Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                           PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID)
                                                                                     CONCEPT STAGE




                               Public Disclosure Copy
                                                                                                                                             Report No.: PIDC24871


                                                        Project Name                 Water Sector Institutional Development Project II (P151224)
                                                        Region                       AFRICA
                                                        Country                      Angola




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                        Sector(s)                    Water supply (65%), Public administration- Water, sanitation and flood
                                                                                     protection (35%)
                                                        Theme(s)                     City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (90%), Water resource
                                                                                     management (10%)
                                                        Lending Instrument           Investment Project Financing
                                                        Project ID                   P151224
                                                        Borrower(s)                  REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
                                                        Implementing Agency          Ministry of Energy and Water
                                                        Environmental                B-Partial Assessment
                                                        Category




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                        Date PID Prepared/           19-May-2015
                                                        Updated
                                                        Date PID Approved/           21-May-2015
                                                        Disclosed
                                                        Estimated Date of
                                                        Appraisal Completion




                               Public Disclosure Copy
                                                        Estimated Date of            29-Sep-2016
                                                        Board Approval
                                                        Concept Review               Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue
                                                        Decision




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                        I.   Introduction and Context
                                                             Country Context
                                                             1.      Angola has achieved remarkable growth after emerging from its 27-year civil war. Strong
                                                             progress has been made in economic management and public finance, infrastructure development,
                                                             and expansion of key services. Gross Domestic Product (GDP) grew at an average annual rate of 11
                                                             percent between 2002 and 2011. Sustained investment in oil and gas sectors yielded a steady stream
                                                             of resource revenues which were used to rehabilitate transport, energy, and social infrastructure.

                                                             2.       The fast economic growth seen in previous years is now slowing due to the decline in
                                                             global oil prices and a contraction in domestic oil production. In 2014, GDP growth was estimated
                                                             at 4.4 percent. Growth is expected to pick up moderately to 5.3 percent in 2015 as oil production
                                                             rebounds with the resolution of maintenance problems in oil fields. Growth is also driven by an
                                                             increase in public investments in the non-oil sectors. This includes, among others, rehabilitation of



                                                                                                        Page 1 of 8
                         roads, increase in energy production by completion of power plants, and development of new
                         irrigation systems to enhance agricultural productivity. The average inflation rate is projected to be
                         about 7 percent by end of 2015. While macroeconomic prospects in the medium term are




Public Disclosure Copy
                         challenging due to declining oil prices, macroeconomic management and commitment to reforms
                         have been favorable.

                         3.      While reasonable progress has been made toward achievement of the Millennium
                         Development Goals (MDGs), Angola is not likely to meet the MDGs by 2015. Despite the positive
                         progress made in poverty reduction, primary education, and gender equality since 2002, progress in
                         other key social indicators remains limited. For example, life expectancy at birth is only about 51
                         years. Maternal mortality is 450 out of 100,000 births, which is the highest in Sub-Sahara Africa.
                         Malnutrition is also acute, with 30 percent of children under five years of age suffering from
                         stunting; 16 percent are under-weight. Furthermore, Angola ranks 148 out of 187 countries in the
                         2013 Human Development Index. Despite the relatively high GDP per capita (US$5,170 in 2013 ),
                         about 37 percent of the population still lives below the national poverty line and without access to
                         basic services, in particular water supply.

                         4.      Rapid population growth, in particular in urban areas, imposes an additional challenge.
                         Angola's population was estimated to be 24.3 million in 2014, with an average annual growth rate of
                         3.3 percent. The urban population represents about 60 percent of the total population, with annual
                         growth of about 5 percent.
                         Sectoral and Institutional Context
                         5.      After emerging from a devastating 27-year civil war in 2002, the water supply sector was
                         dilapidated. The lack of investment, rehabilitation, and service expansion, compounded by the
                         protracted civil war, resulted in low levels of access and poor quality services. As of 2001 only 27
                         percent of the national population had access to improved drinking water sources. In urban areas 42
                         percent of the population had access to improved drinking water sources.




Public Disclosure Copy
                         6.       Since the end of the war, Angola has made progress towards increasing access to improved
                         water services. Between 2006 and 2011, national access to improved drinking water sources
                         increased from 49.1 to 51 percent. In urban areas, there was a significant increase in access to
                         improved drinking water sources – from 58 in 2006 to 73.7 percent in 2011 – driven mainly by
                         expansion of standposts. However, access to water through yard-taps or household connections
                         remains low, at 33.9 percent. In addition, there are wide disparities in access to improved water
                         sources among urban areas, in particular provincial capital cities. For instance, in the cities included
                         as part of the proposed project, access to an improved drinking water source ranges from 5 to 60
                         percent.

                         7.       In addition to improving access, the Government has emphasized the institutional
                         development of the water supply sector and has committed to establishing the necessary policy and
                         legal framework. Right after the end of the civil war the Water Law (2002) was enacted, mandating
                         the need for cost-recovery tariffs and professionalization of service delivery, and devolving the
                         responsibility for service provision to provincial governments. In 2008, the Government approved
                         Vision 2025, which includes goals for the water sector, including universal access to water supply in
                         urban areas by 2025. Building on Vision 2025, the 2013-2107 National Development Plan and the
                         2013-2017 Energy and Water Sector Action Plan identified as a key priority the strengthening of
                         urban water supply, in particular in provincial capitals, with special emphasis on expansion of water


                                                                     Page 2 of 8
                         systems. With this aim, in 2013 and 2014 eight Provincial Water and Sanitation Utilities (PWSUs)
                         were created as a first step toward independent service providers. In addition, there is an on-going
                         process to introduce performance-based management contracts in a number of these utilities.




Public Disclosure Copy
                         Currently, 15 provincial capitals have developed water master plans to address physical and
                         institutional requirements. However, the implementation of the policy and legal framework is still in
                         process, in particular to guarantee the harmonization of the investment program with policy and
                         legal mandates.

                         8.      The strengthening of service delivery is also supported by efforts to put in place water
                         resources management mechanisms. The National Strategic Plan for Water (2003) highlighted the
                         need to identify and quantify water uses; characterize water resources; and create a water balance of
                         water availability and uses. With this objective, the Government of Angola (GoA) created the
                         National Institute for Water Resources (INRH) in 2012. The INRH is gradually becoming
                         operational.

                         9.       The institutional consolidation of the water supply sector needs further development. Clear
                         separation of the policy, regulatory, and service delivery functions is needed to boost sector
                         expansion and promote the sustainability of investments. Indeed, there is an on-going process to
                         create a national asset holding company (Instituto Nacional de Agua Potavel e Saneamento, INAS)
                         responsible for capital investment and rehabilitation of urban water systems, which will create a
                         clear separation between policy making and investment. A regulatory agency for water supply is in
                         the process of being established. Several PWSUs still need to be established. For the recently
                         created PWSUs, internal management strengthening is needed, along with support for improving
                         their operational and financial performance. The INRH needs to become fully operational in order
                         to be able to provide necessary data for adequate water resource planning, as well as develop
                         additional river basin plans.

                         10.     Despite recent investments by the GoA, supported by several development partners, urban




Public Disclosure Copy
                         water supply systems still require substantial investment. Most bulk and household connections are
                         not metered, which challenges production planning and loss reduction initiatives, which in turn
                         challenge the financial sustainability of the systems. In those few cities where there is a billing
                         system in place, collection ratios are lower than 60 percent of the billing. The water departments
                         and or utilities are generally over staffed, and often the skills required are not in line with the
                         systems’ requirements.

                         11.      Substantial investment programs are required in provincial capital cities. Most of the
                         existing water supply systems in provincial capital cities date from colonial times and are therefore
                         in need of significant expansion and rehabilitation. In some provincial capital cities The World
                         Bank has contributed to the expansion and/or rehabilitation of water supply systems under the
                         Emergency Multisector Recovery Project I and II (P083333 and P095229) and the Water Sector
                         Institutional Development Project I (WSIDP I, P096360). However, production is inadequate to
                         meet increasing water demand stemming from rapid urban growth and growing industrial and
                         commercial sectors. Production and distribution mains need to be expanded and sized-up
                         accordingly, while rehabilitation works are needed to reduce technical water losses. Whereas the
                         number of water connections are on the rise, thanks to significant budget allocations from
                         government and several development partners, fast-tracking the pace at which connections are
                         installed are due to achieve Vision 2025. Currently, the GoA and donor allocations to provincial
                         capitals fall short of needs.


                                                                    Page 3 of 8
                             12.     The investment programs need to be accompanied by support to improve the operational
                             and financial performance of the provincial systems' operators. Tariffs, which are decided by




Public Disclosure Copy
                             provincial governors, have recently been adjusted in some capital cities but they are still too low to
                             cover operational costs. Significant operational subsidies are required from provincial governments,
                             which are often provided in the form of chemicals and staff paid by the governor's budget.

                             13.      The World Bank, other development partners, and bi-laterals are supporting government's
                             efforts in provinces. Since becoming effective in 2010, the World Bank-supported WSIDP I has
                             been key to helping the GoA put in place institutional and infrastructure foundations in seven
                             provincial capital cities: Huambo (Huambo province), Kuito (Bie province), Lubango (Huila
                             province), Luena (Moxico province), Malanje (Malange province), N'Dalatando (Cuanza Norte
                             province), and Uige (Uige province). The proposed project aims to continue this support in the
                             current cities and an additional two (Namibe, Namibe province and Dundo, Lunda Norte province).
                             The African Development Bank (AfDB) has been financing support since 2011 in Sumbe (Cuanza
                             Sul province) and has recently approved a new project (Institutional Support for the Sustainability
                             of Urban Water Supply and Sanitation Service Delivery, approved by AfDB Board of Directors,
                             April 1, 2015) comprising investments in Sumbe and technical assistance for the creation and
                             implementation of PWSUs in Cabinda, Cunene, Lunda Sul, Bengo, and Cuanza Sul provinces. The
                             European Union supports institutional capacity development focusing on human resource
                             development and water quality monitoring. UNICEF supports GoA's effort in the areas of policy
                             and strategy and capacity building. Norway has a program of institutional support for the water and
                             energy sectors. The Kingdom of Spain provided until recently support for human resource
                             strengthening and commercial capacity for managing provincial water systems. The Governments
                             of China and Brazil have provided credit to the GoA for infrastructure investments.
                             Relationship to CAS
                             14.      The proposed project in fully aligned with the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY14




Public Disclosure Copy
                             - FY16, in particular with its Second Pillar and the Foundation Plank. The focus of the CPS’s
                             Second Pillar is on enhancing the quality of service delivery to improve the quality of life of the
                             population. In addition, the Foundation Plank of the CPS revolves around building human and
                             institutional capacity approaching the levels common in the middle-income countries.

                             15.     The proposed World Bank Water Sector Institutional Development Project II (WSIDP II)
                             continues, scales up, and consolidates the support provided by the WSIDP I (P096360) and its
                             additional finance (AF, P124511), which has been fundamental to the GoA's institutional efforts and
                             investments to improve the water supply sector.

                             16.       The WSIDP II is scheduled to become effective in February, 2017. The implementation of
                             the first phase of new activities under WSIDP II, including necessary preparatory works and
                             procurement activities, will coincide with the completion of the majority of on-going contracts
                             under WSIDP I. This, in turn, will allow for continuity of sector support without overstretching the
                             implementation capacity of the Financial and Contract Management Unit (FCMU) under MINEA.

                         II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
                             Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)




                                                                        Page 4 of 8
                             The Project Development Objective is to strengthen the institutional capacity of water sector
                             agencies and (From
                             Key Results  increasePCN)
                                                   water service coverage in target cities.




Public Disclosure Copy
                             Key indicators to measure progress toward achievement of the PDO include:

                             (i)     Number of people in urban areas provided with access to an improved water source under
                             the project (core indicator).
                             (ii)    Percentage of Provincial Water and Sanitation Utilities (PWSU) achieving financial
                             performance targets.
                             (iii)   Number of water utilities supported by the project (core indicators).

                         III. Preliminary Description
                             Concept Description
                             19.      The proposed project will finance strategic institutional development activities and priority
                             water supply investments in targeted provincial cities of Kuito-Cunje, Huambo, Lubango, Namibe,
                             N'dalatando-Villa De Lucala, Malange, Uige, Dundo, and Luena (seven of these cities were
                             included under WSIDP I). The project seeks to harness the momentum created under WSIDP I and
                             will deepen and expand the development impacts of that project. The WSIDP II will include
                             activities designed to strengthen water sector institutions, including regulatory capacity, utility
                             operations and water resource management. The proposed institutional interventions will be coupled
                             with infrastructure investments to address key physical challenges and constraints. Water supply
                             infrastructure investments will focus on increasing the capacity of systems and expand water service
                             coverage, predominately in under-served, low-income peri-urban areas.

                             20.      The proposed project has been designed in coordination with the Government's water sector
                             infrastructure investment program and is strategically aligned with AfDB’s water sector projects.

                             21.     The project is expected to include four components, as follows:




Public Disclosure Copy
                             22.      Component 1: Water Supply Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Development (US
                             $55.0 million). The objective of this Component is to strengthen the institutional framework for the
                             water supply sub-sector at central and provincial levels. To achieve this objective the Component
                             will finance activities designed to support the PWSUs, the regulator, and the asset management
                             entity – supporting the creation of an enabling environment for sustainable water service delivery.

                             23.      The World Bank will finance technical assistance (TA) to provide critical start-up support
                             for the recently created PWSUs. The intention of the TA is to establish effective organizational
                             structures, improve operating systems, and develop institutional capacity through the transfer of
                             knowledge and skills to enhance service delivery and improve efficiency. The proposed Component
                             1 will finance technical assistance, management contracts, goods, capacity building/training, and
                             equipment in the project cities related to water supply and utility management.

                             24.     Regulatory support will include creation and expansion of the sector regulatory framework
                             for oversight of water service quality and tariffs, particularly for the newly created PWSUs. In
                             particularly, the regulator will be supported to establish tariff application and review procedures and
                             appropriate mechanisms (i.e. social tariffs) to promote access, whilst maintaining a balance to
                             ensure affordability of water bills for low-income customers and financial sustainability of the



                                                                        Page 5 of 8
                         PWSUs. This Component will also provide goods, operational support, capacity building/training,
                         and technical assistance to the regulator.




Public Disclosure Copy
                         25.     This Component will finance activities to support institutional capacity development of
                         INAS, the asset management entity responsible for the assets of all urban water supply systems that
                         involve water treatment facilities on behalf of the GoA. This Component will finance activities
                         designed to improve the institutional capacity of INAS to fulfill its mandate, including to mobilize,
                         plan, and manage dedicated funds; plan and oversee the execution of investments; promote public-
                         private partnerships for the development and delivery of services; and strengthen performance-
                         based contracting systems. This Component will also provide goods, operational support, capacity
                         building/training, and technical assistance to INAS.

                         26.      Component 2: Water Resource Management (US$12.5 million). The objective of this
                         Component is to support the strengthening of the institutional framework for water resources
                         management. This Component will focus on completing activities that will not be implemented as
                         planned under WSIDP I due to cost overruns. Key activities will include: (1) strengthening and
                         support to INRH; (2) development of systems for water resource monitoring and management; and
                         (3) finance for two new river basin plans. Specific activities include analysis of infrastructure
                         investment requirements; preparation of two new river basin management plans; development of
                         policy and monitoring frameworks; and installation of hydrometric stations and monitoring systems.
                         This Component will provide goods, works, operational support, capacity building/training, and
                         technical assistance to the INRH.

                         27.      Component 3: Rehabilitation and Expansion of Water Supply Production and Distribution
                         (US$274.0 million, including contingencies). The objective of this Component is to support the
                         PWSUs in the development of priority infrastructure to expand system capacity, increase service
                         coverage and service quality, and improve the operating efficiency of the production and
                         distribution systems in targeted cities. The proposed investments have been selected to build upon




Public Disclosure Copy
                         the works implemented through the WSIDP I, and complement the Government's and AfDB’s water
                         sector investments. Whilst improving utilities' operations is an important element of the WSIDP II,
                         service coverage within the selected systems is low (on average less than 34 percent), and therefore
                         proposed interventions under the project focus substantially on necessary infrastructure investments
                         to expand systems. Through project implementation, coverage is expected to increase to as high as
                         75 percent in some of the project cities. A project baseline and specific targets for service coverage
                         expansion will be developed for each city during project preparation and closely monitored during
                         implementation. Specific activities to be financed are further defined below:

                         28.      Sub-component 3a - Rehabilitation and Expansion of Production Facilities (US$65.5
                         million, including contingencies). Investments will include civil, electrical and mechanical works to
                         improve water production in targeted cities where required to support expanding service coverage.
                         Key activities will include expansion and refurbishment of well fields and intake facilities and
                         expansion and refurbishment of water treatment facilities. Also, it will include construction of clear-
                         water storage tanks and the rehabilitation and expansion of transmission infrastructure, including
                         new pipelines, pump stations, telemetry/SCADA, and associated fittings.

                         29.      Sub-component 3b - Rehabilitation and Expansion of Distribution Systems (US$208.5
                         million, including contingencies). Investments under this sub-component will include the
                         development of priority infrastructure to increase service coverage and improve operational


                                                                    Page 6 of 8
                             efficiency of the water distribution systems in selected cities. Investments will include rehabilitation
                             of existing and construction of new distribution centers, including increasing storage with ground
                             tanks and pressure through elevated water towers, water supply network expansion and




Public Disclosure Copy
                             rehabilitation, installation of district meters and pressure control valves within existing pipelines,
                             telemetry, and approximately 155,000 new household meters and associated materials for
                             connections (primarily for yardtaps) – directly benefiting some 930,000 people. Network
                             investments (estimated to be around 1,145 km of pipeline) will be predominantly directed towards
                             expanding coverage to underserved low-income peri-urban areas (mostly with un-paved roads).
                             These investments will have substantial development impacts by providing services to the poor. In
                             addition, they complement WSIDP I-supported network rehabilitation of the urban centers in the
                             targeted cities, which was critical for supporting sustainability of services and economic growth and
                             development within the provincial cities.

                             30. Component 4: Management and Engineering Support (US$38.5 million). This Component
                             includes support for engineering studies; design and supervision of works and performance
                             contracts; project management; project audits; project monitoring and evaluation; implementation of
                             environmental and social safeguards; economic and financial reviews of investments; support for
                             community consultation and communication activities; and development of various other technical
                             studies such as the Luanda Water Master Plan. This Component will partially finance the operations
                             of the Ministry of Energy and Water (MINEA) Project Implementation Unit – the FCMU – which
                             manages implementation of all projects in the sector regardless of the financing source. A training
                             budget will also be provided to support capacity-building activities at the national and provincial
                             levels. This Component will verify the technical feasibility of integrating the existing "Sistema
                             Integrado Sectorial de Agua e Saneamento -SISAS" with IBNET.

                         IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply
                             Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project                                      Yes      No     TBD




Public Disclosure Copy
                             Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                                               ✖
                             Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                                               ✖
                             Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                                        ✖
                             Pest Management OP 4.09                                                                   ✖
                             Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                                                    ✖
                             Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                                             ✖
                             Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                                               ✖
                             Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                                                 ✖
                             Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                    ✖
                             Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                                                     ✖


                         V. Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:   380.00                        Total Bank Financing:         300.00
                            Financing Gap:          0.00
                             Financing Source                                                                               Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                        80.00



                                                                        Page 7 of 8
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development       300.00
                              Total                                                       380.00




Public Disclosure Copy
                         VI. Contact point
                             World Bank
                             Contact:  Luiz Claudio Martins Tavares
                             Title:    Lead Water and Sanitation Spec
                             Tel:      473-5701
                             Email:    ltavares@worldbank.org

                             Borrower/Client/Recipient
                             Name:     REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA
                             Contact:  Joao Boa Francisco Quipipa
                             Title:    Director, Study and International Relations, MoF
                             Tel:      244-222-335250
                             Email:    joao.quipipa@minfin.gv.ao
                             Implementing Agencies
                             Name:     Ministry of Energy and Water
                             Contact:  Luis Filipe da Silva
                             Title:    Secretario de Aguas
                             Tel:      (244-222) 339-988
                             Email:    proj.dsa.minea@ebonet.net

                         VII. For more information contact:
                             The InfoShop
                             The World Bank




Public Disclosure Copy
                             1818 H Street, NW
                             Washington, D.C. 20433
                             Telephone: (202) 458-4500
                             Fax: (202) 522-1500
                             Web: http://www.worldbank.org/infoshop




                                                                      Page 8 of 8
