Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                              Document of
                                                                          The World Bank

                                                                       FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
                                                                                                                    Report No: PAD2851

                                                  INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                            PROJECT PAPER
                                                                                  ON A
                                                                         RESTRUCTURING AND
                                                                     PROPOSED ADDITIONAL LOAN

                                                                 IN THE AMOUNT OF US$150 MILLION

                                                                                TO THE

                                                                         REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                                FOR AN
                                                   ADDITIONAL FINANCING - SECOND WATER SECTOR INSTITUTIONAL
                                                                     DEVELOPMENT PROJECT

                                                                             May 31, 2018




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                Water Global Practice
                                Africa Region


                               This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their
                               official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.
                            CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

                     (Exchange Rate Effective April 30, 2018)

                                 Currency Unit = Angolan Kwanza (AOA)

                                   AOA 225.36 = US$1

                                  FISCAL YEAR
                            January 1 - December 31




      Regional Vice President: Makhtar Diop

             Country Director: Elisabeth Huybens

Senior Global Practice Director: Guang Zhe Chen

            Practice Manager: Maria Angelica Sotomayor

            Task Team Leader: Camilo Lombana Cordoba
                             ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AF       Additional Financing
AFD      Agence Française de Développement (French Development Agency)
AOA      Angolan Kwanza
BOD5     5-day Biochemical Oxygen Demand
BP       Bank Policy
DNA      Direcção Nacional de Águas (National Water Directorate)
EPAL     Empresa Publica de Águas de Luanda (Luanda Public Water Company)
ERR      Economic Rate of Return
ESIA     Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
ESMF     Environment and Social Management Framework
ESMP     Environment and Social Management Plan
ESSF     Environmental and Social Screening Form
FCMU     Unidade de Coordenação de Projetos (Financial and Contract Management Unit)
FM       Financial Management
FY       Fiscal Year
GDP      Gross Domestic Product
GHG      Greenhouse Gas
GoA      Government of Angola
GRS      Grievance Redress Service
HH       Household
IAASB    International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board
IBRD     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
IDA      International Development Association
IDU      Internal Document Unit
IFAC     International Federation of Accounts
IFR      Interim Financial Report
INRH     lnstituto Nacional de Recursos Hidricos (National Institute for Water Resources)
IPF      Investment Project Financing
IRSEA    Instituto Regulador dos Serviços de Electricidade e Água e Saneamento de Aguas Residuais
         (Regulatory Institute for Energy and Water Services)
ISA      International Standards on Auditing
JMP      World Health Organization and United Nations Children’s Emergency Fund Joint Monitoring
         Programme
LCU      Local Currency Units
LPCD     Liters per capita per day
MDG      Millennium Development Goals
MFD      Maximizing Finance for Development
MINEA    Ministério da Energia e Águas (Ministry of Energy and Water)
Minfin   Ministério da Finanças (Ministry of Finance)
NCB      Nationally Competitive Bidding
NPV      Net Present Value
O&M      Operations and Maintenance
OP       Operational Procedures
PAD      Project Appraisal Document
PDO      Project Development Objective
PWSU     Provincial Water and Sanitation Utility
QCBS     Quality and Cost Based Selection
RAP      Resettlement Action Plan
RFQ      Request for Quotation
RPF      Resettlement Policy Framework
RVP      Regional Vice President
SDG      Sustainable Development Goals
SOE      Statement of Expenditures
STEP     Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement
TA       Technical Assistance
WB       World Bank
WSIDP    Water Sector Institutional Development Project
WSIDP2   Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project
YLL      Years of Life Lost
      The World Bank
      Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)




BASIC INFORMATION – PARENT (Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project - P151224)


 Country                        Product Line             Team Leader(s)
 Angola                         IBRD/IDA                 Camilo Lombana Cordoba

 Project ID                     Financing Instrument     Resp CC          Req CC         Practice Area (Lead)
 P151224                        Investment Project       GWA08 (9523) AFCC1 (6544)       Water
                                Financing

Implementing Agency: Ministry of Energy and Water


 ADD FIN TBL1
 Is this a regionally tagged
 project?

 No

 Bank/IFC Collaboration

 No
                                                                    Original Environmental
 Approval Date                       Closing Date                                                  Current EA Category
                                                                    Assessment Category
 10-Mar-2017                         31-Mar-2024                    Partial Assessment (B)         Partial Assessment
                                                                                                   (B)
 [ ] Situations of Urgent Need or Capacity Constraints              [ ] Financial Intermediaries (FI)

 [ ] Series of Projects (SOP)                                       [ ] Project-Based Guarantees


 Development Objective(s)

 The Project Development Objective is to strengthen the institutional capacity of selected water sector agencies and
 increase water service coverage in target cities.


 Ratings (from Parent ISR)
           RATING_DRAFT_NO

                                                       Implementation                           Latest ISR




                                                                                                                Page 1 of 58
     The World Bank
     Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



                                                        15-Jun-2017                            27-Dec-2017

Progress towards achievement of PDO                          S                                     S

Overall Implementation Progress (IP)                         S                                     S

Overall Safeguards Rating                                    S                                     S

Overall Risk                                                 S                                     S




BASIC INFORMATION – ADDITIONAL FINANCING (Additional Financing - Second Water Institutional Development
Project - P167201)
ADDFIN_TABLE
                                                                                          Urgent Need or Capacity
Project ID                     Project Name               Additional Financing Type
                                                                                          Constraints
P167201                        Additional Financing -     Restructuring, Scale Up         No
                               Second Water Institutional
                               Development Project
Financing instrument           Product line               Approval Date
Investment Project             IBRD/IDA                   21-Jun-2018
Financing
Projected Date of Full         Bank/IFC Collaboration
Disbursement
31-Jul-2024                    No

Is this a regionally tagged project?
No

[ ] Situations of Urgent Need or Capacity Constraints     [ ] Financial Intermediaries (FI)

[ ] Series of Projects (SOP)                              [ ] Project-Based Guarantees

[ ] Disbursement-linked Indicators (DLIs)                 [ ] Contingent Emergency Response Component
                                                          (CERC)
[ ] Alternative Procurement Arrangements (APA)


Disbursement Summary (from Parent ISR)




                                                                                                              Page 2 of 58
                The World Bank
                Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



                                                    Net
          Source of Funds                                 Total Disbursed   Remaining Balance            Disbursed
                                            Commitments

          IBRD                                   200.00             0.50               199.50             .3 %
          IDA                                                                                              %
          Grants                                                                                           %


          PROJECT FINANCING DATA – ADDITIONAL FINANCING (Additional Financing - Second Water Institutional
          Development Project - P167201)



PROJECT   FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

     SUMMARY                     -NewFin1




          Total Project Cost                                                                                          150.00

          Total Financing                                                                                             150.00

                          of which IBRD/IDA                                                                           150.00
          Financing Gap                                                                                                  0.00

      DETAILS      -NewFinEnh1




          World Bank Group Financing

            International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                              150.00



     COMPLIANCE

          Policy

          Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects?
          [ ] Yes [ ✔ ] No

          Does the project require any other Policy waiver(s)?
          [ ] Yes [ ✔ ] No




                                                                                                                     Page 3 of 58
      The World Bank
      Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)




INSTITUTIONAL DATA

Practice Area (Lead)
Water

Contributing Practice Areas



Climate Change and Disaster Screening
This operation has been screened for short and long-term climate change and disaster risks

Gender Tag

Does the project plan to undertake any of the following?

a. Analysis to identify Project-relevant gaps between males and females, especially in light of country gaps identified
through SCD and CPF
Yes

b. Specific action(s) to address the gender gaps identified in (a) and/or to improve women or men's empowerment
Yes

c. Include Indicators in results framework to monitor outcomes from actions identified in (b)
Yes



PROJECT TEAM

Bank Staff
Name                          Role                               Specialization                     Unit
                              Team Leader (ADM
Camilo Lombana Cordoba                                                                              GWA08
                              Responsible)
                              Procurement Specialist (ADM
Antonio Laquene Chamuco                                          Procurement                        GGOPF
                              Responsible)
Laurent Mehdi Brito           Procurement Specialist             Procurement                        GGOPF
Rahmoune Essalhi              Procurement Specialist                                                GGOPA
                              Financial Management
Joao Tinga                                                       Financial Management               GGOAC
                              Specialist



                                                                                                               Page 4 of 58
     The World Bank
     Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



Alexander V. Danilenko       Team Member                       Economist                      GWAGP
Belinda Lorraine Asaam       Team Member                       Quality Assurance              GWASO
Benjamin Burckhart           Social Safeguards Specialist                                     GSU01
Beth Anne Hoffman            Team Member                       Legal                          LEGAM
George Ferreira Da Silva     Team Member                       Finance Officer                WFACS
Habab Taifour                Team Member                       WRM                            GWA08
Hila Cohen Mizrav            Team Member                                                      GWA08
Jemima T. Sy                 Team Member                       PPP                            GTIPF
Jose C. Janeiro              Team Member                       Finance Officer                WFACS
Kristyna Bishop              Social Safeguards Specialist                                     GSU01
Maria Isabel Nhassengo-
                             Team Member                       Procurement                    AFCS2
Massingue
Mario Rizzolio               Social Safeguards Specialist                                     GSU01
                             Environmental Safeguards
Paulo Jorge Temba Sithoe                                                                      GEN01
                             Specialist
Rebecca Jean Gilsdorf        Team Member                                                      GWA08
Sofia De Abreu Ferreira      Counsel                                                          LEGEN
Victor Manuel Ordonez
                             Team Member                       Finance Officer                WFACS
Conde

Extended Team
Name                         Title                             Organization                   Location




                                                                                                         Page 5 of 58
The World Bank
Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)




                                                     REPUBLIC OF ANGOLA

        ADDITIONAL FINANCING - SECOND WATER SECTOR INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENT PROJECT


                                                     TABLE OF CONTENTS

I.    BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE FOR ADDITIONAL FINANCING ........................................ 7
II.   DESCRIPTION OF ADDITIONAL FINANCING .................................................................... 10
III. KEY RISKS ..................................................................................................................... 14
IV. APPRAISAL SUMMARY .................................................................................................. 15
V. WORLD BANK GRIEVANCE REDRESS .............................................................................. 23
VI. SUMMARY TABLE OF CHANGES .................................................................................... 24
VII. DETAILED CHANGE(S).................................................................................................... 24
VIII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING ................................................................... 29
ANNEX 1: DESCRIPTION OF COMPONENT 5 .......................................................................... 41
ANNEX 2: DESCRIPTION OF POTENTIAL PROJECT CITIES........................................................ 45
ANNEX 3: ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL ANALYSIS ................................................................. 48
ANNEX 4: REALLOCATION BETWEEN DISBURSEMENT CATEGORIES ORIGINAL LOAN ............. 58




                                                                                                                                   Page 6 of 58
      The World Bank
      Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)




I. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE FOR ADDITIONAL FINANCING


 A. Original Project Objectives and Design

 1.       The Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project ([WSIDP2], P151224), supported by an
 IBRD loan in the amount of US$200 million, was approved on March 10, 2017 and signed on July 14, 2017.
 Total agreed project financing is US$545 million, including counterpart funding and bilateral co-financing. The
 Project Development Objective (PDO) is to strengthen the institutional capacity of selected water sector
 agencies and increase water service coverage in target cities. The selected water sector agencies include: nine
 Provincial Water and Sanitation Utilities (PWSUs), the Luanda Water Utility (Empresa Publica de Água de
 Luanda [EPAL]), the National Institute for Water Resources (Instituto Nacional de Recursos Hidricos [INRH]),
 the national regulator for electricity, water supply and sanitation (Instituto Regulador dos Serviços de
 Electricidade e Água e Saneamento de Águas Residuais [IRSEA]), and the National Directorate for Water
 (Direcção Nacional de Águas [DNA]).

 2.       The project includes four components: 1) Water Supply Institutional Strengthening and Capacity
 Development; 2) Water Resources Management; 3) Rehabilitation and Expansion of Water Supply Production
 and Distribution; and 4) Management and Engineering Support. The first component provides for technical
 assistance (TA) and operational support to the PWSUs; capacity building and development of new instruments
 and systems for IRSEA; and a study to understand the scope for possible PPPs in the sector. The second
 component supports INRH capacity building, expansion of the Borrower’s hydro-meteorological monitoring
 network, INRH’s development of river basin plans and a national dam safety plan. The third component funds
 the rehabilitation and expansion of water supply production and distribution facilities in the nine targeted
 provincial capitals. And the fourth component provides support for project management, technical oversight,
 financial management (FM), monitoring and evaluation, social and environmental safeguards oversight, as
 well as the carrying out of engineering studies and the updating of the Sanitation Master Plans for the nine
 targeted cities.

 3.       The project is co-financed by the French Development Agency (Agence Française de Développement
 [AFD]), through a Euro-dominated loan of US$150 million equivalent, and by the Government of Angola (GoA),
 through a US$95 million counterpart contribution. The Board approved the project with a financing gap of
 US$100 million, and currently the GoA is preparing a parallel financed project with the European Investment
 Bank in order to cover this gap. In line with the project appraisal document (PAD), the GoA aims to secure
 financing to fill the financing gap by the end of the second year of the project. Should the financing gap not
 be filled by the end of year two, the project will be restructured and the activities realigned.

 B. Performance of Original Project

 4.      The WSIDP2 became effective on May 17, 2018. The effectiveness deadline was extended three times
 due to GoA delays in processing the required counterpart contribution of AKZ 250 million (which was made
 on January 15, 2018) and meeting the AFD effectiveness conditions, and the associated cross-effectiveness
 condition under the IBRD loan.

 5.        Project beneficiary agencies, namely, IRSEA, INRH, and DNA, have already started implementation by



                                                                                                            Page 7 of 58
  The World Bank
  Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



preparing their annual action plans and beginning the procurement processes for key activities and TA
consultancies that will be launched before the end of the fiscal year (FY). Preparatory work has been done for
Components 1, 2, and 3, including: preparation of the second generation of management contracts and MoUs
between Ministry of Energy and Water (Ministério da Energia e Águas [MINEA]), the Provinces and PWSUs;
commencement of implementation of the Kwanza River basin management plan; and signing of contracts to
build a total of 89,000 household connections to be installed in seven cities.

6.       An advanced procurement plan was created for a total of US$169 million worth of contracts. To date,
contracts for US$84 million have been signed and are ready to start now that the project is effective. The
project is expected to disburse around 15 percent of these commitments by the end of FY18.

C. Rationale for Additional Financing

7.      The additional financing (AF) will (1) fill a financing gap by replacing existing counterpart co-financing
to ensure timely implementation, which has been threatened by an unanticipated change in GoA’s financial
situation, linked to the downturn in global oil prices; and (2) scale up support to sector institutions to
undertake their mandates for sanitation management and to address the challenges of urban sanitation
through a pilot project in sanitation.

8.       Country Economic Context: The AF will seek to address the impact on the project of the ongoing
financial constraints in the country. As a result of the drop in oil prices that started in late 2014, GoA revenues
were more than halved from 2013 to 2017 (decreasing from 40.2 percent to 17.7 percent of gross domestic
product [GDP]). Expenditures had to be adjusted accordingly, with public investments suffering the largest cut
(decreasing from 11.4 percent of GDP in 2013 to 3.8 percent of GDP in 2016). Public investment in water
declined from local currency unit (LCU) 63.7 billion (0.53 percent of GDP) in 2013 to LCU 55.3 billion (0.33
percent of GDP) in 2016. As a result of the fiscal constraints, the GoA is seeking additional funding from the
World Bank in the amount of US$95 million to replace the counterpart funding it committed to under the
original project. These funds will finance activities that are already approved under WSIDP2. Without the AF,
the project may face delays as the existing disbursement mechanism relies on a pari-passu arrangement, in
which World Bank and AFD funds are matched by GoA funds for all activities. The GoA remains fully committed
to the project as shown in the interest to rapidly procure key assignments to initiate the implementation of
the project; as well as the in willingness to move forward with the policy dialogue through the benefitting
agencies, namely IRSEA, DNA and INRH.

9.       Water Supply & Sanitation Sector: While Angola is a resource-rich country and the third-largest
economy in Sub-Saharan Africa, an estimated 28 percent of its population still live below the international
poverty line of US$1.90 (PPP 2011), and one in six urban people live in poverty. Angola was not able to meet
its Millennium Development Goal (MDG) targets for water and sanitation, as service expansion did not keep
pace with population growth. Under-five mortality has fallen from 207 (per 1,000 live births) to 83, but
malnutrition rates remain high, as 29.2 percent of children under five are stunted and 15.6 percent are
underweight (as of 2007). Low levels of access to sanitation lead to a higher disease burden due to excreta-
related illnesses. For example, Angola has been facing a cholera outbreak since December 2017. Further,
diarrhea is the leading cause of death in Angola (Global Burden of Disease Study 20161). In 2016 alone, an

    1
     Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME). GBDCompareDataVisualization. Seattle, WA: IHME, University
    of Washington, 2016. Available from http:// vizhub.healthdata.org/gbd-compare. April 30, 2018.



                                                                                                                Page 8 of 58
  The World Bank
  Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



estimated 9,121 deaths were attributable to diarrhea caused by poor sanitation, and 4,723 of those deaths
were children under five. An additional 6,467 deaths were attributable to diarrheal illness caused by lack of
access to handwashing facilities.

10.      In urban areas in Angola, an estimated 82.5 percent of households have access to an improved water
source, though only 45 percent have access at their premises and only 33 percent have access when needed
(World Health Organization and United Nations Children’s Emergency Fund Joint Monitoring Programme
(JMP) 2015). Most urban households, 89.4 percent, now have access to an improved toilet/latrine – although
among the poorest wealth quintile only 63.9 percent of households have access (JMP 2015, 2011). However,
about 30 percent of these facilities are shared with neighboring households, and most of these facilities are
attached to a pit or septic tank that has not been properly maintained or safely emptied on a regular basis. A
small number of urban households, in the urban centers of Angolan cities, are connected to sewer networks
(constructed during the colonial period), but they have not been maintained over the past decades and waste
is largely released to local rivers untreated. Overall, in urban areas this means that most human waste receives
minimal to no treatment before being released into the environment. The challenges of urban sanitation will
continue to rise as Angola continues to urbanize (currently urban areas are growing at 5.1 percent per year)
and as water supply access continues to increase – both under WSIDP2 and other GoA projects – bringing
increased volumes of water to these areas, which in turn creates a considerable liability, if not properly
managed.

11.      As urban populations rise, sanitation service delivery will need to increase, not only to provide
toilets/latrines, but also to ensure that the waste generated at the household level receives an appropriate
level of treatment before being released into the environment. This focus on the full sanitation service chain
will also help the GoA to reach its targets under the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), which consider
safe management across the full service chain.

12.      With the introduction of the Water Law (2002), responsibility for professionalization of service
delivery (and cost-recovery tariffs) have been devolved to provincial governments. The PWSUs are being
strengthened under WSIDP and WSIDP2 to deliver water supply services. Overall, for the sanitation sector,
the PWSUs are responsible for service delivery, whereas DNA is responsible for policy making and IRSEA is
responsible for economic regulation. However, although their mandates include sanitation, these institutions
currently do not have the expertise, personnel, or existing policies and regulatory framework to carry out their
sanitation mandates. Further, the PWSUs lack the service framework – in terms of technical, social and
financial considerations; the technical capacity; and the financial means to provide these services. The
proposed AF, building off the successes in strengthening these institutions under WSIDP, will support the
PWSUs and national government institutions in carrying out their mandate for sanitation service provision,
policy implementation and regulation of urban sanitation.

13.     The AF is an important first step in addressing the urban sanitation challenges in Angola and building
the capacity of GoA institutions – both national institutions and PWSUs – to start delivering sanitation services.
The AF is in line with broader GoA and World Bank priorities, as reflected in the existing Country Partnership
Strategy (CPS 2014-20162), which puts considerable focus on knowledge transfer and institutional capacity
development and includes as one of its two pillars “enhancing the quality of service delivery.” The CPS also

    2
     World Bank Report Number 76225. Extended to FY19 through the Angola Performance and Learning Review
    World Bank Report Number 100984.



                                                                                                              Page 9 of 58
   The World Bank
   Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



 places strategic emphasis on more inclusive development, which will be achieved through the AF’s focus on
 peri-urban, low-income communities. Though there have been a number of donor-financed investments in
 sanitation in Angola over the past years, these investments were often designed without sufficient
 consideration of operation and maintenance and without full participation of the Government and affected
 communities. The core principles underlying the proposed sanitation activities for this AF align with the
 Citywide Inclusive Sanitation approach,3 which the World Bank is supporting in a number of countries. Under
 this AF, the GoA will be able to align donor financing from the World Bank and AFD to pursue initial piloting
 for sanitation service delivery. This AF will ultimately provide GoA, with support from the World Bank and
 AFD, the opportunity to pilot approaches to addressing urban sanitation, and following the success of the
 pilots, the GoA will be better positioned to scale-up urban sanitation service delivery across Angola.

 14.      Overall Rationale: Following the successes seen under WSIDP in strengthening water sector
 institutions, the GoA now aims to further strengthen these institutions and support them in carrying out their
 mandates for sanitation. The GoA has requested from IBRD an AF of US$150 million, of which US$55 million
 will be used to strengthen key sector agencies to support piloting sanitation service delivery with small-scale,
 onsite solutions in peri-urban areas of one or more cities. The remaining funds will be used to cover the GoA’s
 co-financing of US$95 million. The AF will provide guidance and technical inputs to the sanitation related
 activities supported under the parent project. In addition, the AF will benefit from the existing implementing
 arrangements under WSIDP2 (including the implementing unit, which is well positioned to undertake the
 additional activities) and synergies with the other institutional strengthening and capacity building activities
 supported by the project. The original project will be restructured accordingly and include an updated results
 framework, to incorporate indicators for the sanitation intervention.

II. DESCRIPTION OF ADDITIONAL FINANCING

 15.     The proposed AF is sought in order (i) fill the financing gap that has emerged as it is necessary to
 replace the US$95 million in Government counterpart financing and (ii) to scale up interventions to add a fifth
 component (US$55 million) to strengthen the institutional capacity of sector agencies related to the sanitation
 services, through piloting sanitation service delivery using small-scale, onsite solutions in peri-urban areas.
 The original operation will be restructured to include three additional intermediate results indicators for the
 sanitation activities and to reflect the updated financing allocation.

 16.     The PDO, closing date, and implementation arrangements will all remain unchanged. The Unidade de
 Coordenação de Projetos (Financial and Contract Management Unit [FCMU WB/AFD]) will be strengthened
 with the addition of a technical expert to support the new sanitation activities. Following approval of the AF,
 both the original project and AF will use the new Procurement Regulations (2017). Though the AF will include
 new activities, only minimal changes to the FM and safeguards arrangements are foreseen. Nevertheless,
 framework safeguards instruments (i.e., Environment and Social Management Framework [ESMF] and
 Resettlement Policy Framework [RPF]) have been updated by the GoA to reflect the new scope of the project.
 The new sanitation activities will take place within the existing geographic boundaries of the project, but the
 scope of activities will expand to include sanitation service delivery, a sub-sector that falls under the same


     3
       Citywide Inclusive Sanitation focuses on ensuring the institutional, financial, social and technical systems are in
     place to provide safe management of sanitation across the full service chain (from household containment to
     treatment and end use) for all residents of a city.



                                                                                                                        Page 10 of 58
  The World Bank
  Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



national and provincial institutions as water supply.

A. New Component for Piloting Small-Scale Sanitation Service Delivery in Peri-Urban Areas

17.      Component 5: Piloting Small-Scale Sanitation Service Delivery in Peri-Urban Areas (IBRD financing
US$55 million). The project will approach sanitation as a service to be delivered and as such, will include
activities to support national and provincial institutions in carrying out their mandates for sanitation service
delivery, policy implementation and regulation as well as pilot activities to increase access (through
infrastructure improvements). In line with this approach, technical solutions will consider the full sanitation
service chain, i.e., household containment, collection, conveyance, treatment and safe disposal. For this
purpose, the project will use the Citywide Inclusive Sanitation approach. Two sub-components are proposed
in this AF. Annex 1 contains a detailed description of this component, including a description of the principles
of the Citywide Inclusive Sanitation approach.

18.      Sub-Component 5a: Citywide Inclusive Sanitation Planning and Institutional Development (IBRD
financing US$2 million). This sub-component will support the national and provincial agencies in planning for
the necessary institutional, policy and regulatory changes that will be required in order to carry out their
mandates for sanitation, through: (a) the provision of TA to the DNA for updating and drafting necessary
policies and instruments for overseeing sanitation service delivery; and the Regulatory Agency (IRSEA) for
drafting and implementing economic regulation for sanitation services, likely including a framework for setting
tariffs/fees for sanitation; (b) development of the proposed approach and guidelines for the preparation of
the Participatory Sanitation Master Plans, including focusing on women’s participation. These plans will be
used to update the existing master plans; (c) the provision of TA to the PWSU(s) of the benefitting province(s)
to, inter alia, build their capacity for operation and maintenance of the fecal sludge management system and
treatment facility; (d) the provision of TA to undertake a study to explore the possible role of the private sector
for urban sanitation service provision; (e) support to develop behavior change/information education
campaigns in the pilot communities to educate households on the importance of proper sanitation and
hygiene behaviors; and (f) the development of a national strategy for scaling up the approach to urban
sanitation. The parent project will finance the actual TA activities and the updating of sanitation master plans,
for each of the nine cities, which will consider a range of technical solutions for providing services to the whole
city (as compared to the existing plans that focus on sewered sanitation only in the central part of the city).

19.      Sub-Component 5b: Piloting Delivery of Small-Scale Sanitation Services in Peri-Urban Areas (IBRD
financing US$53 million). Under this sub-component, infrastructure improvements (detailed in Annex 1) will
be implemented in select peri-urban areas to provide the PWSU(s), who are responsible for both water supply
and sanitation, with an opportunity to pilot onsite sanitation service delivery. The piloting will take place in
one or more of the nine provincial capitals (additional information on each city is provided in Annex 2). The
specific city (or cities) will be chosen through a competitive process, based on completion of the updated
sanitation master plans, PWSU readiness and performance, and PWSU and provincial government support.

B. Change in Financing Arrangements

20.     Table 1 shows the updated project costs and updated percent of financing that will be covered by the
World Bank and AFD financing, once the initially agreed counterpart funding of US$95 million is replaced by
the proposed AF. The total World Bank financing will increase from US$200 million to US$350 million, while
the total project cost will increase from US$545 million to US$600 million (Annex 4. Presents the changes



                                                                                                              Page 11 of 58
  The World Bank
  Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



between the disbursement categories of the Original Loan). The financing gap of US$100 million identified
during the preparation of WSIDP2 will remain unchanged until the GoA secures the required funds to fill the
gap and notifies the World Bank. The GoA is in discussion with the European Investment Bank to provide
financing in order to cover this gap. The GoA aims to secure financing to fill the financing gap by Q4 CY18.
Should the financing gap not be filled by July 2019, the project will be restructured and the activities realigned.
Co-financing will continue to be provided by the World Bank and AFD based on their share of the overall
secured financing of the project: IBRD 70 percent and AFD 30 percent.

                            Table 1: Revised Project Cost and Financing (US$ Million)

                                Project        IBRD                         AFD         GoA         Financing
     Project Components                                     IBRD AF
                                 Cost         Original                   Financing     Contrib.        Gap
     Component 1:
     Water Supply
     Institutional
                               US$74.00       US$26.24      US$19.68      US$19.82         US$0       US$8.00
     Strengthening and
     Capacity
     Development
     Component 2:
     Water Resources           US$35.20       US$12.46       US$9.34       US$9.37         US$0       US$4.00
     Management
     Component 3:
     Rehabilitation and
     Expansion of Water       US$324.00     US$116.54       US$87.41      US$87.42         US$0     US$32.90
     Supply Production
     and Distribution
     Component 4:
     Management and            US$62.30       US$22.24      US$16.68      US$16.88         US$0       US$6.10
     Engineering Support
     Component 5:
     Piloting Small-Scale
     Sanitation Service        US$55.00       US$22.02      US$16.51      US$16.52         US$0          US$0
     Delivery in Peri-
     Urban Areas
     Contingencies and
                               US$49.50         US$0.5      US$0.375       US$0.00         US$0     US$49.00
     Fees
     Total                    US$600.00 US$200.00 US$150.00 US$150.00                   US$0.00 US$100.00
     % Secured Financing                        70%           30%                        0%        0%


C. Changes to the Results Framework

21.     The PDO will remain unchanged as the proposed additional component will continue to support the
strengthening of institutional capacity of the same selected water sector agencies. For sanitation, the results



                                                                                                              Page 12 of 58
  The World Bank
  Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



framework will track the development of guidelines for sanitation master planning (for use in all urban areas
of Angola), the approval of master plans for the nine provincial capitals, the start of implementation of a
master plan in a selected city (or cities), and the development of a national strategy for scaling up the approach
to urban sanitation. To track these achievements, three intermediate results indicators, shown in Table 2, will
be added. The first will assess the development of master planning guidelines; the second will measure the
number of people provided with safely managed sanitation service delivery (following the SDG definition,
requiring containment, as well as safe conveyance, treatment and disposal); and the third will track the
development of a plan for scaling up the approach to urban sanitation. Under WSIDP2, there is an existing
indicator on completion of the updated master plans.

22.     Annual target values are also reflected in Table 2. Prior to construction, the master planning process,
which will begin in Year 2 of the project, will need to be complete. Consequently, completion of construction
and service delivery results are not anticipated until Year 5. The number of project beneficiaries is based on
conservative estimates of unit costs and types of facilities to be built/rehabilitated. These figures will be
updated following the master planning process and the number of beneficiaries may be revised accordingly.

                               Table 2: Additional Intermediate Results Indicators

                                                                  Cumulative Target Values
    Indicator Name            Baseline    YR1      YR2      YR3        YR4     YR5      YR6         End Target
    Approval of guidelines
    for participatory urban
                                 No        No       No       Yes       Yes     Yes      Yes             Yes
    sanitation master
    planning
    Number of people
    provided with safely
    managed sanitation
                                  0         0        0        0         0     10,000 35,000           35,000
    service delivery under
    the project
    (Number)
    Development of a
    national strategy for
    scaling up the piloted       No        No       No       No        No      No       Yes             Yes
    approach to urban
    sanitation


D. Changes to Procurement Arrangements

23.     All financing under Investment Project Financing (IPF), including AF, identified on or after July 1, 2016
are subject to the World Bank Policy "Procurement in IPF and Other Operational Procurement Matters" dated
July 2016 and are required to apply the Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers dated July 2016 and
revised in November 2017. While the WSIDP2 is subject to the Procurement Guidelines and Consultant
Guidelines, respectively, dated January 2011 and revised in July 2014, the project only recently became


                                                                                                              Page 13 of 58
    The World Bank
    Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



  effective. Taking advantage of the AF, (which will be subject to the Procurement Regulations), upon approval
  of the AF, both the original project and the AF will be subject to the Procurement Regulations of July 2016
  revised in November 2017, in order to (i) ensure consistency in the use of procurement instruments within
  the same project and (ii) take advantage of innovations introduced by the Procurement Regulations
  throughout all project implementation phases. As advanced procurement has begun for the parent project,
  WSIDP2 procurement will fall under the new Procurement Regulations from the date of the AF approval
  onward, for activities for which the procurement process did not start yet.

  24.      For the preparation of the AF, a Project Procurement Strategy for Development, limited to the AF part
  of the project, along with related Procurement Plan, was prepared by the Borrower, with support of the World
  Bank. Both the Original Project and the AF will be subject to the new Procurement Regulations. With this in
  mind, and considering the amendment and restatement of the Legal Agreement, procurement matters for
  the overall project will follow the new 2017 General Conditions.

III. KEY RISKS

  25.     The overall risk rating of the original project is Substantial, and the task team proposes that the AF
  retains the same rating. The Political and Governance, Macroeconomic, Institutional Capacity for
  Implementation and Sustainability, Fiduciary, Safeguards, Stakeholders, and Other all remain Substantial.

  26.     The Political and Governance risk is Substantial given concern that political interference at the
  provincial level may prevent PWSUs from establishing cost-recovery tariffs. Support to IRSEA in developing a
  standardized, technical model for setting tariffs may help mitigate this risk. Additionally, some of the PWSUs
  do not yet have their Board of Directors appointed. The World Bank team has raised this issue, and the need
  for timely prioritization of their appointments, with the Ministry of Finance (Ministério da Finanças [Minfin]).

  27.       The Macroeconomic risk continues to be Substantial largely due to the impacts of the global decline
  in oil prices on the Angolan economy. Annual GDP growth was three percent in 2015, but fell to -0.67 percent
  in 2016. The general downturn in the economy has also affected non-oil sectors. Within the water sector,
  much of the impact is linked to the sector’s revenues being collected in local currency, whereas the investment
  costs, and some operating costs, are tied to foreign currencies. This difference is of concern for the long-term
  sustainability of the sector. Some of the macroeconomic risk has been mitigated under this AF with the
  proposed IBRD replacement of US$95 million in counterpart co-financing.

  28.      Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability remains a Substantial risk as the PWSUs
  and national sector agencies (i.e., DNA, IRSEA and INRH) still have limited capacity for implementation and
  sustainability. The FCMU, by contrast, is a strong implementing entity with the necessary skills to implement
  the parent project and proposed AF. The risks due to the limited capacity of the PWSUs and national
  institutions will continue to be mitigated through the use of management contracts funded under the parent
  project. In the PWSU(s) where sanitation pilots occur, the management contract(s) will be amended to ensure
  the PWSU receives sufficient support in developing capacity for sanitation service delivery. The project will
  further mitigate some of the risk due to weak capacity through continued TA and capacity building for the
  national and provincial institutions.

  29.     Fiduciary Risk also remains Substantial because of concerns about the FCMU’s ability to attract and



                                                                                                             Page 14 of 58
    The World Bank
    Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



 retain qualified procurement and FM specialists, difficulties in securing hard currency, and possible delays in
 securing work permits for international consultants (given lengthy processes to do so). To mitigate these risks,
 the FCMU will prioritize the retainment of these key staff and plan project timelines realistically based on
 experience with procurement under WSIDP.

 30.     Safeguard Risk is Substantial given the large number of construction activities that will be undertaken,
 under the WSIDP2. These activities come with both environmental and social risks. These risks will be
 mitigated through the use of the ESMF and RPF prepared for the project, and the associated Environmental
 and Social Impact Assessments (ESIA) and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs).

 31.     Stakeholder risk remains Substantial given the risk that households may not connect to the water
 supply systems and similarly may not be interested in participating in the sanitation service improvements.
 These risks are significantly mitigated given the project’s design and focus on community engagement prior
 to the beginning of works. Similarly, under the AF, the risk of non-payment by households will be mitigated
 through the project’s use of community engagement activities and the range of technical and financing
 options being explored for sanitation services.

 32.     The Other Substantial risk under the project is due to the existing financing gap (of US$100 million).
 As noted, the GoA is in the process of securing financing, from the European Investment Bank, for a parallel
 financed project to cover this gap.

IV. APPRAISAL SUMMARY

A. Economic and Financial Analysis
     ERR: 14.4 percent
     NPV: US$201 million

 33.     Cost-Benefit Analysis. The economic model uses a cost-benefit analysis methodology and compares
 the results of the scenarios with project and without project. The analysis considers the whole project
 (WSDIP2 and the proposed AF together), including both water supply and sanitation activities. Annex 3
 contains a more detailed description of the analysis. These calculations use most of the assumptions and
 parameters included in the original economic models used to calculate the economic benefits for WSIDP2, as
 included in the WSIDP2 PAD and Project Concept Note. The economic feasibility analysis of the project
 compares estimated economic benefits of the project with its economic costs. As the project costs are given,
 the primary analytical challenge of this analysis is to estimate the expected benefits that occurred or are likely
 to occur because of project implementation. In the cost-benefit analysis, benefits were assessed at financial
 prices due to a lack of data on economic prices.

 34.    With and without scenarios. The net benefit of the project was estimated as the incremental benefit
 of two scenarios: with and without project scenarios. The “with project” scenario includes the proposed
 investment program under Components 3 and 5b and their associated number of connections, toilets/latrines,
 and constructed septage treatment facility. The without project scenario assumes the investments are not
 done and therefore the proposed expansion in the number of connections and sanitation facilities would not
 happen in the absence of available government funding.

 35.     The proposed investment will give a boost to nine PWSUs located in different regions of Angola and


                                                                                                              Page 15 of 58
  The World Bank
  Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



help them to achieve water supply coverage to 70 percent and above. It is expected that utilities will take over
operation of the infrastructure, and continue expanding water and sanitation systems according to the
urbanization rate, maintaining coverage rates that were achieved during the project implementation.

36.     For water components, the benefit flow comes from the reduction of the water services costs to the
currently unserved population of about 1.2 million. After the installation of the new connections, the water
consumption will also grow to at least 50 liters per capita a day (lpcd). Payment for this water will be according
to the current tariff set by each individual company with consumption of 50 lpcd in a range from AOA 765 to
AOA 1,100 per month for the average family. Current consumption for unserved populations is estimated at
the level of 10 lpcd, or 51 liters for the average family. The cost of this water is assessed at the level of AOA
7,650 per family per month. The reduction in coping costs ranges from AOA 6,000 - 7,000 per family per month
depending on location. The benefits will become available to new customers from the third year of
implementation onward.

37.      Benefits from sanitation investment include reduced burden from morbidity with excreta-related
diseases by at least 15 percent, reduced coping costs associated with handling waste, and increased value of
housing with latrines, equivalent to the amount of investment. The benefit flow comes from the reduction in
the sanitation services costs for the currently unserved population of about 7,000 households living in
suburban areas. It is conservatively assumed that the incidence of diseases and their treatment costs are the
same as for all Angola on average. The coping cost of AOA 4,500 (US$20) per family per year is assessed as
nuisance conditions (due to open defecation) and sanitation management at the household level. The WSIDP2
AF will also increase the value of the housing, for houses where latrines/toilets are provided. It is assumed
that this increase will correspond to the value of the latrines/toilets. The cost of new pit/septic tank emptying
is added as a new cost for households receiving latrines/toilets.

38.     The improved sanitation benefits will become available to new customers from the fifth year of
implementation onward with the full set of benefits starting from year seven when all construction works will
be completed. After the installation of the new latrines and septage treatment facility operations, the coping
cost for sanitation management will be reduced along with frequency of excreta-related diseases: it is
expected that project interventions will reduce morbidity and associated costs of their treatment by at least
15 percent, reducing the hazard of epidemics, morbidity and mortality from diarrheal and other excreta-
related diseases, which will subsequently result in increased labor productivity of the society.

39.     Additional benefits are expected from the Components 1, 2 and 5a, which will bring transparent
procurement, performance assessment and fact-based investment decision processes to the Angolan water
sector that will reduce risk of mishandling the scarce financial resources and technical expertise. Global
benefits are expected from the reduction of the greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, nutrient discharges with
proper septage treatment as well as release of the BOD5 into surface water and groundwater environments.
These benefits, while important, are not be accounted for in this AF.

40.     The benefits are calculated for the 20 years from the project start. This corresponds to the 14 years
after the project completion. The discount rate is 6 percent, per World Bank (WB) guidelines. The same rate
was used for the WSIDP2.

41.      The project will not bring an additional financial burden to the beneficiaries, as their service costs will
be at least 60 percent lower than the current coping costs.



                                                                                                               Page 16 of 58
   The World Bank
   Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



 42.     Model Result. The economic rate of return (ERR) for the WSIDP2 with AF is 14.4 percent, and the net
 present value (NPV) is US$201 million.

 43.     Stress Test. If the costs of components 1, 2, 3 and 5 are included in the economic assessment, then
 the ERR becomes 9.6 percent and the NPV is US$111 million. The project will also save the lives of at least
 15,500 children, or 730,000 productive years, considering that life expectancy in Angola will grow from 50 to
 60 years between now and 2036. We did not put monetary terms to these health benefits, although they are
 large.

 44.       The project is resilient to external shocks: if the investment cost grows by 30 percent, then the ERR
 will decrease to 10.5 percent and the NPV will decrease to US$128 million. Overall this means that the project
 is resilient to cost increases.

 45.     For the purposes of sensitivity analysis, the shadow exchange rate is estimated at the level of
 US$1=AOA 270 and AOA 400 respectively (see Table 3). The project will be operating within the local financial
 environment. While all operational and maintenance costs and benefits will be in Angolan Kwanza, the project
 financing is in US dollars. We estimated the economic effects on the benefits and project costs varying the
 exchange rate of the local currency to US dollar. The project is sustainable to external shocks related to
 fluctuation of the exchange rate.

                        Table 3: Projected NPV and ERR based on various exchange rates.

      Exchange rate (US$= AOA)            NPV, US$                            ERR, %
                  225                     201 million                         14.4
                  270                     97 million                          8.3
                  400                     27 million                          6.6

 46.      The economic outcomes of the WSIDP2 with AF (including the sanitation component) are slightly
 lower if compared with the original project. The NPV is US$130 million lower while the ERR is 7 percentage
 points below the rate obtained for the parent project. This difference is caused by the inability to assess, with
 the necessary precision, some additional economic benefits associated with improved sanitation, specifically
 global economic benefits. These include, but are not limited to, reduction of nutrient and BOD5 discharges
 into surface waters, reduced pollution with septage of ground water, and similar benefits.

B. Technical

 47.      In order to address the existing sanitation challenges in urban Angola, especially with respect to
 operating and maintaining infrastructure, strengthening institutions responsible for the sector will need to be
 prioritized. Without focusing on these institutions, any intervention will continue to suffer from poor
 sustainability. Pilot-scale infrastructure interventions can thus provide an opportunity to build the capacity of
 these institutions and further develop relevant sector policies, regulations, and service delivery models while
 also providing households with access to safely managed sanitation services (in line with the SDGs). Though
 the PWSUs have very limited existing capacity for sanitation service provision, the project will undertake the
 piloting with a PWSU that has completed its master plan and expressed interest, and under WSIDP2, the
 management contract will provide additional technical support to the PWSU.



                                                                                                             Page 17 of 58
  The World Bank
  Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



48.     The World Bank technical team has visited some peri-urban communities in different cities to gain a
better understanding of conditions on the ground and the type of sanitation interventions that may be most
appropriate in these contexts. The overall proposed approach to sanitation service delivery is in line with
global good practice as it incorporates institutional, financial, regulatory, social and technical considerations
and considers a range of technical solutions for different areas within the city. Further, the approach has been
informed by a number of recent projects and studies by other development partners, including the African
Minister’s Council on Water, European Union Water Initiate, the International Institute for Environment and
Development, Luta Contra Pobreza Urbana, the Water and Sanitation Program, and UNICEF.

49.     The sequencing of activities is also well suited to meet GoA’s needs. By providing TA to create an
action plan for institutional development and capacity building – both at the national and provincial levels –
the project will ensure that capacity needs are addressed in a timely manner. The TA will also provide a plan
for modifying the envisioned sanitation master planning process to be more participatory, which will help
ensure the appropriateness of proposed solutions and increase the likelihood of project success. The master
planning process itself will help ensure that technically feasible, environmentally appropriate, cost effective
solutions are chosen for the small-scale pilot(s).

50.     The treatment facility will be designed to ensure compliance with existing Angolan effluent discharge
regulations, following Presidential Degree no.261/11. There are no existing legal standards for sanitation
designs (e.g., septic tanks, sewers, etc.). Under the proposed Component 5a, the possibility of developing such
standards will be explored. Additionally, if the facility is located in an international water basin, the project
will ensure the impacts will be minimal, if any, for affected international waters.

51.      The current scope of proposed service models for sanitation service delivery is narrow at this point
and focuses heavily on the PWSUs as service providers. This focus on PWSUs as service providers takes into
account (i) the limited existing private sector role in sanitation service delivery in Angolan cities; and (ii) the
role of the project as a pilot that provides the PWSUs with an opportunity to first attempt a more familiar,
straightforward service delivery model. However, these models may be revisited as part of the master
planning process and following the proposed study on private sector engagement.

52.     Given the known financial constraints that the PWSUs are facing for water supply, developing a TA
action plan for IRSEA will help ensure that they are able to develop a framework for sanitation service
provision tariff/fee setting that supports cost recovery efforts.

53.      The project estimates for investment costs are based on best available evidence at this time. Given
the GoA’s lack of experience in sanitation and the lack of existing experience in Angola with some of the
specific proposed solutions, the cost estimates will need to be updated as the project progresses, though the
current estimates are meant to be conservative. More cost-effective alternatives, including shared sanitation
and household co-financing of household facilities, have been considered, but are deemed ill-suited to GoA’s
current needs and the context. Experiences from previous projects in Angola (e.g., those led by NGOs and
other development partners) have shown that households prefer individual household facilities, as compared
to shared household facilities, and in order to get sufficient scale in a timely manner, the pilot will not rely on
household financing for construction. These decisions/approaches will be reviewed during the community
engagement for the master planning processes and a more thorough review will be done to inform how the
sanitation service model might be scaled up in other cities following the piloting.




                                                                                                              Page 18 of 58
   The World Bank
   Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



C. Financial Management

 54.      The FCMU will have fiduciary responsibility for the implementation of the proposed AF. The recent
 FM supervision mission conducted in March 2018, concluded that the FCMU has been working to ensure
 compliance with FM requirements of World Bank-financed operations. The project submitted to the World
 Bank acceptable project audited financial statements for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2016, therefore
 there is no outstanding audit report under this operation.

 55.     The FM and Disbursement arrangements in place for the WSIDP2 will also apply for this operation,
 and changes in those arrangements are not expected. However, in light of discussions between GoA and AFD,
 the opportunity of using an offshore account to deposit funds from the World Bank will be explored.
 Therefore, the project funds, expenditures, and resources will be accounted for using the existing automated
 accounting software and the basis of accounting will be cash basis. Disbursement of IBRD funds will be done
 on transactions basis (Statement of Expenditures [SOE]). The proposed project will make use of advances,
 direct payments, reimbursement and special commitment methods for disbursements. The FCMU will
 prepare quarterly unaudited interim financial reports (IFRs) and provide such reports to the World Bank within
 45 days of the end of each calendar quarter. The project financial statements will be audited annually by the
 independent auditor in accordance with International Standards on Auditing (ISA) as issued by the
 International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board (IAASB) within the International Federation of Accounts
 (IFAC).

 56.    The project’s FM arrangements satisfy the World Bank’s minimum FM requirements under World
 Bank Policy and Directive for IPF and have an overall residual FM risk rating of Substantial.

D. Procurement

 57.      The structure of the procurement function within the FCMU is in place, with one Senior Procurement
 Specialist and two Procurement Officers. The process of mobilization of the second Procurement Specialist is
 underway, and will thus complete the procurement team of the FCMU, as per the institutional arrangements.
 All the procurement staff under the project have the required qualifications. The proposed arrangements for
 the FCMU will be retained under the AF and are adequate to satisfactorily manage the additional resources.
 The FCMU is using the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) consistently for prior review
 activities, but also for post review activities. The FCMU enters in STEP procurement notices and contract
 award notices, for all contracts (under prior and post review), as well as information on payment under each
 signed contract, in a timely manner. Procurement will be subject to the Procurement Regulations for IPF
 Borrowers, July 2016, revised in November 2017; and will also follow the Guidelines on Preventing and
 Combating Fraud and Corruption in Projects Financed by IBRD Loans and International Development
 Association (IDA) Credits and Grants, dated July 1, 2016.

 58.     The current procurement plan includes the following key items. Procurement of consultancy services
 to develop and undertake behavior change/information education campaigns, design and supervision of
 construction/rehabilitation of household toilets/latrines, with septic tanks for up to 5 households in the pilot
 communities (estimated at US$11 million) will be done for each of the pilots through Quality and Cost Based
 Selection (QCBS). Construction/rehabilitation of household toilets/latrines, with septic tanks for up to 5
 households with community participation of local small contractors, through Request for Quotation (RFQ),
 with a cost estimate of US$33.75 million for pilots. Design and supervision of small septage/fecal sludge



                                                                                                            Page 19 of 58
    The World Bank
    Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



 treatment facility and septic tanks for clusters of households, at a cost estimate of US$2 million, will be
 procured through QCBS. Construction of small septage/fecal sludge treatment facilities and septic tanks for
 cluster of more than 5 households will be done in two lots totaling about US$5 million. Supply of vacuum
 trucks for emptying septic tanks (US$0.6 million) will be procured through Nationally Competitive Bidding
 (NCB). A study exploring the possible role of private sector service providers for urban sanitation service
 provision, with a cost estimate of US$200,000, will be procured through QCBS, while the development of a
 national strategy for scaling up the approach to urban sanitation will be done by an Individual Consultant
 (US$75,000), following the update of the master plans. The process of updating the sanitation master plans
 in consultation with relevant stakeholders, using the citywide inclusive sanitation approach has already been
 included in the Procurement Plan of the parent project.

E. Social (including Safeguards)

 59.     OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) is triggered for this project due to the nature of the proposed
 investments. An RPF has therefore been prepared that establishes the standards and procedures to follow in
 the event that individual investments have been determined to result in possible impacts on households
 and/or businesses. The project has been reviewed for resettlement issues, and procedures for activities that
 may require land acquisition have been agreed with the GoA. The RPF updating process was subject to broad
 public consultation in the nine beneficiary cities and has been disclosed in Angola and at the World Bank’s
 external website on April 30, 2018. For the AF the impacts will be avoided and/or mitigated through provisions
 adopted during the project preparation phase and/or the development of the technical designs. In case
 negative impacts expected from the project investments under the AF cannot be avoided, potential impacts
 will be mitigated/compensated through the implementation of the sub-project-specific activities, in line with
 the updated RPF.

 60.      During the detailed planning and design of individual sub-projects, a screening process will determine
 whether or not the Involuntary Resettlement policy is triggered due to land acquisition needs, impacts on
 assets, or impacts on livelihoods. It is expected that engineers will try to utilize unused government land and
 rights-of-way when designing distribution networks and other project works in order to reduce the number
 of affected households and businesses. For cases where project activities cannot find unused public land for
 project investments, a RAP will be prepared based on the guidance and standards set forth in the RPF. The
 RAP will be prepared by the Borrower, reviewed and cleared by the World Bank, and implemented so that
 affected persons will receive compensation prior to the beginning of project activities.

 61.      When it is determined that a RAP is necessary, a baseline census will be conducted to determine who
 and what is affected as well as the nature of impacts. The date of the baseline census will serve as the cut-off
 date, after which time any person moving into the area, or assets being added to the area, will not be eligible
 for compensation or resettlement assistance. Any person using or occupying the land prior to the census will
 be eligible for assistance regardless of their ownership either by legal or traditional means. All data collection
 and monitoring will be disaggregated based on gender, age, and socioeconomic status. This information will
 be included in reporting.

 62.      During RAP preparation, consultations will be conducted with affected communities in order to ensure
 robust communications and to allow beneficiaries to be actively involved in the planning, preparation, and
 implementation process. Beneficiaries will also be informed of the grievance redress mechanisms to be used
 if they have a complaint that is not being effectively handled by contractors, consultants, or the FCMU.



                                                                                                              Page 20 of 58
   The World Bank
   Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



 63.     For individual households receiving water connections and/or improved sanitation services, only
 those households requesting service will experience temporary disturbance within their property as part of
 the installation process. This will not require compensation, as it is requested by the household and is not an
 involuntary acquisition of land. The FCMU and contractors’ environment and social staff will work with
 beneficiaries to determine water supply and sanitation locations as well as timing in order to reduce impacts
 on assets within household compounds, such as gardens or trees.

 64.     As the specific sites and infrastructure interventions are not yet determined, it is difficult to predict
 what impacts the project could have on labor influx (and related issues). For example, if local non-
 governmental organizations (NGOs) are used for construction of facilities (which is currently being
 considered), there will not likely be any impacts due to labor influx. However, if the project site and type of
 interventions end up being such that labor influx is reasonably expected, appropriate measures will be put in
 place to minimize the risk of gender-based violence and other potential adverse community impacts. These
 measures and, any possible mitigation measures, will be in line with emerging practices and lessons learned
 from other infrastructure projects on these issues.

 65.      Social Inclusion and Citizen Engagement: To encourage low-income households to connect to the
 water and sanitation systems, and in order to better explain the benefits and responsibilities of obtaining the
 services, the works contracts for service extensions will include the carrying out of public consultation and
 education programs in each area of service expansion. Such campaigns may include a range of activities, as
 appropriate, including information campaigns, public hearings, distribution of posters and leaflets translated
 into the local language, interactive drama/theatre groups, and community dialogue initiatives with women
 and men. In addition, as an input into the design of service extensions, contractors will carry out a minimum
 of two information/consultation sessions in each sub-project area. The first one will be offered to the general
 population, while the second one will exclusively target women, as women are key beneficiaries of the
 interventions and their needs/preferences surrounding water and sanitation are likely different than those of
 men in the community. Experience under the parent project shows the importance of separate consultation
 meetings for women to ensure they are able to fully participate and voice their preferences, and for sanitation
 this will be even more important, given the sensitive nature of some topics (e.g., menstrual hygiene
 management). The objective of these sessions will be to inform and obtain feedback about: (a) an adequate
 interface with the community to develop principles for community involvement, a participative framework,
 and mechanisms for community awareness and education; (b) identification of community preferences and
 priorities with regard to the provision of services, including target groups such as small, medium and large
 enterprises, groups with special needs and/or low-income and vulnerable households (for example, the aged,
 HIV/AIDS-affected persons, and persons with disabilities, households outside the formal network, women,
 and the socially excluded); (c) the role of the communities in construction oversight, as well as recurrent
 operation and maintenance of the systems; and (d) an assessment of water, sanitation and hygiene-related
 education needs of the community.

F. Environment (including Safeguards)

 66.      The WSIDP2 AF project is classified as category “B,” as it is likely to generate temporary, manageable
 and localized adverse environmental and social impacts and risks. The project activities will involve the
 construction or rehabilitation of sanitation and drainage infrastructure (sewerage networks, household
 latrines, fecal sludge treatment facilities) in a subset of the same nine municipalities of Angola covered by
 WSIDP2. These activities will largely contribute to positive outcomes, such as reducing the prevalence of


                                                                                                             Page 21 of 58
  The World Bank
  Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



unhygienic environmental conditions in urban neighborhoods which cause high rates of child stunting, trigger
cholera epidemics and chronic diarrhea outbreaks, and lead to high child mortality, while also generating
significant adverse environmental and social impacts that require due safeguards consideration. As such,
OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment is triggered. Since the precise location of all sub-project sites will
be determined during implementation through eligibility criteria that will also entail screening procedures for
investments with high adverse environmental impacts, the Borrower updated existing safeguards instruments
for WSIDP2, namely: (i) an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and (ii) an RPF, which
were disclosed in country and in the World Bank Internal Document Unit (IDU) on April 30, 2018. These
instruments will provide guidance and procedures for the preparation of subsequent ESIA/RAP/Environment
and Social Management Plans (ESMP) once the specific details of the sub-projects design and precise locations
are determined.

67.       The ESMF details the sub-project types to be financed under the AF and associated adverse impacts
that may be generated during implementation. Potential sub-project types include, among others, the
following: (i) sewerage infrastructures, including network connections; (ii) small to medium scale drainage
infrastructure; (iii) household latrines/toilets, under cost sharing arrangements; (iv) fecal sludge treatment
facilities and transfer stations. These activities may generate potential environmental and social risks mostly
related to sensitivity of the environment receiving the effluent; management of construction waste, which is
common in any civil works; public nuisance due to presence of odors; health and safety issues (both from
dealing with toxic waste disposal and fecal sludge treatment, as well as from construction activities); noise
and vibration, which even when not beyond acceptable levels, may still be inconvenient for communities; dust
generation; and loss of assets and livelihoods of communities in the vicinity of the work sites. The ESMF
contains an updated social and environmental checklist and an Environmental and Social Screening Form
(ESSF) to screen potential environmental and social effects so that effective mitigation measures are clearly
defined and presented in subsequent ESIA/ESMP. The ESMF also includes principles and guidelines to be
followed by the FCMU for site-specific ESIA/ESMP preparation. These documents will contain estimated costs
for safeguards implementation including specific provisions to address labor influx (as deemed appropriate
when specific details on works, site locations and type of contractors is known), physical cultural resources
and community health and safety.

68.     The preparation of the ESMF and RPF for the parent project involved extensive stakeholder
consultations and participation processes, which included among others, civil society organizations, targeted
project beneficiaries, key government agencies and Municipalities involved in the implementation of the
proposed project sub-projects. A dissemination workshop was carried out, to share the findings; structure and
approach detailed in the draft ESMF, and receive feedback to be considered into the final version of the ESMF
and for consideration in the final design of the project. The ESMF and RPF were updated to reflect the new
scope of interventions considering the sanitation pilot and have been disclosed in-country and on the World
Bank’s website.

69.      The Borrower’s capacity to implement environmental safeguard policies during WSIDP and WSIDP2
has proven to be acceptable. The existing FCMU includes one experienced safeguards specialist, and safeguard
procedures are well established. The FCMU team will further be strengthened in safeguards capacity with a
broad team, clear roles and procedures, to adequately manage environmental impacts of WSIDP2 and the AF
activities.

70.     For the septage/fecal sludge treatment facility, the World Bank technical team visited potential



                                                                                                          Page 22 of 58
    The World Bank
    Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



 wastewater treatment plant sites (that were indicated in previous master plans) in two cities. Though
 additional studies would be required, preliminary visits suggest that finding treatment facility sites will not be
 challenging, particularly given the small-scale nature of the treatment facilities envisioned under the project.
 The treatment facility will be designed and constructed in line with existing Angolan standards, namely
 Presidential Decree 261/11, which includes effluent discharge standards.

G. Other Safeguard Policies

 71.      OP 7.50 International Waterways is applicable to the project, as some of the water supply systems
 and potential sanitation activities under the project rely on sources of water interconnected with the
 Congo/Zaire River and the Zambezi River, which are considered to be international waterways for purposes
 of the policy. However, the activities to be financed under the project in cities located in international basins
 (i.e., Dundo and Luena) do not entail the construction of additional water production capacity, and there will
 be no discharge of treated waste into transboundary water systems. Hence, the project (a) will not adversely
 change the quality or quantity of water flows to the other riparian; and (b) will not be adversely affected by
 other riparian’s possible water use. A Memorandum for Exception to Notification Requirements under OP
 7.50, Project on International Waterways, was submitted to the World Bank’s Africa Regional Vice President
 (RVP). The RVP approved the exception on April 26, 2018.

 72.     OP 4.37 Safety of Dams is triggered through the AF as the parent project includes TA activities related
 to dams and dam safety planning (and the OP was not previously triggered). However, no physical works in
 relation to small or large dams will be undertaken under the project, nor do any project investments rely on
 the appropriate operation of an existing dam. As required, necessary dam safety plans will be prepared and
 terms of reference for and the composition of the independent Panel of Experts will be reviewed and
 approved by the World Bank.


V. WORLD BANK GRIEVANCE REDRESS

 73.      Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a World Bank (WB)
 supported project may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance redress mechanisms or the WB’s
 Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order
 to address project-related concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint
 to the WB’s independent Inspection Panel which determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, as a
 result of WB non-compliance with its policies and procedures. Complaints may be submitted at any time after
 concerns have been brought directly to the World Bank's attention, and Bank Management has been given an
 opportunity to respond. For information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank’s corporate
 Grievance Redress Service (GRS), please visit http://www.worldbank.org/en/projects-operations/products-
 and-services/grievance-redress-service. For information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank
 Inspection Panel, please visit www.inspectionpanel.org.




                                                                                                              Page 23 of 58
    The World Bank
    Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)




 VI. SUMMARY TABLE OF CHANGES

                                                                 Changed                     Not Changed
Change in Results Framework                                          ✔
Change in Components and Cost                                        ✔
Change in Disbursements Arrangements                                 ✔
Change in Safeguard Policies Triggered                               ✔
Change in Procurement                                                ✔
Change in Implementing Agency                                                                    ✔
Change in Project's Development Objectives                                                       ✔
Change in Loan Closing Date(s)                                                                   ✔
Cancellations Proposed                                                                           ✔
Reallocation between Disbursement Categories                                                     ✔
Change of EA category                                                                            ✔
Change in Legal Covenants                                                                        ✔
Change in Institutional Arrangements                                                             ✔
Change in Financial Management                                                                   ✔
Change in APA Reliance                                                                           ✔
Change in Implementation Schedule                                                                ✔
Other Change(s)                                                                                  ✔



VII. DETAILED CHANGE(S)

RESULTS FRAMEWORK       _DETAILED CHA NGES




Project Development Objective Indicators     detailed cha nges




PDO_IND_TABLE




                                                                                                      Page 24 of 58
        The World Bank
        Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



Intermediate Indicators
IO_DETAILED_TABLE          detailed change s




 Number of people provided with safely managed sanitation service delivery under the project
 Unit of Measure: Number
 Indicator Type: Custom

                    Baseline                             Actual (Current)          End Target            Action
 Value              0.00                                 0.00                      35,000.00             New

 Date               23-Mar-2018                          23-Mar-2018               29-Mar-2024
 Approval of guidelines for participatory urban sanitation master planning
 Unit of Measure: Yes/No
 Indicator Type: Custom

                    Baseline                             Actual (Current)          End Target            Action
 Value              No                                   No                        Yes                   New

 Date               09-Apr-2018                          09-Apr-2018               31-Mar-2024
 Development of a national strategy for scaling up the piloted approach to urban sanitation
 Unit of Measure: Yes/No
 Indicator Type: Custom

                    Baseline                             Actual (Current)          End Target            Action
 Value              No                                   No                        Yes                   New

 Date               02-May-2018                          02-May-2018               31-Mar-2023



COMPONENTS
Current Component Name                           Current Cost Action        Proposed Component      Proposed Cost (US$,
                                               (US$, millions)              Name                              millions)
Water Supply Institutional                              74.00               Water Supply                          74.00
Strengthening and Capacity                                                  Institutional
Development                                                                 Strengthening and
                                                                            Capacity Development
Water Resource                                         35.20                Water Resource                         35.20
Management                                                                  Management
Rehabilitation and                                    373.50                Rehabilitation and                    373.50
Expansion of Water Supply                                                   Expansion of Water
Production and Distribution                                                 Supply Production and
                                                                            Distribution




                                                                                                                  Page 25 of 58
          The World Bank
          Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



Management and                               62.30                  Management and                         62.30
Engineering Support                                                 Engineering Support
                                              0.00 New              Piloting Small-Scale                   55.00
                                                                    Sanitation Service
                                                                    Delivery in Peri-Urban
                                                                    Areas
TOTAL                                       545.00                                                        600.00



DISBURSEMENT ARRANGEMENTS
Change in Disbursement Arrangements
Yes


Expected Disbursements (in US$, millions)
LDISBURSTB
Fiscal Year           2017        2018         2019         2020          2021       2022          2023    2024

Annual                0.00         0.00         0.00        0.00          0.00        0.00         0.00     0.00

Cumulative            0.00         0.00         0.00        0.00          0.00        0.00         0.00     0.00

SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK-RATING TOOL (SORT)
Risk Category                                            Latest ISR Rating       Current Rating

Political and Governance                                  z Substantial          z Substantial
Macroeconomic                                             z Substantial          z Substantial
Sector Strategies and Policies                            z Moderate             z Moderate
Technical Design of Project or Program                    z Moderate             z Moderate
Institutional Capacity for Implementation and             z Substantial          z Substantial
Sustainability
Fiduciary                                                 z Substantial          z Substantial
Environment and Social                                    z Moderate             z Substantial
Stakeholders                                              z Substantial          z Substantial
Other                                                     z Substantial          z Substantial
Overall                                                   z Substantial          z Substantial


Safguard_Table



                                                                                                          Page 26 of 58
       The World Bank
       Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



COMPLIANCE
Change in Safeguard Policies Triggered
Yes
Safeguard Policies Triggered              Current                       Proposed

Environmental Assessment OP/BP            Yes                          Yes
4.01

Performance Standards for Private         No                           No
Sector Activities OP/BP 4.03

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04               No                           No

Forests OP/BP 4.36                        No                           No

Pest Management OP 4.09                   No                           No

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP         No                           No
4.11

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10             No                           No

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12       Yes                          Yes

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                 No                           Yes

Projects on International Waterways       Yes                          Yes
OP/BP 7.50

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60     No                           No


LEGAL COVENANTS2

LEGAL COVENANTS – Additional Financing - Second Water Institutional Development Project (P167201)
Sections and Description
OPS LEGAL CONVENANT CHILD NODATA
No information available

Conditions
Type                                Description
Disbursement                        No withdrawal shall be made under Categories (1), (5) and (10) for each
                                    Participating Province unless the Borrower has submitted evidence, satisfactory



                                                                                                              Page 27 of 58
The World Bank
Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



                          to the Bank, that with respect to said particular Participating Province, the
                          Participating Agreement between the Borrower, through MINEA, and the
                          respective Participating Province have been signed




                                                                                                          Page 28 of 58
   The World Bank
   Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



                                                 VIII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING



                                                                 Results Framework
                                                                 COUNTRY : Angola
                                       Additional Financing - Second Water Institutional Development Project
RESULT YES PDO
Project Development Objectives
The Project Development Objective is to strengthen the institutional capacity of selected water sector agencies and increase water service coverage in
target cities.
Project Development Objective Indicators


                                                      Unit of                                                     Data Source /        Responsibility for
 Action                 Indicator Name        Core                   Baseline      End Target    Frequency
                                                      Measure                                                     Methodology          Data Collection

 No Change              Name: Number of              Number               0.00      951,150.00    FCMU-WB          Reports              Quarterly
                        people in urban
                        areas provided with
                        access to Improved
                        Water Sources
                        under the project

Description: This indicator measures the actual number of people in urban areas who benefited from improved water supply services that have been
constructed under the project. Guidance on "improved water sources": Improved water sources include piped household connections (house or yard
connections), public standpipe, boreholes, protected dug well, protected spring and rainwater collection. Hence, "Improved Water Sources" do not
include, inter alia, water provided through tanker truck, or vendor, unprotected well, unprotected spring, surface water (river, pond, dam, lake, stream,
irrigation channel), or bottled water. The definition of what is considered an ‘improved water source' follows the UNICEF-WHO Joint Monitoring Program
definition. Note that "Improved Water Sources" does not refer to the question of new versus rehabilitated water sources, but is the standard definition




                                                                                                                                     Page 29 of 58
  The World Bank
  Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



used to track progress on the Millennium Development Goals. Guidance on people with access: The data on the number of people provided with access
can be estimated by TTLs by multiplying i) the actual number of piped connections with an estimate of the number of people per household connection;
and/or ii) the actual number of community water points with an estimate of the number of people per community water point. The assumptions made
regarding number of people per connection made should be carefully documented in the ‘comments' section of the indicator when data is entered in the
ISR. Guidance on urban classification: The classification should follow the official definition used in the country.
No Change               Name: Direct                Number                0.00      951,150.00    FCMU-WB          Reports              Quarterly
                        project beneficiaries

  No Change               Female                    Percentage           50.00           50.00
                          beneficiaries

Description: Direct beneficiaries are people or groups who directly derive benefits from an intervention (i.e., children who benefit from an immunization
program; families that have a new piped water connection). Please note that this indicator requires supplemental information. Supplemental Value:
Female beneficiaries (percentage). Based on the assessment and definition of direct project beneficiaries, specify what proportion of the direct project
beneficiaries are female. This indicator is calculated as a percentage.
No Change               Name: Number of             Number                0.00             9.00   FCMU-WB          Reports              Annually
                        independent audits
                        of PWSU financial
                        statements
                        documenting
                        financial
                        performance

Description: This indicator reflects the extent to which the PWSUs are able to identify and record revenues and expenses and possess the required
systems and organizational capacity to provide financial information about the utilityâ s operation. Information in audited financial reports document
PWSU performance, key financial challenges, and, over time, the evolution of improvements to operations and finances.
No Change               Name: Percentage            Percentage            0.00           80.00    FCMU-            Reports              Annual
                        of hydrometric                                                            WB/INRH
                        stations supported
                        by the project,
                        providing




                                                                                                                                      Page 30 of 58
  The World Bank
  Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



                         information to INRH

Description: This indicator captures the extent to which the hydrometric stations supported by the project are in working condition, and whether all the
prerequisites to information availability are in place. This indicator will measure progress towards the institutional strengthening activities of INRH and is
related to the PDO.
No Change                Name: Regulatory                Yes/No               No              Yes    FCMU-             Reports              Annual
                         framework for                                                               WB/IRSEA
                         water and
                         sanitation services
                         in place

Description: This indicator will capture information about the progress of various regulatory instruments supported by the project needed to establish a
sound regulatory framework for the water and sanitation sector. This indicator will measure progress towards the institutional strengthening activities of
IRSEA and is related to the PDO.
RESULT_YES_IO

Intermediate Results Indicators

                                                                                                                                               Responsibility
                                                           Unit of                                                    Data Source /
  Action              Indicator Name              Core                  Baseline     End Target     Frequency                                  for Data
                                                           Measure                                                    Methodology
                                                                                                                                               Collection

   No Change           Name: Number of                    Number             0.00           9.00    FCMU-WB            Reports                  Semi-annual
                       water utilities that the
                       project is supporting

  Description: Total number of utilities providing water supply with which the Bank is working under the project.
   No Change           Name: Average audited              Percentage         0.00          80.00    FCMU-              Reports                  Annual
                       cost-recovery ratio for                                                      WB/IRSEA
                       the 5 PWSUs supported
                       by WSDIP I




                                                                                                                                          Page 31 of 58
The World Bank
Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



Description: This indicator measures the financial sustainability of the utilities by comparing collected revenues and operational expenditures, as a
proxy variable to assess the overall performance of the utility (reducing costs and increasing billings and collections). This first group of 5 PWSUs
received initial assistance under WSIDP I and therefore have a higher target ratio. The 5 PWSUs are Malanje, Cuanza Norte, Uige, Huambo, and BiÃ©.
No Change           Name: Average audited            Percentage            0.00          80.00    FCMU-              Reports                   Annual
                    cost-recovery ratio for                                                       WB/IRSEA
                    2 PWSUs to be
                    supported by WSDIP II

Description: This indicator measures the financial sustainability of the utilities by comparing collected revenues and operational expenditures, as a
proxy variable to assess the overall performance of the utility (reducing costs and increasing billings and collections). Because these utilities will begin to
receive assistance under WSIDP II, more modest targets have been set. The 2 PWSUs are Huila and Moxico.
No Change           Name: Average audited            Percentage            0.00          70.00    FCMU-              Reports                   Annual
                    cost-recovery ratio for                                                       WB/IRSEA
                    2 PWSUs to be
                    supported by WSDIP II
                    after year 3

Description: This indicator measures the financial sustainability of the utilities by comparing collected revenues and operational expenditures, as a
proxy variable to assess the overall performance of the utility (reducing costs and increasing billings and collections). Because these utilities are
currently being supported by AfDB and will only be supported by WSIDP II after year 3 of the project, a different timeline for target achievement has
been defined. The 2 PWSUs are Namibe and Lunda Norte.
No Change           Name: Integrated River           Number                0.00            2.00   FCMU-WB/INRH       Reports                   Annual
                    Basin Management
                    Plans supported by the
                    Project

Description: This indicator will measure the completion of Integrated River Basin Management Plans for the prioritized basins.
No Change           Name: Assessment of              Number                0.00            6.00   FCMU-WB/INRH       Reports                   Annual
                    the safety status of
                    prioritized dam carried
                    out by a panel of




                                                                                                                                         Page 32 of 58
The World Bank
Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



                    experts

Description: This indicator will measure the progress on the assessment of the safety status of prioritized dams; a panel will analyze the dams in groups
of four and it is expected to have this exercise repeated every 3 years.
No Change           Name: New piped                 Number               0.00    186,500.00    FCMU-WB            Reports                 Annual
                    household water
                    connections that are
                    resulting from the
                    project intervention

Description: Number of new piped household water connections which result from the project intervention. A piped household water connection is
defined as a connection that provides piped water to the consumer through either a house or yard connection. Hence, they do not include, inter alia,
standpipes, protected well, borehole, protected spring, piped water provided through tanker trucks, or vendors, unprotected wells, unprotected spring,
rivers, ponds and other surface water bodies, or bottled water.
No Change           Name: Length of water           Kilometers           0.00       1,675.00   FCMU-WB            Reports                 Quarterly
                    supply network laid
                    under the project

Description: This intermediary indicator tracks progress through monitoring the number of kilometers of new water supply network installed under the
project. The supervision consultants for each sub-project will collect the information of pipeline installed monthly and report it to the FCMU-WB.
No Change           Name: Increased                 Cubic                0.00     48,000.00    FCMU-WB            Reports                 Semi-annual
                    capacity of water               Meter(m3)
                    treatment (production)

Description: This intermediary indicator tracks progress through monitoring the amount of additional water which can be treated (produced) as a result
of rehabilitation and expansion works implemented under the project.
No Change           Name: Number of                 Number               0.00           2.00   FCMU-WB            Reports                 Annual
                    studies carried out to
                    confirm the availability
                    of water resources with
                    adequate quality




                                                                                                                                    Page 33 of 58
The World Bank
Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



Description: This indicator will reflect the progress of studies on hydro-geological, geophysical investigations as well as on saline intrusion in selected
cities. These studies shall be carried out during the first part of the project to inform follow-up investments.
No Change           Name: Number of                  Number                0.00           8.00    FCMU-WB            Reports                  Annual
                    sanitation master plans
                    updated

Description: This indicator will provide information on the completion of sanitation master plans for eight of the cities supported by the project.
No Change           Name: Systems to                 Number                0.00           9.00    PWSUs/FCMU-        Reports                  Annual
                    receive and respond to                                                        WB
                    customer complaints at
                    the PWSU level in place

Description: This indicator will provide information on the development of systems within the PWSUs that enable customers to inform the relevant
PWSU of service-related issues and for the PWSUs to respond to and follow-up with such complaints.
No Change           Name: Percentage of              Percentage            0.00          60.00    PWSUs/FCMU-        Reports                  Annual
                    registered grievances                                                         WB
                    related to service
                    delivery that are
                    resolved

Description: This indicator will provide information on the percentage of customer complaints received through the customer complaint systems
established by the PWSUs that are successfully resolved.
No Change           Name: Percentage of              Percentage            0.00         100.00    FCMU-WB            Reports                  Annual
                    network expansion
                    contracts that carry out
                    information and
                    consultation sessions

Description: This indicator will track information and consultation sessions carried out by contractors (with the participation of the relevant PWSU)
carrying out civil works related to water supply network extension and customer connections to the network. The sessions will work to ensure the
consideration of neighborhood and customer preferences in the design and implementation of networks and that all potential customers understand




                                                                                                                                        Page 34 of 58
The World Bank
Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



their rights and responsibilities with respect to water service, including the expectation of customer payment for services received. All contracts for
network expansion and customer connections will include the requirement that such information and consultation sessions be carried out in the areas
of expansion.
No Change           Name: Percentage of             Percentage           0.00        100.00    FCMU-WB            Reports                        Annual
                    network expansion
                    contracts that carry out
                    information and
                    consultation sessions
                    specifically for women

Description: This indicator will track information and consultation sessions specifically for women carried out by contractors (with the participation of
the relevant PWSU) carrying out civil works related to water supply network extension and customer connections to the network. As women (and girls)
are expected to be key beneficiaries of the extension of water services, their participation in information and consultation sessions is especially
important to promote the design of networks and location of connections that meet their needs. All contracts for network expansion and customer
connections will include a requirement that a women-specific information and consultation session be carried out in each area of expansion, and
therefore it is expected that 50 percent of all sessions will be for women.
New                 Name: Number of                 Number               0.00     35,000.00    Every 6 months     Reports from wrks              FCMU
                    people provided with                                                                          contracts building             WB/AFD
                    safely managed                                                                                sanitation facilities.
                    sanitation service
                    delivery under the
                    project

Description: Based on estimate of 5 people per household. Safely managed sanitation service delivery includes improved (per JMP definition)
toilet/latrine connected to a safely managed sewer network or fecal sludge management service chain that takes waste to a treatment facility.
New                 Name: Approval of               Yes/No                No             Yes   Annually           MINEA                          FCMU WB/AF
                    guidelines for                                                                                                               D
                    participatory urban
                    sanitation master
                    planning

Description: The indicator will be fulfilled once the GoA approves the guidelines to prepare and/or update the Sanitation Master Plans, which should




                                                                                                                                           Page 35 of 58
The World Bank
Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



bein line with the City Wide Inclusive Sanitation approach
New                 Name: Development of           Yes/No                No              Yes   Annually        MINEA                    FCMU WB/AF
                    a national strategy for                                                                                             D
                    scaling up the piloted
                    approach to urban
                    sanitation

Description: Based on the implementation of the pilot sanitation project(s)the Government will develop an strategy to expand access to the sanitation
services incorporating the lessons learnt through the project and considering technical, financial, institutional, and social elements.




                                                                                                                                  Page 36 of 58
    The World Bank
    Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



RESULT YES TARGET VALUES
                                                                          Target Values

 Project Development Objective Indicators FY_Result1

 Action              Indicator Name                Baseline         YR1           YR2        YR3        YR4        YR5        YR6       End Target
 No Change           Number of people in
                     urban areas provided
                     with access to Improved           0.00         0.00           0.00 150,000.00 410,000.00 690,000.00 951,150.00 951,150.00
                     Water Sources under the
                     project
 No Change           Direct project
                                                       0.00         0.00           0.00 150,000.00 410,000.00 690,000.00 951,150.00 951,150.00
                     beneficiaries
 No Change           Female beneficiaries            50.00         50.00          50.00      50.00      50.00      50.00      50.00          50.00
 No Change           Number of independent
                     audits of PWSU financial
                                                       0.00         2.00           4.00       4.00       4.00       8.00       9.00           9.00
                     statements documenting
                     financial performance
 No Change           Percentage of
                     hydrometric stations
                     supported by the project,         0.00         0.00          50.00      50.00      60.00      70.00      80.00          80.00
                     providing information to
                     INRH
 No Change           Regulatory framework for
                     water and sanitation               No             N             N          N          N          N             Y           Y
                     services in place

 Intermediate Results Indicators FY_Result1




                                                                                                                             Page 37 of 58
   The World Bank
   Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)




Action             Indicator Name              Baseline           YR1          YR2          YR3        YR4         YR5        YR6      End Target
No Change          Number of water utilities
                   that the project is               0.00          0.00         2.00         4.00       9.00       9.00        9.00           9.00
                   supporting
No Change          Average audited cost-
                   recovery ratio for the 5
                                                     0.00         40.00        60.00        80.00      80.00      80.00       80.00          80.00
                   PWSUs supported by
                   WSDIP I
No Change          Average audited cost-
                   recovery ratio for 2
                                                     0.00          0.00        20.00        35.00      50.00      70.00       80.00          80.00
                   PWSUs to be supported
                   by WSDIP II
No Change          Average audited cost-
                   recovery ratio for 2
                                                     0.00          0.00         0.00        10.00      35.00      50.00       70.00          70.00
                   PWSUs to be supported
                   by WSDIP II after year 3
No Change          Integrated River Basin
                   Management Plans                  0.00          0.00         0.00         1.00       1.00       2.00        2.00           2.00
                   supported by the Project
No Change          Assessment of the safety
                   status of prioritized dam
                                                     0.00          0.00         0.00         2.00       4.00       6.00        6.00           6.00
                   carried out by a panel of
                   experts
No Change          New piped household
                   water connections that
                                                     0.00          0.00         0.00    30,000.00   80,000.00 135,000.00 186,500.00 186,500.00
                   are resulting from the
                   project intervention




                                                                                                                             Page 38 of 58
  The World Bank
  Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



No Change         Length of water supply
                  network laid under the            0.00          0.00       200.00         500.00     900.00     1,300.00    1,675.00      1,675.00
                  project
No Change         Increased capacity of
                  water treatment                   0.00          0.00         0.00        6,000.00   6,000.00   36,000.00   48,000.00     48,000.00
                  (production)
No Change         Number of studies carried
                  out to confirm the
                  availability of water             0.00          0.00         1.00           1.00       1.00         2.00        2.00            2.00
                  resources with adequate
                  quality
No Change         Number of sanitation
                                                    0.00          0.00         0.00           8.00       8.00         8.00        8.00            8.00
                  master plans updated
No Change         Systems to receive and
                  respond to customer
                                                    0.00          0.00         0.00           2.00       4.00         7.00        9.00            9.00
                  complaints at the PWSU
                  level in place
No Change         Percentage of registered
                  grievances related to
                                                    0.00          0.00         0.00          30.00      50.00       60.00        60.00           60.00
                  service delivery that are
                  resolved
No Change         Percentage of network
                  expansion contracts that
                                                    0.00          0.00       100.00         100.00     100.00      100.00      100.00           100.00
                  carry out information and
                  consultation sessions
No Change         Percentage of network
                  expansion contracts that          0.00          0.00       100.00         100.00     100.00      100.00      100.00           100.00
                  carry out information and




                                                                                                                                Page 39 of 58
  The World Bank
  Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



                  consultation sessions
                  specifically for women
New               Number of people
                  provided with safely
                  managed sanitation                0.00          0.00         0.00        0.00   0.00   10,000.00   35,000.00     35,000.00
                  service delivery under the
                  project
New               Approval of guidelines for
                  participatory urban
                                                      No             N            N          Y      Y           Y             Y           Y
                  sanitation master
                  planning
New               Development of a
                  national strategy for
                  scaling up the piloted              No             N            N          N      N           N             Y           Y
                  approach to urban
                  sanitation




                                                                                                                        Page 40 of 58
The World Bank
Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



                                    Annex 1: Description of Component 5


  1. Component 5: Piloting Small-Scale Sanitation Service Delivery in Peri-Urban Areas (IBRD financing
  US$55 million). The project will approach sanitation as a service to be delivered, and as such, will include
  activities to support national and provincial institutions in carrying out their mandates for sanitation
  service delivery, policy implementation and regulation as well as pilot activities to increase access
  (through infrastructure improvements). In line with this approach, technical solutions will consider the
  full sanitation service chain – i.e., household containment, collection, conveyance, treatment and safe
  disposal. The project will use the Citywide Inclusive Sanitation approach, which focuses on: (i) embedding
  sanitation within the framework of urban governance and municipal services provision; (ii) establishing
  clear roles and responsibilities, with accountability and transparency, and robust service delivery
  management; (iii) delivering ‘safe management’ through the sanitation chain – for both onsite sanitation
  and sewers – to ensure separation of fecal contamination from people across the whole city; (iv) outcomes
  rather than technologies – allowing for diversity of solutions and approaches; (v) basing decisions on
  secure operational budgets being available (always planning for operation and maintenance); (vi)
  facilitating progressive realization, building on what is already in place; and (vii) committing resources to
  training city leaders and technicians of the future to solve complex problems rather than deliver fixed
  solutions. Two sub-components are proposed under this component.

  2. Component 5a: Citywide Inclusive Sanitation Planning and Institutional Development (IBRD financing
  US$2 million). This sub-component will support the national and provincial agencies in planning for the
  necessary institutional, policy and regulatory changes that will be required in order to carry out their
  mandates for sanitation, through:

       a) The provision of TA to (i) prepare the guidelines and create an action plan for capacity
          development and institutional support to DNA for updating and drafting necessary policies and
          instruments for overseeing sanitation service delivery; and (ii) prepare the guidelines and create
          an action plan for capacity development and institutional support to IRSEA for drafting and
          implementing economic regulation for sanitation services, likely including a framework for
          setting tariffs/fees for sanitation (that reflect the costs of providing services, the payment
          capacity of users, and explores different alternatives for financing capital investments). The
          actual capacity development activities will be funded by the TA activities under WSIDP24.

       b) Development of the proposed approach and guidelines for the preparation of the Participatory
          Sanitation Master Plans, which will be prepared and used under the project, ensuring (i) the
          master plan process includes gathering more detailed baseline information on existing sanitation
          service provision – and related complementary urban services – in different parts of the cities;
          (ii) the master plans are developed in a participatory manner, incorporating inputs from
          households, the PWSUs, provincial government, and other relevant local stakeholders; and (iii)

  4
    Through the support to IRSEA for setting cost-recovery tariffs and developing sound policies for the sanitation
  sector, the project will continue the work undertaken through the parent project towards enabling Maximizing
  Finance for Development (MFD) so as to set a clear strategy of ensuring that the underlying funding of the sector is
  sustainable.




                                                                                                                         Page 41 of 58
The World Bank
Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



            as is the case under WSIDP2, ensuring community engagement activities will also include
            separate, targeted engagement with women to ensure their voices are heard and their
            preferences are taken into account during the different phases of the project. This TA will be
            informed by the initial master planning undertaken for the first cluster of three cities, which will
            serve as a pilot of the proposed approach. (Note: The parent project will finance the updating of
            sanitation master plans, for each of the nine cities, in line with the Citywide Inclusive Sanitation
            approach, which will consider a range of technical solution for providing services to the whole
            city, as compared to the existing plans that focus on sewered sanitation only in the central part
            of the city.)

       c) The provision of TA to develop an action plan for the PWSU(s) where small-scale sanitation
          infrastructure investments are made, in order to strengthen their ability to (i) incorporate
          sanitation customers into their existing customer management systems, in line with TA provided
          under WSIDP2 on customer management and billing and collection efficiency; (ii) operate and
          maintain the fecal sludge management system and other sanitation service facilities; and (iii)
          operate and maintain the fecal sludge treatment facility. This support will be provided through
          the management contract(s) funded by WSIDP2. The contracts will be amended to include
          provision for a sanitation specialist to provide the necessary TA and capacity development on an
          ongoing basis.

       d) The provision of TA to undertake a study exploring the possible role of private sector service
          providers for urban sanitation service provision, with a focus on possibilities for private sector
          pit/tank emptying.

       e) Consultancy services to develop and undertake behavior change/information education
          campaigns in the pilot communities to educate households on the importance of proper
          sanitation and hygiene behaviors, including handwashing and toilet/latrine maintenance.

       f)   The provision of TA to develop a national strategy for scaling up the approach to urban sanitation,
            which will be informed by the piloting activities (under Component 5b) and the associated
            monitoring and evaluation of the pilot(s).

  3. Component 5b: Piloting Delivery of Small-Scale Sanitation Services in Peri-Urban Areas (IBRD financing
  US$53 million). Under this sub-component, infrastructure improvements will be implemented in select
  peri-urban areas to provide the PWSU(s), who are responsible for both water supply and sanitation, with
  an opportunity to pilot onsite sanitation service delivery. The piloting will take place in one or more of the
  nine provincial capitals (additional information on each city is provided in Annex 2). The specific city (or
  cities) will be chosen through a competitive process, based on completion of the updated sanitation
  master plans, PWSU readiness and performance, and PWSU and provincial government support; the
  details of these criteria will be specified in the Project Implementation Manual. The updated master plans
  will consider solutions for the entire city, likely using a mix of sewered and onsite solutions, based on
  which technologies are technically feasible, cost effective (in terms of both capital and operational
  expenditures), and culturally appropriate. However, for the purposes of piloting, areas will be chosen
  where the master plans have identified onsite sanitation as the optimal solution. Within the city (or cities),
  the small-scale sanitation piloting will be undertaken in peri-urban areas where the majority of houses




                                                                                                                   Page 42 of 58
The World Bank
Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



  are constructed of less permanent materials and informal housing is common, in order to target low-
  income households. A clear mechanism/process will be developed to help in selecting peri-urban areas
  with a high concentration of low-income households. Targeting will not take place at the household level
  given the economies of scale needed to make the sanitation service model financially viable.

  4. For the pilot(s), peri-urban areas will be chosen where onsite sanitation is identified as an appropriate
  solution, based on the updated sanitation master plan. The types of technical solutions will include
  household toilets/latrines, with septic tanks for each household or cluster of households. Vacuum trucks
  will then provide emptying of the tanks and take the waste to a small septage/fecal sludge treatment
  facility. These solutions will provide safe management of the waste generated, while causing low
  environmental impacts to the surrounding areas. Financing for related urban services (especially drainage
  and solid waste management) may also be considered, if it is deemed necessary to ensure proper
  sanitation service delivery and sanitation system management.

  5. Wherever possible, in lieu of building new infrastructure, existing infrastructure – including existing
  household toilets, latrines, septic tanks, etc. – will be rehabilitated. A potential framework to improve
  sanitation services (shown in Table A1) was developed and refined with support from the FCMU, who
  agree that it will be important to update the city sanitation master plans so as to select proper
  interventions that target low-income peri-urban communities, provide high quality service in a cost-
  effective manner, and results in minimal adverse environmental impacts.

                           Table 1.1: Menu of Possible Technical Solutions for Containment1

                    Type of Area                                           Proposed Sanitation Solution
   where there is sufficient space to dig new pits             Individual household (HH) pit latrines
   as needed
   where there is sufficient space for individual              Shared/clustered (<=5 HHs) household septic tanks,
   septic tanks and soakaways and/or areas                     serviced by vacuum truck emptying services and
   with existing HH septic tanks                               septage treatment plants
   where there is insufficient space for                       Households (e.g., 5-50 HHs) connected by small
   individual septic tanks and soakaways                       simplified sewer networks to neighborhood-level
                                                               septic tanks, with vacuum truck emptying services
                                                               and septage treatment plants
   that are densely populated and lack sufficient              Shared/clustered (<=5 HHs) household septic tanks
   household water supply and/or in areas                      connected to solids-free sewers, with liquid
   without sufficient space for soakaways                      treatment at decentralized facilities and vacuum
                                                               truck emptying services for the septic tanks
  1Wherever possible, in lieu of building new infrastructure, existing infrastructure – including household toilets/latrines, septic

  tanks, etc. – will be rehabilitated.

  6. Pit/tank emptying and conveyance will either be handled by the PWSU itself or by local private sector
  actors, who are overseen by the PWSU. The exact model will be determined based on existing private
  sector interest and capacity in the selected areas. This decision will also be linked to the study on private
  sector involvement under component 5a.




                                                                                                                                       Page 43 of 58
The World Bank
Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



  7. The specific treatment plant technology and sizing of the facility will be based on: the quantity and
  quality of incoming waste streams, capital and operating costs, sophistication of technology, ability to
  meet Angolan effluent discharge standards, the energy requirements for operation, and other similar
  criteria. Given previous GoA experiences and space availability outside of most cities, the types of
  technologies that will likely be chosen include: settling thickening tanks and/or gravity thickeners for solid-
  liquid separation; waste stabilization ponds, constructed wetlands, and/or anaerobic baffled reactors for
  liquid treatment; and drying beds and/or composting for final sludge dewatering. Based on current
  estimates, the size of the plants will likely be small, providing treatment for 150-250 m3 of waste per day.
  This facility will need to be carefully sited to ensure it is close enough to the city and accessible to vacuum
  trucks, but it also causes minimal environmental impact. Thus, the site will need to: avoid areas with fragile
  receiving waters; avoid residential and agricultural areas; and avoid fragile ecosystems and flood prone
  environments (both due to groundwater and fluvial flooding).

  8. During the pilot, a clear monitoring framework will be in place to assess the success and challenges of
  the piloted service delivery models and technologies. This information will be critical for informing future
  interventions and policies for the sector, including the strategy for scaling up the approach to urban
  sanitation (financing under component 5a).




                                                                                                                    Page 44 of 58
  The World Bank
  Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



                               Annex 2: Description of Potential Project Cities
A. Lubango
   1. The city of Lubango, the capital of Huila Province, with a population of approximately 585,260
   inhabitants, is one of the most important in Angola. It is the economic and population center of southern
   Angola, and has significant education, health, and tourist assets. Its water supply assets lag significantly
   behind the development of the city, suffering from lack of investment and maintenance since
   independence. In addition, water access is still considerably low, even compared to other Angolan cities.
   Water resources are constrained by poor investments, and the distribution network suffers from both
   poor conditions, incomplete and/or un-connected networks within the core area, and lack of extension
   to large and otherwise well-developed peri-urban neighborhoods. The existing water supply system has
   an installed capacity of up to 14,400 m3 per day. There is no formal sanitation system, and its
   implementation is crucial, especially in peri-urban areas supplied by networked water, due to the
   topography of the area and the population density.

B. N’Dalatando
   2. The city of N'Dalatando is the capital of Cuanza Norte Province, in the north of Angola, with a
   population of approximately 132,670. Agriculture is the main economic activity, including production of
   corn, peanuts, coffee, cotton, peas, beans, citrus fruits, cassava, sisal, palm, and sorghum. The city is along
   the main road between Luanda and economic centers further east. N’Dalatando’s water supply system is
   faced with several challenges. First, the water supply is insufficient during the dry season—both in terms
   of meeting the operating capacity of the treatment system and the demands of the population. Water
   supply constraints during the dry season regularly result in the operation of only one or two of the four
   sand filters of the water treatment plant, leading to significant restrictions in consumption and low
   pressure in the distribution network. Second, the system effectively has no meters in the production or
   distribution systems, nor on customer connections. The installed capacity of the current system is around
   7,776 m3 per day. After completion of the works under WSIDP and WSIDP2, it is estimated that 44,800
   inhabitants will have access to the network. There is no existing formal sanitation system, but its
   implementation is crucial, especially in peri-urban areas supplied by networked water, due to the high
   population density and topography of the area

C. Dundo
   3. Dundo is the capital of Lunda Norte province, with a population of approximately 156,530 inhabitants.
   The province is a primary center of mining activities. Dundo is served by a water supply system built prior
   to independence, although several investments have been made in recent years, including construction
   of a new ground reservoir and elevated tank, replacement of some of the network with PVC pipes, and
   the construction of public standposts. The oldest pipes are ductile iron and were, similar to most of the
   system, out of service for several years, leading to significant damage. The system, with an existing
   capacity of 5,400 m3 per day, includes very few connections—only an estimated 464, most of them yard
   taps. Several neighborhoods have no network and are served only by public standposts. The entire system
   suffers from insufficient pressure, and water quality testing indicates source contamination.

    4. A “new centrality” (Nova Centralidade) has been constructed in Dundo and includes a water
    treatment plant, with production capacity of 20,000 m3 per day, as well as a wastewater treatment facility
    (including tertiary treatment, connected to a central sewer network serving 40,000 population
    equivalents). In addition, the GoA is currently making investments in (a) a 300 m3 elevated tank; (b) 35



                                                                                                                     Page 45 of 58
  The World Bank
  Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



    kilometers of tertiary network, 1,050 associated residential connections and 21 public standposts; and (c)
    rehabilitation of two springs.

D. Luena
   5. Luena is the capital city of the province of Moxico, in east-central Angola, with a population of
   approximately 280,640, the majority of whom reside in peri-urban areas. Water is supplied through a
   relatively recently constructed intake and treatment plant with a capacity of 11,000 m3 per day. The
   original distribution network was built prior to independence but has recently been entirely rebuilt. The
   distribution network is served from two elevated storage tanks—Cidade and Sangondo. There is no
   existing formal sanitation system. As in other cities, the need for sanitation is especially crucial in peri-
   urban areas due to high population density and the topography of the area.

E. Moçamedes
   6. Moçamedes is the capital city of Namibe province, in the southwest of Angola, with a population of
   approximately 225,645. The province and the city have a desert climate, and are dry throughout most of
   the year. The city’s water system, with an installed capacity of 14,400 m3 per day, is supplied by boreholes
   along the left bank of the Bero river. Water is pumped to reservoir tanks that serve the distribution
   network. The distribution network dates from before independence and has been poorly maintained; it
   serves the core urban area but suffers from frequent breakages. Significant improvements to the existing
   distribution system are currently being financed by the GoA, including construction of a new water
   treatment plant for removal of iron and manganese and chlorine treatment. In addition, the Moçamedes
   water utility is receiving institutional strengthening from the African Development Bank’s ongoing water
   project.

    7. There is an existing sewer network in the urban center, including a lift station with 8,000 m3 per day
    capacity and a treatment plant, which includes tertiary treatment and sludge management (with a
    capacity of 200,000 population equivalents). However, the system serves only a small fraction of the city’s
    population.

F. Kuito-Kunje
   8. Kuito city is the capital of Bié province, in the center of Angola and extending through the plateau
   region of the Upper Zambeze massif. Kuito (and its neighboring city, Kunje) received significant population
   inflows during the civil war, and the city is now estimated to have a total population of around 340,500.
   Works financed under WSIDP to improve the city’s water supply were completed in 2015. The current
   water supply system has a capacity of 5,832 m3 per day. There is an existing sewer network that serves
   the central part of the city. The network is connected to a wastewater treatment plant (sized for 36,000
   population equivalents) and designed to provide tertiary treatment, including sludge management.

G. Huambo
   9. Huambo is the capital city of Huambo province, a largely agricultural province located in the center-
   west of Angola. It is the second-largest city in Angola, with an estimated population of 532,500. The city
   and its economy were significantly affected by the civil war and are still in the process of rebuilding.
   Significant portions of the population—many of whom fled to the city during the war—live in unplanned
   peri-urban areas, some of which are prone to flooding. Huambo has a single source of water—a diversion
   of the Kulimahala river, with an intake at a small weir that is often obstructed by vegetation and refuse.




                                                                                                                   Page 46 of 58
     The World Bank
     Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



       The source is subject to biological and agricultural pollution. The water treatment plant was built prior to
       independence. The existing water supply system has an installed capacity of 15,840 m3 per day. The
       existing sewer network serves the central portion of the city and connects to a wastewater treatment
       plant (for 14,000 population equivalents) designed with tertiary treatment, including sludge management.

H. Malanje
   10. Malanje is the capital city of Malanje province with a population of approximately 400,000
   inhabitants. The traditional city is located southeast of the Guiné River, which flows through the city. New
   residential areas of the city—some formal, some peri-urban—have expanded around the original city on
   the southeast side of the river, as well as across the river, north-west of the original city. The city’s sole
   water source is the spring feeding the Guiné river.

       11. Malanje’s treatment capacity is an estimated 11,300 m3 per day, and the utility has approximately
       8,000 customer connections. There is no existing formal sanitation service provision. High population
       density and the city’s topography make sanitation a particularly pressing need in many of the newly
       inhabited peri-urban areas.

I.     Uíge
       12. The city of Uige is located in north-eastern Angola and is the provincial capital of Uige province. The
       province is largely agricultural. The city has an estimated population of 394,820 inhabitants.

       13. Uige’s water supply is treated in two water treatment plants, with a combined built capacity of 14,400
       m3 per day. There are an estimated 5,880 connections, but the utility is currently undertaking a cadastral
       survey of connections and has confirmed, so far, 2,132 connections. However, only 1,366 of those
       connections have signed water supply contracts with the utility. There is no existing formal sanitation
       service provision. The sanitation needs are particularly pressing in densely populated peri-urban areas.




                                                                                                                      Page 47 of 58
The World Bank
Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



                                 Annex 3: Economic and Financial Analysis
  ERR: 14.4 percent
  NPV: US$201 million

  1.      For the Economic and Financial Analysis, the analyses used for WSIDP2 have been updated to
  include the new activities. The analysis considers both the original activities (focusing primarily on water
  supply) as well as the new activities (focusing on sanitation).

  Project Overview

  2.       The objective of both the Angola WSIDP2 and the proposed AF are to strengthen the institutional
  capacity and efficiency of the recipient's agencies in the water sector to improve access and reliability of
  water service delivery. The objective of its components focuses on (i) capacity development; (ii)
  institutional support; and on (iii) investments into targeted public water sector utilities (PWSUs) that serve
  provincial capitals through development of priority infrastructure to expand the water supply system
  capacity, increase service coverage and service quality, and improve the operating efficiency of the
  production and distribution systems). The first two components will bring transparency to the sector
  through improved performance monitoring, fact-based investments and performance improvement
  programs. Through component 3, selected PWSUs will expand their customer base to achieve a critical
  mass required to manage and operate their water supply systems. Component 5, under the AF, will pilot
  sanitation services. The project will build new connections, rehabilitate existing connections, install water
  meters, construct/rehabilitate latrines/toilets, and construct a fecal sludge treatment facility. The water
  meters will equip the PWSUs with a tool to measure customers’ water consumption and bill them
  accordingly. It is important to notice that the proposed investments’ focus on the expansion of water and
  sanitation systems, including an expansion into the poor peri-urban communities. These investments will
  help reduce the coping costs for currently unserved populations and generate a flow of economic benefits
  that then can be invested into improving living conditions and other preferred actions.

  3.        The objective of the project, including the proposed AF, is to call for improved national capacity
  to monitor, plan and implement water and sanitation agenda, and increase access to water and sanitation
  services in selected cities of Angola. The sanitation infrastructure improvements will be implemented in
  select peri-urban areas to provide the PWSUs with an opportunity to pilot onsite sanitation service
  delivery. The piloting will take place in one or more of the nine provincial capitals. The specific city (or
  cities) will be chosen through a competitive process, based on completion of the updated sanitation
  master plans, PWSU readiness and performance, and PWSU and provincial government support. Within
  the city (or cities), the small-scale sanitation piloting will be undertaken in peri-urban areas, to target low-
  income households. In practical terms, selected provinces and their water and sanitation companies will
  be supported in beginning to manage sanitation infrastructure, manage latrines and a septage treatment
  facility, establish and expand their customer base for water and sanitation to achieve a critical mass
  required to manage and operate their water supply and sanitation systems. These investments will
  similarly help reduce the coping cost of the currently unserved population and reduce the burden of
  excreta-related diseases associated with poor water and sanitation.




                                                                                                                     Page 48 of 58
The World Bank
Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



  4.       Angola has the fifth highest rates of morbidity and mortality from water-related diseases,
  including malaria, cholera and diarrheal diseases in the region. Nearly 10 percent of Angolans reported
  malaria infections in 20155; more than 30 percent of the population gets acute diarrhea annually; and
  more than 50,000 cases of cholera were reported in 2015 (or 0.21 percent)6. Angola has one of the highest
  rates of morbidity and mortality from diarrheal diseases in Africa. The incidence of acute diarrhea resulting
  in death is 489 per 100,000 children under five7 (2011). Improved water supply and sanitation, associated
  with handwashing may result in 88 percent reduction of mortality of children under five years of age8.
  Both interventions – in water and sanitation – will also generate significant health benefits to all other
  population groups reducing the hazard of epidemics, morbidity and mortality from diarrheal and other
  water- and excreta-related diseases, which will subsequently result in increased labor productivity of the
  Angolan society.

  5.        Angola did not meet its MDG targets for water and sanitation. Water coverage from public utilities
  is relatively low. Sanitation service development outside of Luanda is in its rudimentary stage. While water
  companies are expanding piped-water services in parallel with urbanization, this service expansion is not
  enough to improve coverage. Average water coverage with piped connections in secondary cities is only
  around 34 percent9. In addition, there are wide disparities in access to improved water sources among
  urban areas, in particular provincial capital cities: in the cities included as part of the proposed project,
  access to an improved drinking water source ranges from five to 60 percent, except N'dalatando, where
  piped water coverage10 exceeds 82 percent. The remaining households, i.e., the unserved population,
  relies on local sources and gets water from private vendors. The latter usually sell potable water in 20-
  liter jerry cans charging about 100 Angolan kwanza (or US$0.45) per jerry can. An average family of five11
  must buy two to three jerry cans per day and will spend up to 7,500 kwanza (US$37) per month to meet
  basic drinking needs12 and minimum sanitary activities.

  6.     Sanitation services outside of the capital Luanda are not developed. The coping cost per family is
  around 11,000 kwanza (US$50) per year. These costs include maintaining a clean environment, and
  removing human waste, and protecting families from diarrhea and some incidences of cholera.

  7.      Fully financed WSIDP2 component 3 of the project will provide 122,500 connections during the
  first phase of implementation, and an additional 45,000 connections during the second phase.
  Additionally, the project funds will finance rehabilitation of another 19,000 connections. The total number
  of beneficiaries is about 1.2 million people in nine regional cities of the country to get in-house and in-
  yard connection to public water services. In addition, three water treatment plants will be constructed,
  with an additional capacity of 54,000 m3 per day, to cover the demand of the growing population. It is

  5
    http://clubofmozambique.com/news/malaria-cases-fall-world-mozambique-angola-account-7/
  6
    http://www.ifrc.org/ar/news-and-media/news-stories/africa/angola/angola-cholera-cases-rising-again/
  7
    https://www.path.org/publications/files/VAD_rotavirus_angola_fs.pdf
  8
    http://www.cdc.gov/healthywater/global/diarrhea-burden.html
  9
    http://www.unwater.org/fileadmin/user_upload/unwater_new/docs/jmp.2014_eng.pdf
  10
     This includes service with standpipes.
  11
     The average family size is 5.1 people per household. Angola census results, 2015.
  12
     http://www.nap.edu/read/10925/chapter/6#158




                                                                                                                  Page 49 of 58
The World Bank
Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



  expected that connected residents will start consuming at least 50 lpcd of water, to meet basic personal
  and food hygiene including laundry and bathing. The additional benefits also include increased value of
  the housing with piped water on premises. These benefits, while very important, are not accounted for in
  the analysis.

  8.       Under the proposed AF, component 5 will initiate development of onsite sanitation service
  delivery, developing local and national capacity on sanitation (including treatment capacity) for at least
  7,000 families living in peri-urban areas of one of the selected cities. The types of technical solutions will
  include household toilets/latrines, with septic tanks for each household or cluster of households. Vacuum
  trucks will then provide emptying of the tanks and take the waste to a small septage/fecal sludge
  treatment facility. These solutions will provide safe management of the waste generated, while causing
  low environmental impacts to the surrounding areas. Wherever possible, in lieu of building new
  infrastructure, existing infrastructure – including existing household toilets, latrines, septic tanks, etc. –
  will be rehabilitated.

  9.       The project will provide significant economic benefits through the associated TA components:
  Component 1: Water Supply Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Development and Component
  (US$74 million) and 2: Water Resources Management. Both components are focused on development of
  institutional capacity within the sector.

  10.      Additional benefits are expected under component 5a: bringing performance assessment and
  fact-based investment decision processes to the Angolan urban sanitation sector. These changes will also
  reduce risk of mishandling the scarce financial resources and provide additional technical expertise. These
  institutional strengthening components will also bring transparency to the water sector and improve
  sector performance. Institutional support in water resource management will additionally help ensure
  rational use of available water resources and long-term planning. These benefits will not be counted as
  part of the economic analysis.

  11.     The selected utilities and their customers will benefit from these TA components; however, it is
  impossible to quantify such stream of benefits for a specific utility and its customers. The project team
  conducted a stress test to assess the effect of the two infrastructure-investment components on the
  project’s economic rate of return and its stream of benefits.

  Rationale for Public Sector Investment

  12.      Proper development of the country institutional structure for water and sanitation requires public
  finances and close attention from the GoA. Also in Angola, municipalities and their public companies
  traditionally provide municipal water services. Although the benefits of improved water supply and
  sanitation will accrue to the society, the benefits of such investments are not sufficient to induce private
  sector investments, especially for sanitation. This is especially true for Angola, where the municipal sector
  has suffered from decades of civil war that has resulted in underinvestment and poor maintenance.




                                                                                                                   Page 50 of 58
The World Bank
Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



  Rationale for World Bank Involvement

  13.     The World Bank has been involved in the municipal service sector in Angola since 2008, supporting
  investments in the water sector with the WSIDP that provided a first set of necessary investments into a
  troubled sector. These investments provided emergency infrastructure and compensated for the decades
  of underinvestment in the sector due to the civil war and neglect of water infrastructure in the early years
  after the civil war. The WSIDP2 will continue to support and enhance the benefits from WSIDP. With this
  follow-up project, the World Bank, with its global experience, will be able to combine a focus on funding
  the most cost-effective investments that will assist the utilities in improving their efficiency in service
  delivery and support cost recovery in the participating utilities. This area has not garnered that much
  attention yet, but it is a critical element in the Angola CPS, as it is critical to put the sector on more
  sustainable footing while providing essential services to the population.

  14.     The focus of the WSIDP2 is provincial capital cities. Most of the existing water supply systems in
  these cities date from colonial times and are therefore in need of significant expansion and rehabilitation.
  The World Bank has contributed to the expansion and/or rehabilitation of water supply systems under
  the Emergency Multisector Recovery Project I and II (P083333 and P095229) and the WSIDP, P096360.
  However, water distribution systems in these cities are still inadequate to meet increasing demand
  stemming from rapid population growth and developing industrial and commercial sectors. Currently, the
  GoA and donor allocations fall short of the funds needed by these provincial capitals. Thus, the World
  Bank intervention is timely and needed. WSIDP2 will also develop institutions for proper monitoring of
  water and sanitation services at the national level.

  15.     The specific World Bank value added is in:

          (i) Use of transparent procurement, international experience in new technologies and approaches
          that are not yet introduced in the Angolan water and sanitation sector; and
          (ii) In helping utilities and the recently established regulator with the transition to becoming a
          more financially viable sector, while ensuring that the service remains affordable and accessible
          to all, including the urban poor.

  Methodology of the economic analysis

  16.     Cost-Benefit Analysis. The economic analysis uses a cost-benefit analysis methodology and
  compares the results of the scenarios with project and without project. These calculations use most of
  the assumptions and parameters included in the economic models used in WSIDP2 to calculate the
  economic benefits, as included in the PAD and Project Concept Note. The economic feasibility analysis of
  WSIDP2 compares estimated economic benefits of the project with its economic costs. As the project
  costs are given, the primary analytical challenge of this analysis is to estimate the expected benefits that
  occurred or are likely to occur because of project implementation. In the cost-benefit analysis, benefits
  were assessed at financial prices due to a lack of data on economic prices.

  17.     With and without scenarios. The net benefit of the project was estimated as the incremental
  benefit of two scenarios: with and without project scenarios. The with project scenario includes the




                                                                                                                 Page 51 of 58
The World Bank
Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



  proposed investment program under components 3 and 5b and their associated number of connections,
  latrines/toilets, and septage treatment facility. The without project scenario assumes the investments are
  not done and therefore the proposed expansion in the number of connections and latrines would not
  happen in the absence of available government funding.

  Benefits

  18.      The proposed investment will give a boost to nine water companies located in different regions
  of Angola and help them to achieve coverage, for water supply, to 70 percent and above. It is expected
  that utilities will take over operation of the infrastructure, and continue expanding water and sanitation
  systems according to the urbanization rate, maintaining coverage rate that was achieved during the
  project implementation.

  19.      For the water component, the benefit flow comes from the reduction of the water services costs
  to the currently unserved population of about 1.2 million people. After the installation of the new
  connections, the water consumption will also grow to at least 50 lpcd. Payment for this water will be
  according to the current tariff set by each individual company, with consumption of 50 lpcd ranging from
  AOA 765 to AOA 1,100 per month for the average family. Current consumption for unconnected people
  is estimated at 10 lpcd, or 51 liters per average family. The cost of this water is assessed at the level of
  AOA 7,650 per family per month. The reduction in coping costs ranges from AOA 6,000 to 7,000 per family
  per month depending on location. The benefits will become available to new customers from the third
  year of implementation onward.

  20.      Benefits from sanitation investment include reduced burden from morbidity with excreta-related
  diseases by at least 15 percent, reduced coping costs with handling poor sanitation, and increased value
  of housing with latrines, equivalent to the amount of investment. The benefit flow comes from the
  reduction of the sanitation services costs to the currently unserved population, about 7,000 households
  living in suburban areas. It is conservatively assumed that in the project cities the incidence of diseases
  and their treatment costs are the same as for all Angola on average. The coping costs of US$20 per family
  per year is assessed as nuisance due to open defecation and sanitation management at the household
  level. The AF will also increase the value of the housing it will provide with latrines/toilets. It is assumed
  that this increase will correspond to the value of latrines. The cost of new pit/septic tank emptying is
  added as a new cost for households receiving latrines/toilets.

  21.      Some additional economic benefits associated with improved sanitation, specifically global
  economic benefits are not accounted in this analysis. These include, but are not limited to, reduction of
  nutrient and BOD5 discharges into surface waters, reduced pollution with septage of ground water, and
  similar benefits.

  22.      The improved sanitation benefits will become available to new customers from the fifth year of
  implementation onward with the full benefits starting from year seven when all construction works will
  be completed. After the installation of the new latrines and septage treatment facility operations, the
  coping cost for sanitation management will be reduced along with frequency of excreta-related diseases.
  It is expected that project interventions will reduce morbidity and associated costs of their treatment by




                                                                                                                   Page 52 of 58
The World Bank
Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



  at least 15 percent, reducing the hazard of epidemics, morbidity and mortality from diarrheal and other
  excreta-related diseases, which will subsequently result in increased labor productivity of the society.

  23.     Additional benefits are expected from components 1, 2 and 5a in bringing transparent
  procurement, performance assessment and fact-based investment decision processed in the Angolan
  water sector that will reduce risk of mishandling the scarce financial resources and technical expertise.

  Costs

  24.      The total investment cost for component 3 is US$294,525,000 in the nine project cities and
  component 5 is US$54,625,000 in one or two project cities. Calculations for the economic analysis include
  cost of construction of new connections, operation and maintenance costs of these connections and
  associated benefits to newly connected populations with water supply services. For sanitation it includes
  investment costs into latrines, septage collection and treatment plant and other sanitation related
  infrastructure, as well as fees for regular emptying for constructed latrines. The fees charged to new
  customers will offset the part of the operations and maintenance (O&M) costs. Collection rate is set at
  100 percent due to project improvements in billings and collections.

  25.     An additional stress test was conducted to assess the economic impact on the project of including
  the cost of components 1, 2 and 5a in the economic analysis.

  26.       Two models are assessed. Model 1: Operation and maintenance cost of the water and sanitation
  services will grow proportionally to the number of connections. Model 2: newly constructed and
  rehabilitated connections will be more efficient than the old ones. Similar to the WSIDP, it is expected
  that the new water connections may use newer and more modern technologies along with meters and
  proper engineering. We estimate that the new connections will cost at least 30 percent less than the
  current ones to operate due to economies of scale and mentioned operation improvements, i.e., the
  utilities will actually save on O&M costs due to the savings made in energy and maintenance and by
  reducing network losses.

  Assumptions

  27.      The expected investment will take six years, with equal amount of investment from 2017-2024.

                               Table 3.1: Tentative timeline for investments
        Year of           1            2             3             4            5             6
        implementation
        Water             16.66%       16.66%        16.66%        16.66%       16.66%        16.66%
        investments
        295 million
        Sanitation                                                              35%           65%
        investments
        55 million




                                                                                                              Page 53 of 58
The World Bank
Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)




  28.     Population projection. The current population is approximated from reports of Instituto Nacional
  de Estatística, República de Angola (2015). The current rate of urbanization is reported as three percent
  per year on average13 for the entire length of the project. The current coverage rate was taken as is, except
  Dunda, Luene and Namibe, for which coverage information was not available at the time of preparation
  of this analysis. We used an estimated 34 percent for these companies, which is the average for
  municipalities in Angola.
  29.     It is expected that the project will be providing benefits for 20 years following its start. The
  benefits will start coming beginning in the third year of the project. The sanitation benefits will become
  available in the seventh year of the project. The discount rate is assessed at six percent, per World Bank
  guidelines.

  30.        All calculations are in constant AOA with the exchange rate of US$1=AOA 225.

  31.    Health benefits were assessed by the WHO standard procedure of the year-life loss (YLL) related
  to mortality of children under five years old due to acute diarrhea.

  32.    Global benefits are expected from the reduction of the GHG emissions, nutrient discharges with
  proper septage treatment as well as release of the BOD5 into surface water and groundwater
  environments. These benefits, while important, are not accounted for in this economic analysis.

  33.      The project will not bring an additional financial burden to the beneficiaries, as their service costs
  will be at least 60 percent lower than the current coping costs.

  Results

  34.     Model Result. The economic rate of return (ERR) for the WSIDP2 with AF is 14.4 percent, and the
  NPV is US$201 million.

  35.     Stress Test. If the costs of components 1, 2, and 5a are also included in the economic assessment,
  then the ERR becomes 10 percent and the NPV becomes US$111 million.

  36.      The project will save the lives of at least 15,500 children or 730,000 productive years, considering
  that life expectancy in Angola will grow from 50 to 60 years between now and 2036. We did not put
  monetary terms to these health benefits, although they are large.

  37.     The economic outcomes of the WSIDP2 with AF (including the sanitation component) are slightly
  less than for the parent program (without sanitation component), for which the ERR was 22 percent and
  the NPV US$386 million – seven percentage points and US$185 million less, respectively. This difference
  is caused by the inability to assess some additional economic benefits associated with improved
  sanitation, especially global economic benefits. In addition, the original WSIDP2 also used an exchange
  rate of US$1=AOA 167.


  13
       The World Fact Book, 2015, Angola.




                                                                                                                    Page 54 of 58
The World Bank
Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



  Risk and sensitivity analysis

  38.    The project is resilient to the external shocks: if the investment costs grow by 30 percent, then
  the ERR will be 10.5 percent and the NPV will be US$128 million. The project is resilient to cost increases.

  Economic effects due to exchange rate fluctuation

  39.     For the purposes of the sensitivity analysis, the shadow exchange rate is estimated at the level of
  US$1=AOA 270 and AOA 400 respectively. The project will be operating within the local financial
  environment. While all operational and maintenance costs and benefits will be in Angolan Kwanza, the
  project financing is in US dollars. We estimated the economic effects on the benefits and project costs
  varying the exchange rate of the local currency to US dollar. The project is sustainable to external shocks
  related to fluctuation of the exchange rate.

          Table 3.2: Economic results considering different exchange rate scenarios
   Exchange rate (US$=AOA)             NPV, US$                            ERR, %
               225                     201 million                         14.4
               270                     97 million                          8.3
               400                     27 million                          6.6

  Fiscal impact

  40.       The expanded network and operations will result in a fiscal impact for all companies as none of
  them cover operational and maintenance costs of water service provision. The investment programs need
  to be accompanied by support to improve the operational and financial performance of the PWSUs: while
  tariffs, which are decided by provincial governors, have recently been adjusted in some capital cities, they
  are still too low to cover operational costs. Significant operational subsidies may be required from
  provincial Governments that are often provided in the form of supplies (e.g., chemicals) and staff paid for
  by the governor's budget. According to Model 1 below, the fiscal impact for the project would result in
  the following cost-recovery for each of the utilities.




                                                                                                                 Page 55 of 58
The World Bank
Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



                    Figure 3.1 WSIDP2: Cost-recovery. Model 1
   80%
   70%
   60%
   50%
   40%
   30%
   20%
   10%
    0%




  41.      Model 2. However, while improvement of services may bring a loss to utilities, as the current
  operational and maintenance costs do not cover costs of operation, the technical improvements and
  correction of tariffs will make the utilities sustainable. The municipal governments will need to cover the
  fiscal deficit to keep services operational and sustainable. Even with 30 percent cost reduction, the O&M
  cost recovery will be achieved only in Huambo. The 50 lpcd consumption can be considered to be a
  conservative estimate (at low end of project usage). With the growth of the economy and imminent
  improvement of the living standard, the water consumption will grow. At the same time, the GoA may
  start tariff adjustments to align with economic growth. Thus, the desired cost recovery can be achieved
  for the whole project, on average, and specifically for seven of the nine PWSUs, if consumption grows to
  at least 70 lpcd and the tariffs are corrected by 50 percent.


                      Figure 3.2 WSIDP2: Cost-recovery. Model 2
    250%

    200%

    150%

    100%

     50%

      0%




  *Consumption 70 lpcd, O&M cost reduction 30 percent and tariff adjusted by 50 percent relative to current level




                                                                                                                    Page 56 of 58
The World Bank
Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)




  Conclusions

  42.     The proposed AF under WSIDP2 is resilient with significant benefits. It will withstand cost
  increases by 30 percent.

  43.     Stress tests prove that the project is sustainable even if costs of the Component 1, 2 and 5a are
  included in the economic analysis.

  44.    The project may require tariff adjustment by 50 percent to become fiscally sustainable for the
  PWSUs.

  45.     The project is resilient to external shocks related to currency exchange rate fluctuations:.




                                                                                                              Page 57 of 58
The World Bank
Additional Financing - Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P167201)



               Annex 4: Reallocation between disbursement categories Original Loan

                                                    Amount of the Original   Amount of the Original
                                                             Loan                    Loan
                     Category
                                                      Initial Allocation      Proposed Allocation
                                                     (expressed in USD)       (expressed in USD)
        (1) Goods, non-consulting services,
   consulting services, Operating Costs, and              18,700,000               16,636,000
   Training for Part 1(a) of the Project

        (2) Goods, non-consulting services,
   consulting services, Operating Costs, and              8,600,000                7,651,000
   Training for Parts 1(b) and (c) of the Project

         (3) Goods, consulting services,
   Operating Costs, and Training for Parts                12,000,000               10,676,000
   2(a), (b), (c), (e) and (f) of the Project
        (4) Goods, Works, consulting
   services, Operating Costs, and Training for            2,000,000                1,779,000
   Part 2(d) of the Project
        (5) Goods, Works, consulting
   services, and Operating Costs for Part 3 of           131,000,000              116,542,000
   the Project
        (6) Goods, consulting services
   (including audits), Training and Operating             25,000,000               22,241,000
   Costs for Part 4 of the Project
   (7) Performance Payments                               2,200,000                1,957,000
   (8) Front-end Fee                                       500,000                  500,000
   (9) Interest Rate Cap or Interest Rate Collar
                                                              0                          0
   premium
   (10)     Goods, Works, non-consulting
   services, consulting services, Operating                   0                    22,018,000
   Costs, and Training for Part 5 of the Project
   TOTAL AMOUNT                                                200,000,000               200,000,000




                                                                                                       Page 58 of 58
