Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                                PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID)
                                                                                          APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                      Report No.: PIDA109953




                               Public Disclosure Copy
                                                        Project Name                          Second Water Sector Institutional Development Project (P151224)
                                                        Region                                AFRICA
                                                        Country                               Angola




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                        Lending Instrument                    Investment Project Financing
                                                        Project ID                            P151224
                                                        Borrower(s)                           Republic of Angola
                                                        Implementing Agency                   Ministry of Energy and Water
                                                        Environmental Category                B-Partial Assessment
                                                        Date PID Prepared/Updated             14-Feb-2017
                                                        Date PID Approved/Disclosed           29-Nov-2016, 16-Feb-2017
                                                        Estimated Date of Appraisal
                                                        Completion




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                        Estimated Date of Board               10-Mar-2017
                                                        Approval
                                                        Appraisal Review Decision             The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate.
                                                        (from Decision Note)

                                                        I.   Project Context




                               Public Disclosure Copy
                                                             Country Context
                                                             1.       Angola has achieved remarkable growth after emerging from its 27-year civil war. Strong
                                                             progress has been made in economic management and public finance, infrastructure development,
                                                             and expansion of key services. Gross Domestic Product (GDP) grew at an average annual rate of 11
                                                             percent between 2002 and 2011. Sustained investment in the oil and gas sectors has yielded a
                                                             steady stream of revenues that have been used to rehabilitate transport, energy, and social
                                                             infrastructure. However, growth and its benefits have not been distributed equally, and there are




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                             wide disparities in income and wealth across the population and between regions.

                                                             2.       The rapid economic growth seen in previous years is now slowing due to the decline in
                                                             global oil prices and a stagnation in domestic oil production. Oil prices fell 32 percent from January
                                                             to July 2016, but this drop reached as low as 73 percent on February 2016. The initial effects were
                                                             felt on government revenues and external accounts. The 2016 government revenues are half the
                                                             2013 level, and the 2015 current account deficit was 8.5 percent of GDP, compared to a surplus of
                                                             6.7 percent in 2013. The initial government response to falling oil revenues was to cut expenditures
                                                             and raise non-oil revenues to balance the budget in the medium term and to allow the currency to
                                                             depreciate to reduce the current account deficit. As the cost of the adjustment was felt on a
                                                             widespread basis, the government halted the adjustment process, opting to pursue exceptional
                                                             measures, such as administrative restrictions to access foreign exchange. These restrictions
                                                             substantially reduced the country➢❨ s imports and domestic production, which is small and heavily


                                                                                                        Page 1 of 8
                         reliant on imported inputs. As a result, economic activity contracted even more, the wedge between
                         the official and the parallel exchange rate skyrocketed, and inflation reached 38.2 percent in August
                         2016. The budget deficit is expected to increase to 5.9 percent of GDP in 2016. Capital




Public Disclosure Copy
                         expenditures, although expected to increase compared to 2015, are at a much lower level than in the
                         past.

                         3.       As a result of the oil boom of the past decade and the subsequent strengthening of the
                         Angolan Kwanza, the cost of infrastructure development➢❨ including local and foreign labor➢❨ is
                         particularly high. The oil boom led to an extended period of rapidly rising incomes while deepening
                         reliance on imports. The Government was not able to insulate public income and expenditure from
                         crowding out of other tradable goods and services from abroad. As a result, the growth of the oil-
                         related parts of the economy resulted in a high and unsustainable level of unit labor costs relative to
                         peer countries. While the recent fall in oil prices and resulting investment and economic slowdown
                         has put pressure on the exchange rate and has increased inflation and unemployment, the net effect
                         on labor costs and the cost of infrastructure is still not clear. The GoA faces a serious challenge in
                         managing the economic downturn and the transition away from oil dependence.

                         4.      While reasonable progress was made toward achievement of the Millennium Development
                         Goals (MDGs), Angola did not meet its MDG targets for water and sanitation in 2015. Despite the
                         positive progress made in poverty reduction, primary education, and gender equality since 2002,
                         progress in other key social indicators remains limited. For example, life expectancy at birth is only
                         about 51 years. Maternal mortality is 450 out of 100,000 births, which is the highest in Sub-Sahara
                         Africa. Malnutrition is also acute, with 30 percent of children under five years of age suffering from
                         stunting; 16 percent are under-weight. Furthermore, Angola ranks 148 out of 187 countries in the
                         2013 Human Development Index. Despite the relatively high GDP per capita (US$5,170 in 2013),
                         about 37 percent of the population still lives below the national poverty line and without access to
                         basic services, in particular water supply.




Public Disclosure Copy
                         5.      Rapid population growth, in particular in urban areas, imposes an additional challenge.
                         Angola's population was estimated to be 24.3 million in 2014, with an average annual growth rate
                         of 3.3 percent. The urban population represents about 60 percent of the total population, with
                         annual growth of about 5 percent.

                         Sectoral and institutional Context
                         1.      The state of water supply infrastructure was understandably poor following independence
                         from Portugal and the extended civil war. Lack of investment, rehabilitation, and service expansion
                         during this period, compounded by other effects of the war, resulted in low levels of access and
                         poor quality services. As of 2001, only 27 percent of the population had access to improved
                         drinking water sources. Access was somewhat better in urban areas, with 42 percent of the
                         population estimated to have access.

                         2.      Since the end of the war, Angola has made progress towards increasing access to improved
                         water services through public investment, largely through the construction of stand posts into
                         previously unserved urban areas. Between 2006 and 2015, national access to improved drinking
                         water sources remained roughly static, at 49 percent of the population. In urban areas, however,
                         there was a significant increase in access to improved drinking water sources➢❨ from 58 in 2006 to
                         75 percent in 2011➢❨ driven mainly by expansion of stand posts. However, access to water through


                                                                    Page 2 of 8
                         private household (yard-taps or internal plumbing) connections remains low, at 32 percent in urban
                         areas. In addition, the figures for access in urban areas may be overstated, as peri-urban
                         areas➢❨ where density is often as high as or higher than formal urban areas, and where water is




Public Disclosure Copy
                         largely non-existent➢❨ are not included in ➢❨ urban➢❨ service estimates. Finally, there are wide
                         disparities in access to improved water sources among urban areas, in particular in provincial
                         capital cities. For example, in the cities included as part of the proposed project, access to an
                         improved drinking water source ranges from 5 to 60 percent.

                         3.       In addition to improving access, the Government has emphasized the institutional
                         development of the water supply sector and has committed to establishing necessary policy and
                         legal frameworks. Right after the end of the civil war the Water Law (2002) was enacted,
                         mandating cost-recovery tariffs and professionalization of service delivery, and devolving the
                         responsibility for service provision to provincial governments. In 2008, the Government approved
                         Vision 2025, which includes goals for the water sector, including universal access to water supply
                         in urban areas by 2025. Building on Vision 2025, the 2013-2107 National Development Plan and
                         the 2013-2017 Energy and Water Sector Action Plan identified as a key priority the strengthening
                         of urban water supply, in particular in provincial capitals, with special emphasis on expansion of
                         water systems. With this aim, between 2013 and 2016 sixteen Provincial Water and Sanitation
                         Utilities (PWSUs) were created as a first step towards independent service providers. In addition,
                         there is an on-going process to introduce performance-based management contracts in a number of
                         these utilities. Currently, 12 provincial capitals have prepared water master plans to address
                         physical and institutional requirements. However, the implementation of the policy and legal
                         framework is still in process, in particular, measures to guarantee the harmonization of the
                         investment program with policy and legal mandates.

                         4.       Angola is rich in water resources, with 77 river basins, 43 hydrological basins, and
                         important upstream positions in several international basins. However, water resource management
                         infrastructure and capacity collapsed during the war; for example, 189 hydro meteorological




Public Disclosure Copy
                         stations existed in 1975; as of 2008, only a few were operating. Only a single river basin➢❨ the
                         Cunene River Basin➢❨ has a formally constituted administration. The National Strategic Plan for
                         Water (2003) highlighted the need to identify and quantify water uses; identify water resources; and
                         establish a water balance. With this objective, and with the support of WSIDP I, the GoA formally
                         created the National Institute for Water Resources (INRH) in 2010. However, staffing and
                         budgeting constraints have prevented INRH from becoming fully operational, and current
                         operations rely largely on outside consultants. The INRH needs significant capacity strengthening
                         before it can fulfill its mandate, collect and analyze relevant data for adequate water resource
                         planning, and develop additional water basin plans.

                         5.      The institutional development of the water supply sector similarly needs further
                         strengthening, and clear separation of the policy, regulatory, and service delivery functions is
                         needed to promote the sustainability of investments. As part of WSIDP 1, a regulatory office for
                         water supply was established in 2016 within the national electricity regulator. Multiple PWSUs
                         have been established, and additional ones are in the process of being established. For the recently
                         created PWSUs, internal management strengthening is needed, along with support for improving
                         their operational and financial performance.

                         6.      The GoA has been supported in its efforts to rehabilitate water supply systems and expand



                                                                    Page 3 of 8
                         access to improved water sources by several bilateral agencies as well as the World Bank Group.
                         China, in particular, has been key in providing financing for investments made under the GoA➢❨ s
                         Public Investment Program (PIP), with approximately US$734 million over a period of 7 years.




Public Disclosure Copy
                         These PIP investments have primarily been in rehabilitation and reconstruction of water production
                         and treatment, which were a key bottleneck to improving water services, in a number of provincial
                         cities, as well in constructing boreholes and protected wells to serve public standposts in peri-urban
                         areas in order to extend services to previously unserved areas. In addition, Brazil has provided
                         limited credit for investments in Luanda, Lobito and Benguela, while AfDB approved a project in
                         2015 to finance capital investments in Sumbe and technical assistance for the established PWSUs in
                         seven provinces. Finally, various European bilaterals have provided limited assistance in the form
                         of technical assistances.

                         7.       The World Bank Group➢❨ s assistance to the water sector in Angola began with the
                         Emergency Multisector Recovery Projects I and II (P083333 and P095229), which supported the
                         rehabilitation of water supply
                         systems, and is ongoing with the first Water Sector Institutional Development Project (WSIDP I,
                         P096360). WSIDP I, which was approved in July, 2008 for an amount of US$57 million equivalent,
                         was intended to be a seven-year project of rehabilitation of water supply and water rehabilitation
                         assets, new networks and household connections, and capacity building of national- and provincial-
                         level agencies involved in water supply, capital investment, and water resource management,
                         including to the nascent PWSUs. Additional Financing of US$120 million equivalent was approved
                         in June, 2011, with all additional financing going toward the expansion of water supply networks
                         and new household connections in nine selected provincial capitals. At that time, it was estimated
                         that only six percent of water production capacity was being used, pointing to an urgent need to
                         rehabilitate and expand networks and to install connections.

                         8.       Since the approval of the WSIDP I Additional Financing, cost escalations and unexpected
                         new costs of planned investments (for example, the preliminary designs available at the time of




Public Disclosure Copy
                         appraisal did not include a number of necessary works, while hydro meteorological stations that had
                         expected to be rehabilitated turned out to require full replacement) increased the total cost of the
                         project to nearly US$300 million. At the same time, an 11 percent depreciation of the SDR resulted
                         in a US$25 million reduction in available funds. As a result, the project was restructured in April
                         2016. This restructuring reduced the number of PWSUs supported by the project (seven, instead of
                         nine), the number of hydro meteorological stations (36, instead of 189), the number of Integrated
                         Basin Management Plans (one, instead of two), and residential connections (110,000, instead of
                         132,000).

                         9.       WSIDP I is scheduled to close June 30, 2019; its implementation has facilitated significant
                         learning about the water sector in Angola and implementation challenges and has built a high
                         degree of trust between the GoA and the Bank in the sector. The project has supported directly and
                         indirectly the establishment of 16 PWSUs between 2013 and 2016, and performance-based
                         management contracts for six of the PWSUs have recently begun, providing commercial, technical,
                         and financial support. These three-year contracts will expire in 2019, at which point WSIDP II will
                         continue to provide support. In addition, WSIDP I supported the establishment, in 2016, of a water
                         office within the electricity regulator, which is now known as Regulatory Institute for Energy and
                         Water Services (IRSEA), as well as the establishment of the National Water Resources Institute
                         (INRH) in 2010. While INRH is partially operational, consultants are providing institutional
                         strengthening to the agency and are assisting in the preparation of the Integrated River Basin


                                                                    Page 4 of 8
                             Development Plan for the Kwanza River and in the installation of 35 hydrometric stations
                             supported by the project, while procurement of the water information management system has been
                             completed. Most significantly, with respect to the rehabilitation of water supply systems,




Public Disclosure Copy
                             rehabilitation and expansion works are underway in Huambo, N'Dalatando, Malanje, Kuito, Uige,
                             Lubango, and Luena.

                             10.      Because of the starting point of all the water supply systems, significant capital investments
                             and institutional development are both still needed, and are likely to continue to be needed over
                             several decades. While the GoA has made investments in water production in many cities, systems
                             are operating mostly well under capacity due to poor distribution systems. (For example, it was
                             estimated in 2010 that only six percent of water production was being used in the cities targeted by
                             WSIDP I; investments in the network are estimated to bring usage up to approximately 60 percent
                             of treatment capacity.) Lack of meters throughout the production and distribution systems,
                             including for most customer connections, make estimating system losses impossible, but most
                             operators believe that unaccounted-for water (UFW) is at least 50 percent, split between technical
                             and commercial losses. Most cities do not have billing systems in place➢❨ invoices may be
                             estimated based on an assumed monthly consumption level, but bills are generally not provided to
                             customers. In those few cities where there is a billing system in place, collection ratios are lower
                             than 60 percent of the billing.

                             11.      In addition to capital investment needs, all the PWSUs need to strengthen their commercial
                             and operating capacity, both ➢❨ soft➢❨ , human-resource capacity and system capacity, such as
                             investment in financial management systems and billing software, operational reporting systems,
                             etc. Information systems need to be put in place for management to be able to accurately track
                             operations, costs, and revenues as a first step toward preparing proposals for tariff adjustments.
                             Currently, available information indicates that only two of six PWSUs are able to cover their
                             operating expenses from their estimated billed revenues➢❨ all other PWSUs do not cover their
                             costs. Factoring in what is actually received from customers, however, none of the PWSUs are able




Public Disclosure Copy
                             to cover their costs. Operating deficits are currently covered by subsidies from the provincial
                             governments, often provided in the form of in-kind materials and staff paid by the governor's
                             budget. These are likely to continue to be required for several years as information systems, cost
                             accounting, and tariff adjustments are improved.

                         II. Proposed Development Objectives
                             The Project Development Objective is to strengthen the institutional capacity of selected water
                             sector agencies and increase water service coverage in target cities.

                         III. Project Description
                             Component Name
                             Water Supply Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Development
                             Comments (optional)
                             This component aims to strengthen the institutional framework for the water and sanitation sector,
                             as well as to build capacity at the recipient agencies at both national and provincial levels. The
                             component will finance activities designed to support the PWSUs and the water office of the
                             regulator for energy and water (IRSEA). The proposed activities under this component will support
                             institutional strengthening and sustainability of the agencies responsible for policy setting,
                             regulation, sector information, and the provision of water and sanitation services. The component



                                                                        Page 5 of 8
                             will provide goods, operational support, capacity building/training, and technical assistance to
                             IRSEA and the PWSUs.




Public Disclosure Copy
                             Component Name
                             Water Resource Management
                             Comments (optional)
                             This Component will support the strengthening of the institutional framework for water resource
                             management, including continuing support and activities initiated under WSIDP I. Key activities
                             will focus on: (a) strengthening and support to INRH and Regional INRH; (b) development of
                             systems for water resource monitoring and management; (c) support for the development of new
                             river basin plans, and (d) support for the preparation of a National Dam Safety Plan. This
                             component will provide goods, works, operational support, capacity building/training, and technical
                             assistance to INRH.
                             Component Name
                             Rehabilitation and Expansion of Water Supply Production and Distribution
                             Comments (optional)
                             1. This component is to support the PWSUs in the development of priority infrastructure to expand
                             system capacity, to increase service coverage and quality, and to improve the operating efficiency of
                             the production and distribution systems in target cities.
                             Component Name
                             Management and Engineering Support
                             Comments (optional)
                             1.      This component provides goods, operational costs, engineering support, training and
                             technical assistance for Project management, technical oversight, financial management, monitoring
                             and evaluation, implementation of social and environmental safeguards, as well as other investments
                             in the water sector, including: (a) the carrying out of engineering and other technical studies; (b) the
                             design and supervision of works and performance contracts; and (c) support for community




Public Disclosure Copy
                             consultation and communication activities.


                         IV. Financing (in USD Million)
                             Total Project Cost:     545.00               Total Bank Financing: 200.00
                             Financing Gap:          100.00
                             For Loans/Credits/Others                                                                      Amount
                             Borrower                                                                                        95.00
                             International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                          200.00
                             FRANCE French Agency for Development                                                           150.00
                             Total                                                                                          445.00

                         V. Implementation
                             1.      Institutional and implementation arrangements will replicate the arrangements under
                             WSIDP I, building upon the capacity built in the existing FCMU at DNA. The FCMU supports the
                             implementation of other programs for the water sector (that is, PIP, AfDB, EU), and has proven
                             implementation capacity; between 2011 and 2015 this unit procured and disbursed US$628 million
                             for investments and activities in the sector.



                                                                         Page 6 of 8
                               2.       Project management will be overseen by MINEA. Project implementation will rely on a
                               dedicated FCMU for the World Bank/AFD project (FCMU-WB), which will report to the MINEA




Public Disclosure Copy
                               Project Director, and will be mainly staffed by local and international consultants. The FCMU-WB
                               will manage all WSIDP II activities, including procurement, financial management and accounting
                               for project funds, as well as coordination with other agencies and institutes involved in the project.

                               3.      Project beneficiary agencies at the national level➢❨ INRH, IRSEA, and DNA➢❨ will be
                               responsible for establishing the agencies➢❨ priorities and for supporting the FCMU-WB
                               throughout the procurement process related to each agency. Institutional support to the PWSUs, as
                               well as all infrastructure investments under Component 3 in the target cities, will be closely
                               coordinated by the respective PWSUs, the corresponding provincial government, and DNA.
                               Beneficiary agencies shall provide periodic reports to the FCMU-WB on the progress of activities
                               supported by the project for their respective components.

                         VI.    Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)
                               Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project                                        Yes          No
                               Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                                                 ✖
                               Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                                                      ✖
                               Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                                               ✖
                               Pest Management OP 4.09                                                                          ✖
                               Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                                                           ✖
                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                                                    ✖
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                                                 ✖
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                                                        ✖
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                      ✖
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                                                            ✖




Public Disclosure Copy
                               Comments (optional)
                               With respect to OP/BP 7.50, the activities to be financed under the project in cities located in
                               international basins (i.e., Dundo and Luena) do not entail the construction of additional treatment
                               capacity, nor the expansion of production facilities. Existing water treatment capacity will be
                               utilized to supply areas that will receive network extensions under the project. For the foregoing
                               reasons, it was determined that the project meets the criteria defined in paragraph 7 (a) of OP 7.50
                               and is eligible for an exception to notification requirements. That is the project: (a) will not
                               adversely change the quality or quantity of water flows to the other riparian; and (b) will not be
                               adversely affected by other riparians➢❨ possible water use. A Memorandum for Exception to
                               Notification Requirements under OP7.50, Project on International Waterways, was prepared for the
                               project (dated Aug 20, 2015) and approved by the Bank➢❨ s Africa Regional Vice President.

                         VII. Contact point
                               World Bank
                               Contact: Luiz Claudio Martins Tavares
                               Title:   Lead Water and Sanitation Spec
                               Tel:     473-5701
                               Email: ltavares@worldbank.org



                                                                           Page 7 of 8
                             Contact:   Camilo Lombana Cordoba
                             Title:     Sr Water & Sanitation Spec.
                             Tel:       458-8319




Public Disclosure Copy
                             Email:     clombanacordoba@worldbank.org

                             Borrower/Client/Recipient
                             Name: Republic of Angola
                             Contact: Martina Fernandes
                             Title:   Director, Study and International Relations, MoF
                             Tel:     244-222-335250
                             Email: martina.fernandes@minfin.gov.ao
                             Implementing Agencies
                             Name: Ministry of Energy and Water
                             Contact: Mr. Luis Filipe da Silva
                             Title:   Secretario de Estado das Aguas
                             Tel:     244-222-339988
                             Email: lfsilva_4@hotmail.com

                         VIII. For more information contact:
                             The World Bank
                             1818 H Street, NW
                             Washington, D.C. 20433
                             Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                             Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects




Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       Page 8 of 8
