Public Disclosure Authorized
                                               PROGRAM-FOR-RESULTS INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID)
                                                              CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                   Report No.:PIDC0120933
                                                                                 (The report # is automatically generated by IDU and should not be changed)


                                       Program Name                     Sustainable Rural Water and Sanitation Program
                                       Region                           AFRICA
                                       Country                          Tanzania
                                       Sector                           Water (GWA01)




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       Financing Instrument             PforR
                                       Program ID                       P163732
                                       Borrower(s)                      UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA
                                       Implementing Agency              Ministry of Water and Irrigation
                                       Date PID Prepared                06 June 2017
                                       Estimated Date of Appraisal      16 March 2018
                                       Completion
                                       Estimated Date of Board          31 May 2018
                                       Approval
                                       Concept Review Decision          Following the review of the concept, the decision was
                                                                        taken to proceed with the preparation of the operation.




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                  I.       Introduction and Context

                                  A. Country Context
                               1. Tanzania has experienced strong economic growth, averaging about seven percent per annum
                                  over the last decade. Despite sustained economic growth, Tanzania remains one of the poorest
                                  countries in Africa with 47 percent of Tanzanians earning less than US$ 1.90 per day. At present,
                                  75 percent of Tanzania’s 50 million population live in rural areas where more than 80 percent of
                                  the poor reside.
                               2. Tanzania has successfully reduced death rates in younger age groups and surpassed the
                                  Millennium Development Goal related to child mortality. However, stunting among children
                                  under five is persistently high, affecting over three million children in Tanzania with large
                                  regional disparities, ranging from 15 percent in Dar es Salaam to 56 percent in Rukwa region in




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                  western Tanzania. Stunting is a predictor of many developmental constraints, including cognitive
                                  deficits and loss of future economic opportunities. Some estimate the overall GDP losses from
                                  stunting at between four to 11 percent (Horton and Steckel, 2013). Recent evidence suggests that
                                  poor sanitation is the second leading risk factor for child stunting worldwide (Danaei et al, 2016)
                                  and up to 43 percent of stunting may be due to gut infections caused in part by poor water,
                                  sanitation and hygiene (Guerrant et al, 2013).
                               3. Water, along with energy, tourism, agriculture, and environment, is one of the sectors in
                                  Tanzania most impacted by climate variability, a major threat to economic growth. At the current
                                  pace of reduction, freshwater available per capita is projected to drop from current 1,952 m3
                                  (2014) to 1,000 m3 by 2036, the threshold below which water scarcity begins to seriously affect
                                  economic and human development. Population pressure, deforestation, and unsustainable land
                                  and water management in fragile catchment areas exacerbate the situation. The Government of
   Tanzania (GoT) has outlined its medium-term objective of becoming a middle-income country
   through the Tanzania Development Vision 2025 which, among other things, aims to build an
   educated population, a competitive economy and achieve 90 percent rural access to safe water by
   2025.
   B. Sectoral and Institutional Context
4. In 2006, Tanzania launched its ambitious and overarching Water Sector Development Program
   (WSDP) covering the period 2006-2025 and encompasses all relevant sub-sectors including: i)
   Water resources management; ii) rural water supply; iii) urban water supply; v) sanitation and
   hygiene, and iv) program delivery support. WSDP phase I (2006-2015) placed emphasis on the
   decentralization of the sector, shifting responsibilities for rural water and sanitation service
   provision from the central government to Local Government Authorities (LGAs) which was in
   line with the GoT's decentralization by devolution policy. LGAs became responsible for the
   construction of new water schemes and the implementation of rural water supply in general. The
   ownership and management responsibilities of village water schemes were delegated to the
   autonomous and community elected, Community Owned Water Supply Organizations
   (COWSOs)1 as stipulated in the National Water Policy (NAWAPO) of 2002 and the 2009 Water
   Act. Supervision and capacity building of COWSOs are the responsibility of LGAs along with
   major rehabilitation/repair of rural water schemes. The NAWAPO recognizes the importance of
   private sector participation and sets out policies that encourage private sector participation and
   Public Private Partnerships. Despite these policies, the rural water sub-sector has seen no
   noteworthy investments or involvement of the private sector.
5. Funding for the GoT’s WSDP I was sourced through a Sector Wide Approach (SWAp) program
   where the GoT and development partners (DP), including the World Bank, contributed more
   than US$ 1.4 billion. The GoT alone contributed US$ 367 million (26 percent). The rural water
   supply component received US$ 560 million while only US$ 24.2 million (less than 2 percent)
   was allocated for rural sanitation. According to the GoT, WSDP I provided access to improved
   water services for more than 10 million people, and more than 4 million gained access to
   improved sanitation. The second phase of WSDP (WSDP II) commenced in July 2016 as an
   extension of WSDP I and a National Water Investment Fund (NWIF), financed by fuel levies,
   was established by the GoT in 2016 with the main purpose of supporting rural water supply.
   Rural Water Supply
6. Goal 6 of the Sustainable Development Goals calls for universal and equitable access to water
   supply by 2030. In 2015, rural access to improved water supply was at 46 percent in Tanzania
   (JMP, 2015), below the Sub-Saharan African average of 56 percent and virtually at the same
   level as in 1990. Approximately 40 percent of rural households spend more than 30 minutes to
   fetch drinking water (DHS, 2016). The 2013 national water point mapping survey confirmed that
   among Tanzania’s 86,000 rural water points2, 55 percent were functional, 7 percent needed
   repair and 38 percent were non-functional3. In recognition of the sustainability challenges, the

   1  COWSOs hold the ownership of water infrastructure assets and are responsible for their operation and
   maintenance. COWSOs participates in water scheme design, sets its own water tariffs and generate revenues from
   sales of water.
   2
     In Tanzania, there are three main types of water schemes: hand pumps, gravity-fed schemes and deep-well
   boreholes with piped distribution systems. Household connections are uncommon.
   3
     The survey covered all water points in Tanzania and was not limited to the schemes constructed under WSDP I.
   implementation completion report4 for WSDP I stated that “achieving sustainable water service
   delivery continues to be a major challenge”. Considering the lack of preventative maintenance
   and repair, the low levels of access to rural water supply can arguably be characterized as a result
   of deferred maintenance of existing systems rather than lack of investment in new infrastructure.
7. Water points break down for reasons common to other similar public assets in rural districts, but
   there are three sector-specific lessons from WSDP I worth highlighting. First, the LGAs’
   incentives were heavily skewed towards the construction of new infrastructure, and limited
   attention and resources were dedicated to setting up the proper local institutional arrangements.
   Second, the decision to move from handpumps and other simple pumping technologies to large
   multi-village schemes powered by diesel generators exacerbated the need for higher village-level
   competencies and technical backstopping support mechanisms which, in most cases, were non-
   existent. Finally, the inability of the MoWI to collect timely and accurate data clouded its ability
   to address the growing backlog of the multifaceted sustainability challenges. WSDP I was
   implemented across all 132 LGAs (now 185), which further hampered supervision, coordination,
   and capacity building efforts. At the village level, the COWSOs' capacity gaps are most acute in
   tariff setting5, financial and operational management, and many of them are still to be formally
   registered. Each LGA is on average responsible for 80 village-level COWSOs.
8. Water quality and quantity vary significantly in Tanzania.6 Under WSDP I, regional laboratories
   for water quality testing were established but regular monitoring of water quality is uncommon.
   Source protection and watershed management are key activities that help maintain sustainable
   water supply, protecting water quality and quantity by increasing aquifer recharge and reducing
   movement of sediment and fecal matter into unconfined aquifers and surface water. Such
   procedures and activities are still to be fully institutionalized.
9. WSDP I and technical assistance by the Bank's Water and Sanitation Program (WSP) made some
   progress in addressing sustainability of rural water supply. In 2016, 10 years into WSDP I, the
   Ministry of Water and Irrigation (MoWI) launched its Sustainability Strategy that aims to further
   strengthen the COWSOs’ capacities; unfortunately, resource limitations and a lack of attention to
   scale and efficiencies in capacity building debilitate these efforts. Following the initial water
   point mapping survey, MoWI established a Central Data Management Team (CDMT) in 2015 to
   be the custodian for all data pertaining to the rural water sub-sector. Although data management
   and monitoring have historically been a challenge and substantial work on M&E is still needed,
   there has never been better data on rural water supply in Tanzania than what is generated now.
   Rural Sanitation and Hygiene
10. In 1973, President Nyerere led the nationwide “Mtu Ni Afya” (Healthy Man) campaign which
   was highly successful in moving sanitation practices from open defecation to fixed-point
   defecation (unimproved latrines). From 1973 to 1978, the use of unimproved latrines rose from
   20 percent to over 80 percent. Since then, little attention was given to rural sanitation until 2012
   when GoT, through extensive TA from WSP, launched the National Sanitation Campaign


   4
     Implementation Completion Report for the Water Sector Support Project, 2016, ICR3737.
   5
     While the price of water at the informal market remain high, the COWSOs often undercharge for water and
   therefore unable to recover its operations and maintenance expenses.
   6
     High fluoride concentrations can be found in groundwater in the fluoride-belt and other hydrogeological zones
   contain high turbidity, arsenic, salinity or E. coli.
   (NSC). The NSC's goals were to encourage households to build improved sanitation facilities7
   and facilitate the transformation to Open Defecation Free (ODF) communities, through a mix of
   the globally recognized community-led total sanitation (CLTS) approach, sanitation marketing, a
   behavior change communication (BCC) campaign, and school toilet rehabilitation and
   construction. Unfortunately, the NSC received limited funding and the BCC campaign was never
   realized. According to the 2016 DHS, 86 percent of rural households still have unimproved
   sanitation facilities almost four decades after the “Mtu Ni Afya” campaign. This results in large
   costs to Tanzanians in terms of access time, premature death, productivity losses and health care
   costs, amounting to 1 percent of GDP (WSP, 2012). This does not include the long-term costs
   associated with child stunting, which affects 35 percent of children under five in Tanzania (GoT,
   2014).
11. A recent DfID -WSP process evaluation8 of phase 1 of the NSC (2012-2015) found several
   barriers to successful implementation, including: systematic delays in disbursement of GoT
   funds; weak supply chain for sanitation hardware; lack of GoT funding for sanitation; capacity
   gaps and limited incentives for reliable monitoring of NSC activities; and delays in the
   development of the BCC campaign component. As a result, DfID agreed to finance and manage
   the development of a nationwide sanitation and hygiene BCC campaign, which will be rolled out
   as part of the second phase of the NSC (2017-2019). This will be carried out in close
   collaboration with the Ministry of Health and Community Development, Gender, Elderly and
   Children (MoHCDGEC) in November 2017.
   C. Relation to CAS/CPF/CPS
12. The GoT’s WSDP program and the proposed lending operation are both closely aligned with the
   Bank’s twin goals of ending extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity, and it is in line
   with the World Bank 2012–15 Country Assistance Strategy9 (CAS) for Tanzania, which was
   further extended to 2016 at the time of the CAS Progress Report (CASPR). The operation
   supports the CAS strategic objective of “Building Infrastructure and Delivering Services” and
   will contribute to achieving the CAS outcome of “increased access to and quality of water and
   sanitation services”. It is also consistent with the increased focus on institutional reforms in the
   context of investment programs identified in the CASPR. The draft Systematic Country
   Diagnostic (SCD) and the draft Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Tanzania stresses the
   importance of strengthening human capital to raise labor productivity, which can be achieved
   notably by protecting early childhood development through improved access to water and
   sanitation, and water resource management. The proposed lending operation contributes to the
   goal of the GoT’s National Five Year Development Plan (2016/17 – 2020/21) to increase access
   to clean and safe water in rural areas to 85 percent and achieve 75 percent of rural households
   using improved sanitation facilities by 2020-21.
   D. Rationale for Bank Engagement and Choice of Financing Instrument
13. There is a clear rationale and a pressing need for a transformational operation addressing the
   sustainability of rural water supply in Tanzania, and there has not been a sufficiently large

   7
     Under the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) framework, the term "improved" is replaced with the term
   "basic", but shall be used throughout the document for ease of understanding.
   8
     Chitty et al (2016) “Process evaluation of Tanzania’s National Sanitation Campaign”, SHARE (Sanitation and
   Hygiene Applied Research for Equity), London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, Policy Brief.
   9
     Report Number: 60269.
   sanitation and hygiene intervention since the 1970s. The GoT’s WSDP provides a well-
   established framework for the delivery of rural water supply and sanitation services at scale;
   however, it has had limited impact on sustainability of rural water supply and sanitation.
14. The rationale for the proposed Sustainable Rural Water and Sanitation Program and the Bank’s
   involvement is to maintain the momentum of the sector reforms and the developments initiated
   during the implementation of previous World Bank-financed projects: River Basin Management
   and Smallholder Irrigation Improvement Project (P038570), Rural WSS Project (P047762),
   Water Sector Support Projects I-II (P87154, P15036)). The proposed Program will precede the
   Bank’s anticipated health operation on children under five, however, efforts will be made to
   ensure the two operations explore synergies and target the same geographical areas.
   Additionally, the Bank’s continued involvement provides opportunities to build on the lessons
   learned under the past projects and address persistent challenges specifically pertaining to
   sanitation, hygiene, sustainability of rural water supply and sector capacity building.
15. The rural water supply sub-sector is on a positive trajectory of addressing many of the
   underlying barriers to sustainability. Nonetheless, the COWSOs’ capacity gap remains one of the
   major challenges that needs to be addressed at scale by reshaping local institutional procedures
   and the prevailing incentive structures. Lessons from Vietnam, Egypt and Mexico indicate that a
   results-based approach can be effective in creating new incentive structures for local institutions.
   The results-based approach is being used more and more by the World Bank in Tanzania, which
   has active Program-for-Results (PforR) lending operations in the education, health, urban and
   energy sectors. It is becoming increasingly evident that the result-based approach is more
   effective when Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs) include both outcome and process DLIs,
   and when these incentives are complemented by substantial technical assistance to support client
   governments through the change process and by establishing new systems, capabilities and
   procedures. To this point, the Program will be best facilitated via a flexible and overarching
   technical assistance (TA) support package similar to the Tanzania PforR in education. To ensure
   quality and timely implementation, the TA will be implemented via the Investment Project
   Finance (IPF) instrument. The proposed Program will be a hybrid of the PforR and IPF
   instruments as illustrated in Figure 1 below.
   Figure 1. Structure of the Sustainable Rural Water and Sanitation Program
16. The use of the PforR lending instrument to support the Government's program ‒ WSDP II ‒ will
   add significant value by:
         •   incentivizing the achievement of the most important goals of the ongoing government
             program (such as ensuring the sustainability of rural water supply) through financial
             support from the central government to participating regions and LGAs;
         •   addressing the political economy and institutional incentive challenges associated with
             budget allocations and lack of focus on the sustainability of rural water and sanitation
             services;
         •   strengthening the Government’s program, including at the LGA and lower levels, by
             establishing a structured framework to enhance its own systems and procedures with
             respect to rural water and sanitation;
         •   supporting the development of a results-based culture for rural water and sanitation
             within the GoT, with strengthened output and outcome M&E and a credible and
             independent verification system that can continue beyond the life of the Bank-funded
             Program;
         •   allowing for flexibility in implementation, and through a TA component, addressing the
             risks inherent in low capacity LGAs in Tanzania; and
         •   promoting new and innovative approaches for transformational impacts on rural water
             and sanitation in Tanzania.

   II.       Program Development Objective(s)

   The development objective for the operation is to increase access to rural water supply and
   sanitation services and strengthen the institutional capacity to manage WSDP in participating
   rural districts.
   PDO Indicators
   The proposed PDO indicators are the following:
         •   People provided with access to an improved water source (male and female) (number) –
             Corporate Results Indicator
         •   People provided with access to improved sanitation (male and female) (number) –
             Corporate Results Indicator
         •   Monitoring and reporting system for rural water and sanitation established and
             operationalized
         •   Annual Institutional Development Plans approved and implemented at district level
    A. Key Program Results
17. The proposed key result areas and corresponding DLIs are presented in Table 1 below. GoT has
    expressed interest in the inclusion of rural sanitation and hygiene results within the PforR
    Program, therefore a significant result area for rural sanitation and hygiene will be developed. A
    detailed Results Framework, containing both performance and disbursement indicators will be
    developed during program preparation.
                    Table 1. PforR Program: Overview of Proposed DLIs (to be confirmed)
        Program Result                                                          Other Intermediate Results Indicators
                                  Disbursement-Linked Indicators
             Area                                                               (which do not trigger disbursements)
                                                       Outcome DLIs
    Result Area 1        1.1 District: Number of existing functional water     ▪ Source protection measures planned
    Sustainable          points 10                                               and implemented
    access to
    improved water       1.2 District: Number of new improved water
    sources in rural     points (in underserved areas11)
    areas
    Result Area 2        2.1 District: Population with access to (i)           ▪ National BCC campaign launched and
    Sustainable          improved sanitation and (ii) hand-washing               under implementation
    access to            stations
    improved
    sanitation and       2.2 District: Population living in verified ODF
    hygiene              communities12

                                                         Process DLIs
    Result Area 3        3.1 District: Reliable monitoring and reporting       ▪ Citizens engagement indicator (TBD)
    Strengthened         system for rural water and sanitation established     ▪ Completion of annual capacity building
    institutional
                         3.2 District: Annual Institutional Development          activities as per the PIM
    capacity to
    manage the           Plans approved and implemented                        ▪ Percent of villages with registered
    WSDP                 3.3 District: Registered and fully operational          COWSOs
                         COWSOs13                                              ▪ % of COWSO that are fully metered

18. The proposed operation will contribute to increased and sustained access to rural water supply
   and sanitation and improved hygiene behavior through a total investment of US$250 million as
   an IDA credit. The five-year Program is estimated to benefit more than 3.5 million people. The
   participating LGAs are incentivized to spend their Program allocation on a combination of both
   software and hardware, thereby increasing access while strengthening the relevant local
   institutions and systems. GoT and beneficiary counterpart financing is estimated at US$ 100
   million per year for rural water supply, excluding sanitation.

   III.      Program Description

19. Drawing on lessons from previous rural water and sanitation programs globally and in Tanzania,
   the proposed five-year Program is recommending a results-based approach with a flexible
   technical assistance component to support the implementation and provide quality assurance at

   10
      The Regional Secretariats (RSs) play an increasingly important role in the supervision, coordination, capacity
   building and quality assurance of LGAs. The flow of fund will be arranged such that the DLIs provides an incentive
   to RSs, and rewards them for the performance of their respective LGAs.
   11
      The proposed Program will develop modalities to incentivize equitable investments in low-coverage communities
   by leveraging satellite population data and water point geo-references. A list of villages with no access to an
   improved water source has already been developed by MoWI.
   12
      ODF verification criteria to be agreed with the GoT, but could include use of improved sanitation facilities in all
   households and public schools and health clients and other public areas. Recent literature suggests that safe infant
   and child excreta disposal greatly improves health impacts and does not require big changes in the interventions to
   the ODF verification criteria, which is why this will also be considered under the ODF verification criteria.
   13
      This will be a scalable DLI.
   national, regional, and district levels.
20. Lessons from the WSDP I clearly demonstrate the challenging implications of nationwide
   implementation in the Tanzanian rural water and sanitation sectors. To make sure that this
   Program is well coordinated, monitored and sufficiently supported, the geographical scope will
   be limited to 10 regions equivalent to about 40 percent of the country’s rural area. The
   geographical selection will be determined by the Bank’s detailed poverty WASH diagnosis and
   based on a clear algorithm combining stunting, poverty, sanitation, and water access indicators
   that will be refined during the preparation of the Program. To ensure logistical and
   administrative efficiency in the implementation of the Program, the geographical selection
   process will be regional, meaning that all LGAs in a selected region will participate in the
   Program.14 The regional focus is conducive for verification and for the technical assistance
   deemed critical for the success of the Program. Despite the regional selection approach, it will be
   mainly the LGAs that the Program seeks to incentivize, as they are responsible for the provision
   of rural water and sanitation services.
                             Box 1. Synergies with Existing Results-Based Activities

          In 2013, DfID allocated US$ 102 million to WSDP II through a Payment by Results
          (PbR) approach with the aim of improving the number of functioning water points. After
          a significant delay caused by lack of data and poor reporting by LGAs, the DfID PbR
          started in December 2016 in 57 LGAs scattered throughout the country. The design of
          DfID’s PbR was informed by the Bank’s first PforR in Vietnam, and includes only two
          outcome DLIs. DfID’s PbR rewards LGAs for water points kept in operation and for
          additional newly constructed water points; it does not include any DLIs on sanitation or
          hygiene.
          To ensure full complementarity with the PbR, the proposed PforR Program has adopted
          DfID’s two DLIs, namely, DLI 1.1 and 1.2 in Table 1. As opposed to the current PbR,
          the PforR will have a regional geographical focus so the two programs will inevitably
          overlap. In regions where the PbR and the PforR overlap, all LGAs under the region will
          benefit in full from the PforR; only the LGAs under the PbR will have DLI 1.1 and 1.2
          paid through the PbR. To avoid confusion, the payments of the two programs will be
          synced so that the LGAs will only experience one result-based program. During the
          preparation of the proposed Program, efforts will be made for the PforR to fully take over
          all LGAs under the targeted regions which would allow DfiD to adopted additional
          LGAs in other regions.
21. The proposed Program will ensure full complementarity with DfID’s PbR, with an approach that
   can be phased and replicated to other geographical areas of Tanzania. The Program’s alignment
   with DfID will include monitoring, evaluation and verification, and complementary DLIs. At the
   same time, the program will utilize and build on the substantial work already undertaken by the
   GoT including the M&E framework and the national sanitation BCC campaign.
22. Learning from global and Tanzania-specific experiences, the Program will have the following
   three closely interrelated components corresponding with WSDP II and DfID’s PbR:
   Result Area 1: Sustainable access to improved water sources in rural areas

   14
        There are on average seven LGAs per region.
   Instrument: PforR (US$ 180 million)
23. This component will be implemented by the MoWI and the President's Office ‒ Regional
   Administration and Local Government (PO-RALG) and will support comprehensive
   improvements in sustainable access to water supply services in the participating regions and
   districts by:
       •   Increasing coverage of water supply services by financing investments identified in
           district WASH plans with a focus on low-coverage communities.
       •   Rehabilitating and repairing non-functional and partly functional water points.
       •   Reducing the cost of water extraction by mainstreaming solar power.
       •   Developing district-wide monitoring systems that regularly collect and report data on the
           sustainability of services.
       •   Protecting quality and quantity of water sources for relevant water points.
       •   Sustaining existing water points by instilling efficiency, focus, benchmarking and scale in
           LGAs’ activities on sustainability such as:
               o Ensuring COWSOs are registered and that their institutional are continuously
                    assessed, strengthened and professionalized.
               o Establishing long-term sustainability support mechanisms, to ensure that
                    maintenance schedules, technical assessments for rehabilitation and repair needs
                    are met.
               o Supporting COWSOs on setting appropriate and affordable tariffs.
               o Developing district WASH networks to regularly connect all COWSOs and LGA-
                    level stakeholders for coordination and horizontal learning.
24. The vast distance and disconnect between communities and district level authorities, coupled
   with the large number of unregistered and low capacitated COWSOs suggest that LGA officials
   alone will not be able to build the COWSOs’ capacity in a timely and sufficient manner to ensure
   sustainability. Given the large backlog of sustainability support work and the lack of appropriate
   support systems in most districts, this component will support the LGAs to outsource this work
   to local organizations (NGOs or other service providers) with appropriate experience and
   capacity to build the basic capacity needed at scale. This will involve registration of COWSOs
   and the establishment of basic operating procedures, including setting a cost-reflective tariff and
   ensuring that all water points are metered.
25. To instill long-term sustainability, the Program will seek to replicate international good practices
   from Benin and Brazil by establishing local service providers to fill the existing capacity gap
   between the LGAs and COWSOs. The operation of rural water supply can be clustered across
   several villages and contracted out to local private sector service providers as successfully
   demonstrated in Benin. This will be initiated by the GPOBA-funded solar project where one
   service provider will receive a 5-year service contract for 25-50 COWSOs within a specific
   locality. Another model is where a cluster of rural COWSOs form a water trust that subsequently
   can provide technical and managerial support to each COWSO; this model has proven successful
   in Brazil and in the Kilimanjaro Region of Tanzania. Both models seek to foster economies of
   scale in the service provision of rural water supply by clustering COWSOs and linking the
   operations with resourceful and capable service providers. The two models can operate
   interchangeably and, through these approaches, the community ownership structure will remain
   while the associated capacity gaps are being addressed.
26. An external and independent verification agent will conduct the verification exercises for the
   Program’s DLIs. The Ministry of Water and Irrigation and participating LGAs will also be
   encouraged to strengthen internal verification mechanisms and the use of routine monitoring data
   in order to improve data reliability, strengthen progress tracking, and develop feedback loops
   that enable LGAs to take rapid and appropriate action when any project areas or results are found
   to be off track.
   Result Area 2: Sustainable access to improved sanitation and hygiene
   Instrument: PforR (US$ 50 million)
27. This component will be implemented by the Ministry of Health and Community Development,
   Gender, Elderly and Children (MoHCDGEC) and PO-RALG, and will support the second phase
   of the National Sanitation Campaign (NSC) and the rollout of the DfID-supported sanitation and
   hygiene BCC campaign. As under WSDP I, the LGAs will implement the NSC, and the
   Program’s TA will encourage and support the implementation of the planned community-led
   total sanitation activities. The component will support supply-side interventions at community
   level, notably the support and encouragement of local private sector suppliers and service
   providers in using locally available materials or plastic pans, hand-washing stations and other
   appropriate products and services for the low-cost upgrading and improvement of sanitation
   facilities, and in collaborating with local financial institutions for the delivery of sanitation and
   hygiene products and services to rural communities.
28. The verification and certification processes for Open Defecation Free (ODF) communities will
   be developed and institutionalized in the participating regions and districts. As in Results Area 1,
   the strengthening of internal verification mechanisms and the use of routine monitoring data in
   the analysis of progress and performance will be supported. An independent verification agent
   will conduct the verification exercises for the Program’s DLIs. Due to its health impact, a DLI
   based on an increase in the population that practices handwashing with soap at critical times was
   considered. However, previous WASH programs have failed to effect sustainable or even
   substantial change on handwashing behavior, in part because of the ineffective and often
   cumbersome monitoring of household handwashing practices. Therefore, the Program will use
   handwashing stations as a proxy for good handwashing.
   Result Area 3: Strengthened institutional capacity to manage the WSDP
   Instrument: IPF (US$ 20 million)
29. This TA component will be implemented by both MoWI and MoHCDGEC. Activities relevant
   for rural water will be implemented by MoWI whereas TA activities pertaining to sanitation and
   hygiene will be implemented by MoHCDGEC. At the system level, program activities will be
   strategically designed to enhance the capacity of the government to monitor, ensure quality, and
   improve and sustain WASH service delivery. This component will support the high-level
   coordination and cooperation between Ministries and different levels of government that will be
   required for successful implementation of the Program.
30. Cascaded Technical Assistance to Program Implementation: To optimize and fast-track
   implementation, the Program will include a substantial technical assistance support (TAS)
   package to support the GoT in: (i) implementing the PforR Program approach with embedded
   DLIs, (ii) undertaking capacity building, planning, systems strengthening and financial
   management improvement activities, aiming to improve the overall quality of rural water supply
   and sanitation services, and (iii) communications to build awareness and buy-in to the Project
   and the PforR approach.
31. Support in developing integrated reporting and management information systems: More
   specifically, the TA intends to strengthen the capacity of the MoWI, MoHCDGEC and PO-
   RALG to collect, consolidate and use real-time data on service delivery for planning and
   monitoring of program activities. The Program will fund a modernization of the management and
   information systems and processes in the WASH sector, both for M&E and for the required
   verification of program results. A detailed verification protocol will be developed and the
   Program will engage a qualified independent verification agent throughout the project. For
   modernization and efficiency purposes, the Program seeks to implement the Rural Water and
   Sanitation Information System, SIASAR, successfully adopted by 11 countries and supported by
   the World Bank (P148645 and P153736). The adaptation is envisaged to be fast, cost-effective
   and to avail actionable data to the LGAs, a critical aspect of strengthening the sustainability of
   rural water supply.
32. Specific technical assistance: The component will particularly support the strengthening of the
   sanitation supply chain to ensure appropriate and affordable products are available in the market.
   The TA will support Basin Water Boards and WUAs in developing capacity and institutional
   arrangements required to monitor water quality and quantity parameters. This project will draw
   on a number of global lessons from on-going operations where source protection and water
   quality issues are addressed, particularly in India. It will also support LGAs in improving
   borehole drilling supervision through such means as the use of borehole cameras, a technology
   that is currently unfamiliar to district level officials. Standard engineering designs will also be
   standardized and include the provision of simple water treatment applications among others.
   Building on the success of Tanzania’s Dar es Salaam Water and Sewerage Corporation’s
   (DAWSCO) participation in the leadership center of excellence training, the Program will
   facilitate a similar exercise for key officials in the rural water and sanitation sub-sectors.
   A. Role of Development Partners
33. As per the SWAp framework adopted by the GoT under WSDP I, financing for WSDP II was
   anticipated to come from a range of development partners (DPs) and with GoT’s share largely
   coming from the general budget. However, contributions from DPs have decreased significantly
   over the last couple of years. Of the major former contributors, only DfID currently supports
   rural water and sanitation, with some earmarked support from Belgium and the Japan
   International Cooperation Agency (JICA), and ad hoc support from UNICEF and numerous local
   and international NGOs. The results-based approach will thus have to be successfully
   demonstrated in order to ignited future backing from DPs.
34. Through its input finance, DFID has allocated an additional TSH 20 million (US$ 9,000) per
   year per each LGA for registration and capacity building of COWSOs, and UNICEF will provide
   technical assistance on water quality and treatment. With regards to the many NGOs operating in
   the sector, efforts will be made to promote division of labor so that NGOs participating in the
   Project focus on specific geographical areas of the country. The Program will be implemented in
   close collaboration with DfID and its PbR project and synergies between the two programs as
   explained in Box 1.

   IV.     Initial Environmental and Social Screening
35. Sector experience suggests that the overall environmental impact of this Program is expected to
   be positive and the negative impacts insignificant. The core environmental considerations
   concern water availability, its quality, and protection of water sources. The ESSA will review the
   capacity of implementing institutions (both at central and LGA levels) to address direct social
   and environmental risks. The ESSA will focus on institutional, organizational, and procedural
   aspects that are relevant to environmental protection and social inclusion. It is important to note
   that an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been developed for the
   ongoing Second Water Sector Support Project (P150361). The ESMF has been prepared by the
   MoWI and disclosed in-country and on the World Bank’s external website. It establishes clear
   procedures and methodologies for site-specific environmental and social assessments and
   safeguard instruments to be carried out before implementation of projects in the water sector. In
   addition, the framework establishes the principles and procedures to undertake consultations and
   to implement grievance mechanisms, as required during project implementation. The ESSA will
   be a supplement of the ESMF.
   A. Citizen engagement and gender
36. Citizen engagement: As per the demand-responsive approach to rural water supply intended by
   the GoT, the Program will have the significant participation of beneficiaries, notably through the
   community management and ownership model as stipulated by the NAWAPO. In addition, the
   Program will fund an SMS-based citizen feedback mechanism to support the existing water point
   mapping system.

37. With regards to gender, significant progress has been noted on women’s participation in the
   management of COWSOs. Nevertheless, men still constitute a larger proportion than women on
   COWSO boards, and it is still uncommon to find women as the COWSO chairman. The
   COWSO competency model developed jointly by the MoWI and the World Bank includes
   women’s participation as one of the competencies to be attained. The Program plans to roll-out
   the competency model to all participating LGAs, thus incentivizing COWSOs to achieve gender
   balance.

38. Sanitation and hygiene often have better gender equality propensities than water supply. Women
   and girls tend to value sanitation and hygiene more highly than men, and often have higher
   benefits in terms of security, dignity, privacy for menstrual hygiene management, and fewer risks
   around child defecation, than men and boys. Furthermore, women are also more often involved
   as sanitation and hygiene promoters, and can be pro-actively involved in the promotion of
   sanitation goods and services.

   B. Climate risk screening
39. The exposure of the Project to climate shocks was assessed using the Bank's Climate and
   Disaster Risk Screening Tool. The assessment indicated a potential increase in extreme
   temperatures, severe storms and floods, as well as recurrent droughts in the future. The Program
   will contribute to global goods such as mitigation through CO2 emissions reductions achieved by
   replacing diesel pumping with solar water pumping. Climate change adaptation measures will
   include improved watershed management and switching rural villages from seasonal to
   permanent water sources. A greenhouse gas accounting analysis will be carried out during the
   preparation of the program.
      V.     Tentative financing
             {Same as in AUS}

       Source:                                                                 ($m.)
       Borrower/Recipient                                                       500
       IBRD                                                                       0
       IDA                                                                      250
       Others (specify)
                                                                       Total   750
VI.   Contact point World Bank
      Contact: Kristoffer Welsien
      Title: Water and Sanitation Specialist
      Tel: +1 240 676 2975
      Email: kwelsien@worldbank.org

      Borrower/Client/Recipient
      Contact: Philip Mpango, Ministry of Finance and Planning,
      UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA
      Title: Permanent Secretary,
      Tel: + 255 222112856
      Email: ps@mof.go.tz


      Implementing Agencies
      Contact: Prof. Kitila Mkumbo, Ministry of Water and Irrigation
      Title: Permanent Secretary
      Tel: +255222450838
      Email: ps@maji.go.tz


      VII. For more information contact:
      The InfoShop
      The World Bank
      1818 H Street, NW
      Washington, D.C. 20433
      Telephone: (202) 458-4500
      Fax: (202) 522-1500
      Web: http://www.worldbank.org/infoshop
