Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                           Document of

                                                                       THE WORLD BANK

                                                                  FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

                                                                                                              Report No.: 124518-TZ



                                                       INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                              PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

                                                                               ON A

                                                                       PROPOSED CREDIT

                                                           IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 243.4 MILLION
                                                               (US$350 MILLION EQUIVALENT)

                                                                             TO THE




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                               UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA

                                                                             FOR THE

                                           SUSTAINABLE RURAL WATER SUPPLY AND SANITATION PROGRAM

                                                                           JUNE 5, 2018




Public Disclosure Authorized
                               Water Global Practice
                               Africa Region




                                This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of
                                their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.
                   CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

              (Exchange Rate Effective April 30, 2018)

              Currency Unit = Tanzania Shilling (TZS)
                        TZS 2,253 = US$1
                        SDR 0.695 = US$1

                          FISCAL YEAR
                          July 1 – June 30

              ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

ACG     Anti-Corruption Guidelines
BCC     Behavior Change Communication
CAG     Controller and Auditor General
CDMT    Central Data Management Team
CLTS    Community-Led Total Sanitation
COWSO   Community-Owned Water Supply Organization
CPF     Country Partnership Framework
CUIS    Common Used Items Systems
CWS     Community-Wide Sanitation
CWST    Council Water and Sanitation Team
DFID    U.K. Department for International Development
DHS     Demographic and Health Survey
DLI     Disbursement-Linked Indicator
DLR     Disbursement-Linked Result
DP      Development Partner
EIA     Environmental Impact Assessment
EMA     Environmental Management Act
EMIS    Education Management Information System
ESMF    Environmental and Social Management Framework
ESSA    Environmental and Social Systems Assessment
EIRR    Economic Internal Rate of Return
F&C     Fraud and Corruption
FiLDI   Field-level Leadership Development Initiative
FSA     Fiduciary Systems Assessment
GBV     Gender-based Violence
GDP     Gross Domestic Product
GIS     Geographic Information System
GoT     Government of Tanzania
GPSA    Government Procurement Services Agency
GRM     Grievance Redress Mechanism
GRS     Grievance Redress Service
HDI     Human Development Index
IA      Implementing Agency
IAG     Internal Auditor General
ICR     Implementation Completion and Results Report
INT     Integrity Vice-Presidency
IPF     Investment Project Financing
IPSAS   International Public Sector Accounting Standards
IVA        Independent Verification Agent
LGA        Local Government Authority
LSHTM      London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine
M&E        Monitoring and Evaluation
MIS        Management Information System
MoEST      Ministry of Education, Science, and Technology
MoFP       Ministry of Finance and Planning
MoHCDGEC   Ministry of Health, Community Development, Gender, Elderly, and Children
MoWI       Ministry of Water and Irrigation
MTR        Midterm Review
NAWAPO     National Water Policy
NCB        National Competitive Bidding
NEMC       National Environmental Management Council
NPV        Net Present Value
NSC        National Sanitation Campaign
NSMIS      National Sanitation Management Information System
NWIF       National Water Investment Fund
O&M        Operation and Maintenance
OC         Other Charges
ODF        Open Defecation Free
PAP        Program Action Plan
PbR        Payment by Results
PCCB       Prevention and Combating of Corruption Bureau
PCU        Project Coordination Unit
PDO        Program Development Objective
PforR      Program-for-Results
OM         Operations Manual
PO-RALG    President's Office - Regional Administration and Local Government
PPA        Public Procurement Act
PPRA       Public Procurement Regulatory Authority
PV         Photovoltaic
RPF        Resettlement Policy Framework
RS         Regional Secretariat
RWST       Regional Water and Sanitation Team
SDG        Sustainable Development Goal
SIASAR     Rural Water and Sanitation Information System (Sistema de Informacion de Agua
           y Saneamiento Rural
SPSC       Strategic Program Support Consultant
SWASH      School Water and Sanitation and Hygiene
ToR        Terms of Reference
USAID      United States Agency for International Development
VAC        Violence Against Children
VPO-DoE    Vice-President’s Office - Division of Environment
WASH       Water, Sanitation and Hygiene
WPMS       Water Point Mapping System
WRM        Water Resources Management
WSDP       Water Sector Development Program
WSP        Water and Sanitation Program
WSS        Water Supply and Sanitation
     Regional Vice President:     Makhtar Diop
Global Practice Vice President:   Laura Tuck
             Country Director:    Bella Bird
             Practice Manager:    Catherine Signe Tovey
          Task Team Leaders:      Iain Menzies/ Kristoffer Welsien
                                              TANZANIA
                       Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program

                                        TABLE OF CONTENTS

I.   STRATEGIC CONTEXT                                                          1
     A. Country Context                                                         1
     B. Sectoral and Institutional Context                                      3
     C. Relationship to the CPF and Rationale for Use of Instrument             6

II. PROGRAM DESCRIPTION                                                         8
     A.   Government Program (WSDP)                                             8
     B.   Program Development Objective and Key Results                         9
     C.   PforR Program Scope                                                   9
     D.   Disbursement-Linked Indicators and Verification Protocols            13
     E.   Capacity Building and Institutional Strengthening                    14

III. PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION                                                    16
     A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements                          16
     B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation                                      18
     C. Disbursement Arrangements                                              18

IV. ASSESSMENT SUMMARY                                                         19
     A.   Technical                                                            19
     B.   Fiduciary                                                            22
     C.   Environmental and Social Effects                                     24
     D.   Risk Assessment                                                      27
     E.   Program Action Plan                                                  29

ANNEX 1. DETAILED PROGRAM DESCRIPTION                                          30
ANNEX 2. RESULTS FRAMEWORK MATRIX                                              41
ANNEX 3. DISBURSEMENT LINKED INDICATORS, DISBURSEMENT ARRANGEMENTS
AND VERIFICATION PROTOCOLS                                         43
ANNEX 4. SUMMARY TECHNICAL ASSESSMENT                                          51
ANNEX 5. SUMMARY FIDUCIARY SYSTEMS ASSESSMENT                                  56
ANNEX 6. SUMMARY ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SYSTEMS ASSESSMENT                   68
ANNEX 7. SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK RATING                                     75
ANNEX 8. PROGRAM ACTION PLAN                                                   76
ANNEX 9. IMPLEMENTATION SUPPORT PLAN                                           78
ANNEX 10. REGIONAL TARGETING SELECTION PROCESS                                 80
                                                           PAD DATA SHEET

                                                                 Tanzania
                            Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program (P163732)

                                           PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

                                                                Africa
                                                         Water Global Practice

                                                                                                       Report No.: 124518-TZ
.




                                                           Basic Information

Date:                                   June 5, 2018              Sectors:        Water

Country Director:                       Bella Bird                Themes:         Rural Water and Sanitation

Practice Manager                        Catherine Signe Tovey

Global Practice Vice                    Laura Tuck
President:

Program ID:                             P163732

Team Leader(s):                         Iain Menzies and
                                        Kristoffer Welsien

Program Implementation                  6 years                   Start Date: June 26, 2018         End Date: July 31, 2024
Period:

Expected Financing                      August 31, 2018
Effectiveness Date:

Expected Financing Closing              July 31, 2024
Date:
.




                                                        Program Financing Data
[ ]     Loan          [ ]     Grant               [ ]    Other

[X]     Credit

For Loans/Credits/Others (US$, millions):

Total Program Cost:               740                                    Total Bank Financing:        350
Total Co-financing:               390                                    Financing Gap:                 0

.




                                                                     i
Financing Source                                     Amount

BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                   US$325 million

IDA                                                  US$350 million
Others (DFID, parallel financing)                    US$65 million
Financing Gap                                        0

Total                                                US$740 million
.




Borrower: United Republic of Tanzania

Responsible Agency: Ministry of Water and Irrigation; President's Office - Regional Administration and Local
Government; Ministry of Health, Community Development, Gender, Elderly, and Children; and Ministry of
Education, Science, and Technology.
    Contact:           Prof. Kitila Mkumbo                                     Title:   Permanent Secretary

    Telephone No.:     +255 232 2602/2623 22602/754 301908                     Email:   ps@maji.go.tz
.




Fiscal Year             2019                 2020                     2021              2022                  2023             2024


Annual                  72.5                  53.8                    73.6              74.7                  75.4              0


Cumulative              72.5                 126.3                    199.9             274.6                 350              350.0

.




Program Development Objective(s)

Increase access to rural water supply and sanitation services in participating districts and strengthen the capacity of
select sector institutions to sustain service delivery.



                                                               Compliance

Policy
Does the program depart from the CAS in content or in other significant                                              Yes [ ]     No [ X ]
respects?
.




Does the program require any waivers of Bank policies applicable to                                                  Yes [ ]     No [ X ]
Program-for-Results operations?


Have these been approved by Bank management?                                                                         Yes [ ]     No [ ]


Is approval for any policy waiver sought from the Board?                                                             Yes [ ]     No [ X ]




                                                                          ii
Overall Risk Rating: Substantial
Legal Covenants
The Recipient shall within six (6) months from the Effectiveness Date appoint and thereafter maintain, at all times
during the implementation of the Program, independent verification agents under terms of reference acceptable to the
Association (“Verification Agents”), to verify the data and other evidence supporting the achievement of one or
more DLIs (Schedule 2. Section I.B.2. (a)).
The Recipient shall not later than 12 months from the Effectiveness Date, establish and thereafter maintain
throughout the implementation of the Operation, the National Steering Committee comprising MoWI, MoHCDGEC,
MoEST, PO-RALG, MoFP and the Agency to oversee the coordination and monitoring, and verify progress of
implementation, of the Program and the Project. (Schedule 2, Section I.A(b)1).

Legal Conditions
Effectiveness Conditions:
The Recipient has prepared and adopted an Operations Manual satisfactory to the Association in accordance with the
provisions of section 4.01 of the Financing Agreement.
Withdrawal Conditions:
The Recipient shall carry out the Program Action Plan, or cause the Program Action Plan to be carried out, in
accordance with the schedule set out in the said Program Action Plan in a manner satisfactory to the Association.
(Schedule 2: Section I.B.1)
Notwithstanding the provisions of Part, A of this Section, with respect to Categories (1) through (8) (the Program),
no withdrawal shall be made: (a) for purposes of Section 2.03 of the Program General Conditions, for DLRs
achieved prior to the Signature Date; and (b) for any DLR until and unless the Recipient has furnished evidence
satisfactory to the Association that said DLR has been achieved, including verification reports from the Verification
Agent, based on reports prepared by the Recipient certifying the achievement of the DLRs in accordance with the
Verification Protocol. (Schedule 2: Section IV.B.1)
Notwithstanding the provisions of Part B.1(b.) of this Section, with respect to the Program, the Recipient may
withdraw an amount not to exceed $72,500,000 as an advance; provided, however, that if the DLRs in the opinion of
the Association, are not achieved (or only partially achieved) by the Closing Date, the Recipient shall refund such
advance (or portion of such advance as determined with reference to the Verification Protocol) to the Association
promptly upon notice thereof by the Association. Except as otherwise agreed with the Recipient, the Association
shall cancel the amount so refunded. Any further withdrawals requested as an advance under any Category shall be
permitted only on such terms and conditions as the Association shall specify by notice to the Recipient. (Schedule 2:
Section IV.B.2)
Notwithstanding the provisions of Part B.1(b) of this Section, with respect to the Program, if any of the DLR has not
been achieved by the date by which the said DLR is set to be achieved, the Association may, by notice to the
Recipient: (a) authorize the withdrawal of such lesser amount of the unwithdrawn proceeds of the Financing then
allocated to said Category which, in the opinion of the Association, corresponds to the extent of achievement of said
DLR, said lesser amount to be calculated in accordance with the formulas set out in the table in Section IV.A of
Schedule 2 to this Agreement; (b) reallocate all or a portion of the proceeds of the Financing then allocated to said
DLR to any other DLR; and/or (c) cancel all or a portion of the proceeds of the Financing then allocated to said
DLR. (Schedule 2: Section IV.B.3)
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section V.A of this Schedule, no withdrawal shall be made from Category (9) for
payments made in respect of the Project prior to the Signature Date. (Schedule 2: Section IV.C)




                                                           iii
                                                   Team Composition
                                                       Bank Staff
Name                      Title                                           Specialization                      Unit

Iain Menzies              Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist   Task Team Leader                    GWA01

Kristoffer Welsien        Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist          Task Team Leader                    GWA01

Sanjay Pahuja             Lead Water Resources Specialist                 Capacity Building                   GWA03

Harriet Nattabi           Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist          Water and Sanitation                GWA01

Josses Mugabi             Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist   Water and Sanitation                GWA01

Lilian Pena               Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist   Water and Sanitation                GWA02

Nightingale Rukuba-Ngaiza Senior Counsel                                  Legal                               LEGAM

George Joseph             Senior Economist                                Economics                           GWAGP

Claire Chase              Economist                                       Economics                           GWAGP

Roland White              Lead Urban Specialist                           PforR Operations                    GSU12

Gisbert Kinyero           Senior Procurement Specialist                   Procurement                         GGO01

Michael Okuny             Senior Financial Management Specialist          Financial Management                GGOAE

Jane Kibbassa             Senior Environmental Specialist                 Environmental Safeguards            GEN01

Daniel Mira-Salama        Senior Environmental Specialist                 Environmental Management            GEN01

Jean Owino                Finance Officer                                 Finance                             WFACS

Mary Bitekerezo           Senior Social Development Specialist            Social Safeguards                   GSU07

Jacob O. Obongo           Social Development Specialist                   Social Safeguards                   GSU07


MaryIrene Singili         Administrative Assistant                        Operations                          AFCE1

                                                     Non-Bank Staff
Name                      Title                                           City

Gabriel Lwakabare         Consultant, Rural Water Supply and Sanitation   Dar es Salaam, Tanzania

Edward Ramsay             Consultant, Rural Water Supply and Sanitation   Kilmersdon, United Kingdom

Carlos Batarda            Consultant, Rural Water Supply and Sanitation   Dar es Salaam, Tanzania

Sophie Ayling             Consultant, Monitoring and Evaluation           Washington, DC, United States of America

Vasantt Jogoo             Consultant, Safeguards                          Mauritius




                                                            iv
I.          STRATEGIC CONTEXT

A.          Country Context

1.          Economy. Tanzania is on a strong growth trajectory but poverty rates, particularly in rural areas,
remain high. Although Tanzania has experienced rapid economic growth over the last decade, with annual
gross domestic product (GDP) growth averaging about 7 percent, the economy has softened slightly since
late-2016.1 The majority of the population rely on agriculture for their livelihood and the economy is highly
dependent on natural resources, including water.2 Tanzania’s annual population growth rate stands at about
3 percent due to the persistently high fertility rate at five births per woman. At the current growth rate, the
population is projected to double from about 55.5 million in 2016 to over 100 million by 2037.
Approximately 70 percent of the Tanzanian population currently reside in rural areas.3

2.          Poverty. Despite relatively strong and stable economic growth, the poverty rate remains high
and human development progress is suboptimal. The poverty rate declined from 34 percent in 2007 to 28
percent in 2012, and extreme poverty fell from 12 percent to 10 percent during the same period. About 11.9
million people live in poverty and 4.2 million in extreme poverty.4 According to the World Population
Prospects 2017, the Human Development Index (HDI) value for Tanzania improved from 0.446 in 2005 to
0.531 in 2015, but the country remains in the low human development category (151 out of 188 countries)
and when discounted for inequality, the HDI for Tanzania drops to 0.396.5

3.          Health. Chronic undernutrition rates,
                                                                    Figure 1. Stunting Percentage of Children Ages 0-6
as measured by stunted growth, are high, affecting
one in three children under five years. Tanzania
has successfully reduced death rates in younger
age groups and surpassed the Millennium
Development Goal related to child mortality.
However, chronic undernutrition in Tanzania is
the third highest in Sub-Saharan Africa, affecting
an estimated 2.7 million children or 35 percent,
with large regional disparities ranging from 15
percent in Dar es Salaam to 56 percent in Rukwa
region in western Tanzania, as illustrated in
Figure 1. Stunted children are shorter, more
susceptible to disease, and more likely to have
poorer cognitive and educational outcomes.
Stunting is a predictor of many developmental
constraints, including cognitive deficits and loss
of future economic opportunities. The effects of
stunting are permanent; when stunted children
become adults they are likely to earn 20 percent
less than their peers. Some estimate the overall
GDP losses from stunting at 4–11 percent.6                                                                  Source: DHS 2016


1 World Bank. 2017. “World Development Indicator.”
2 World Bank. 2017. “Tanzania Economic Update, Managing Water Wisely.”
3
    UN Population Division. 2017. “World Population Prospects.” https://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/.
4 World Bank. 2015a. “Tanzania Mainland Poverty Assessment.” Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group.
5 United Nations Development Programme. 2016. “The Human Development Report 2016, Human Development for Everyone.”

6 Horton, S. and R. Steckel. 2013. “Malnutrition: Global Economic Losses Attributable to Malnutrition 1900–2000 and

Projections to 2050.” In The Economics of Human Challenges.




                                                                1
Recent evidence suggests that poor sanitation is the second leading risk factor for child stunting worldwide7
and that diarrhea and chronic environmental enteropathy (intestinal inflammation) in children are linked to
a lack of sanitation and have a significant impact on childhood development.8 Up to 43 percent of stunting
may be due to gut infections caused in part by poor water, sanitation, and hygiene.9

4.           Gender gap. There are significant gaps between women and men in labor force participation,
employment, and unemployment rates in Tanzania. Despite Government’s efforts to promote gender
equality, women are less likely to participate in the labor force than men and those who do participate
experience higher unemployment rates than men. The Tanzania Demographic and Health Survey (DHS)
for 2010 shows that 19.1 percent of women of ages 20–24 years had no education at all, compared with
10.5 percent for men, and the unemployment rate of females is higher (12.3 percent) compared to that of
males (8.2 percent). In rural communities, women and girls are typically responsible for collecting water
and are, therefore, disproportionately affected when water sources are remote or do not function properly.
Measures targeted toward promoting gender equality in responsibilities, access to resources, opportunities,
and social services represent a crucial step to empower the poor and expedite poverty reduction. A gender
assessment conducted during the Program preparation emphasized the need for higher female participation
in the sector both at community and professional levels. The Program will aim to improve sanitation
facilities and promote hygiene practices, which represent a challenge for girls, especially those wishing to
attend schools. About 57 percent of schools in Tanzania have no functional hand washing facilities, almost
40 percent have no water supply in the premises and more than 60 percent do not have a place to dispose
sanitary pads. More than half of the latrines for girls do not have doors, which increases the risk of Gender-
based Violence (GBV) at schools and girls dropping out altogether.10 It is evident, that adequate sanitation
and menstrual hygiene management increase adolescent girls’ retention and participation in schools in
Tanzania.11 Considering that only 52 percent of the eligible student population is enrolled in lower
secondary schools, it is important to promote adequate conditions, especially for girls, to attain education.12

5.          Climate variability and environmental stewardship. Tanzania has a complex landscape with
high spatial climate variability, from tropical at the coast to temperate in the highlands, and two predominant
precipitation regimes with an average annual rainfall of 600–800 mm. The economy is increasingly affected
by prolonged droughts, severe storms and floods, and rising temperatures. Projections show an average
temperature increase of 1ºC –3ºC over the next 50 years. The economic impacts of recent extreme weather
events amount to about 1 percent of GDP per year and with the dependence of the economy on climate-
sensitive activities, this cost is expected to increase by an additional 1 to 2 percent of GDP per year by
2030.13 Disadvantaged socioeconomic groups are disproportionally affected by climatic conditions and
resort to various adaptation practices and coping strategies, including diversification of their production
and livelihoods. In addition, trade-offs in natural resources use are increasing with pressure from population
growth and economic development, affecting key ecosystem services such as water production and timber,


7 Guerrant, Richard. 2012. “The Impoverished Gut—A Triple Burden of Diarrhea, Stunting and Chronic Disease.”

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3617052/.
8 Petri, Naylor, Haque. 2014. “Environmental Enteropathy and Malnutrition: Do We Know Enough to Intervene?” BMC

Medicine.
9 Goodarz, Danaei. 2016. “Risk Factors for Childhood Stunting in 137 Developing Countries.”

http://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/article?id=10.1371/journal.pmed.1002164 . Recent trials in Kenya and elsewhere suggest
that household sanitation upgrades from unimproved to improved latrines, and handwashing stations do not reduce childhood
diarrhea or improve growth (Null, Clair. 2018. Lancet Glob Health 6: e316–29). It is noted that the study only enrolled pregnant
women, attained a very low compliance rate especially in the second year of the study, and the targeted areas held relatively high
baseline sanitation coverage before the intervention.
10 UNICEF, 2011. “Adolescence in Tanzania.”
11 World Bank. 2015. “Preparing the Next Generation in Tanzania: Challenges and Opportunities in Education.”
12 United Republic of Tanzania, Ministry of Education, Science and Technology. 2016. “National Guideline for Water, Sanitation

and Hygiene for Tanzania Schools.”
13 GCAP (Global Climate Adaptation Partnership). 2011. “Economics of Climate Change in Tanzania.”




                                                                2
on which rural communities depend. Efforts to address the vulnerability of the poor and to improve adaptive
capacity require a greater role for local and national institutions in planning and implementation of
interventions to support resilience as well as in governing access and sustainable use of resources.

B.          Sectoral and Institutional Context

6.          Water Sector Development Program (WSDP). In 2006, Tanzania launched its ambitious
WSDP for 2006–2025, encompassing the entire water sector, from water resources management (WRM)
to urban and rural water supply and sanitation. In line with the emphasis on decentralization of the 2002
National Water Policy (NAWAPO), the first phase of the WSDP (WSDP-1, 2006–2015) delegated the
construction of new water schemes to the 185 Local Government Authorities (LGAs) and scheme
management to village-level autonomous Community-Owned Water Supply Organizations (COWSOs).
COWSOs own the water supply schemes but can delegate their operation to a third party. WSDP-1 received
more than US$1.4 billion in funding, of which US$367 million (26 percent) came from the Government of
Tanzania (GoT), while US$1,033 million (74 percent) came from development partners (DPs), including
the World Bank14, through a sector-wide approach. The rural water supply component received US$560
million but only US$24.2 million (less than 2 percent) was allocated for rural sanitation. According to the
GoT, WSDP-1 provided access to improved water supply to over 10 million people and 5.1 million gained
access to improved sanitation; both outcomes exceeded set targets.15 The second phase of the WSDP
(WSDP-2) commenced in July 2016 and may benefit from the National Water Investment Fund (NWIF)
that was recently created to finance investments in rural water supply.16 The Implementation Completion
and Results Report (ICR)17 for WSDP-1 found that “achieving sustainable water service delivery continues
to be a major challenge.” Lessons from implementation showed that there is a need to consider different
management models that can address the shortcomings of COWSOs. With regard to rural sanitation, the
ICR found that the GoT is still reliant on donor resources for sanitation interventions and that a significant
effort is needed to improve sanitation coverage in rural areas.

7.          Several critical challenges need to be addressed to ensure that the responsible institutions can
increase and sustain water and sanitation service delivery. In 2017, the World Bank conducted a
comprehensive Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) Poverty Diagnostic in Tanzania18 using the vast
sector data and research available. The main findings were as follows:

            •     Access and failure rate. Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 6 calls for universal access
                  to water and basic sanitation by 2030, a formidable challenge for Tanzania where rural access
                  to improved water supply was at 48 percent in 2015, below the Sub-Saharan African average
                  of 56 percent.19 In 2016, 40 percent of water points were reportedly nonfunctional and 19
                  percent reportedly failed during the first year of operation.20 The poor are disproportionally
                  affected with a high correlation between poverty and lack of access to basic water supply. An
                  in-depth analysis of water point data has shown that technology choice, hydrology,


14
     The first Water Sector Support Project – WSSP-I (P087154).
15 Note: This figure is derived from MoWI’s methodology of estimating access and is not consistent with the findings of recent

surveys such as DHS 2016.
16 The NWIF is an agency under the MoWI which was established though the Water and Sanitation Act No. 12/2009. The NWIF

has the mandate to provide investment support for rural water service provision in areas of mainland Tanzania, which are without
adequate water services. The structure of the NWIF consists of a Board of Trustees, which includes a chairman and four members
from the MoWI, Ministry of Finance and Planning (MoFP), and President’s Office - Regional Administration and Local
Government (PO-RALG). The NWIF is funded by fuel levies.
17 World Bank. 2016. “Implementation Completion Report for the Water Sector Support Project, ICR3737.”
18 World Bank. 2017. “Tanzania WASH Poverty Diagnostic.”
19 World Development Indicators, 2015.
20 World Bank. 2017. “Tanzania WASH Poverty Diagnostic.”




                                                                  3
                management, and location-based factors are to varying degrees responsible for the failures.
                The capacity of local institutions has persistently been ranked as the overarching challenge.

         •      Skewed institutional incentives. The high failure rate of rural water points is also attributed
                to an excessive focus on new construction. Local governments allocate nearly all their
                financial and human resources to the construction of new water points, disregarding the
                essential tasks of monitoring, building capacity, and providing technical backstopping to
                villages with existing water points. The limited management capacity of small, rural, and
                often marginalized communities led to frequent water system breakdowns.

         •      Sanitation remains underfunded. The sanitation sector achieved gains in coverage in recent
                years but still has a long road ahead. Though almost all Tanzanians practice fixed-point
                defecation, over 80 percent of rural Tanzanians rely on rudimentary, unimproved sanitation
                facilities. WASH promotion in schools and hospitals has received limited attention, and 75
                percent of schools lack a functional handwashing facility with available soap and water. Over
                half of health facilities report routine water shortages, which can interfere with hygienic care.

8.          Rural water supply. The sector has benefitted from extensive assessments, surveys, and
research. Five important lessons on rural water supply emerged from WSDP-1:21 (a) limited attention and
resources were devoted to arrangements for water scheme maintenance, repair, and replacement; (b) the
establishment of COWSOs was overlooked and only about 20 percent of villages have a registered
COWSO, of which a majority suffer from acute capacity gaps in tariff setting and financial and operational
management; (c) there were widespread shortcomings in value-for-money water supply service delivery,
lack of quality assurance for design and construction, and poor standardization of designs and components;
(d) unreliable data on scheme functionality and sustainability hampered efforts to address the growing
backlog of nonfunctional schemes; and (e) national-level Ministry of Water and Irrigation (MoWI) staff in
the water sector currently lack the resources and tools to provide the necessary leadership, support, and
training to the regional- and district-level staff to develop their capacity on the technical and management
aspects of water supply.

9.          Water quality. Rural water supply often fails to meet national standards and 57 percent of rural
households are drinking water contaminated with E. coli bacteria. Of these cases, 56 percent was due to
contaminated water points and 44 percent was due to poor hygiene in households.22 With technical
assistance from the World Bank’s Water and Sanitation Program (WSP), WSDP-1 made some progress in
addressing water quality issues by introducing regional laboratories for water testing and implementing
source protection and watershed management activities. However, these remedies are still to be fully
operationalized and water treatment is uncommon in rural areas because it was neither introduced nor
institutionalized.

10.         Sector data and reporting. WSDP-1 was notorious for poor data and infrequent reporting.
However, toward the end of the past phase, the WSDP completed a nationwide water point mapping survey
which provided critical information to the sector. Recognizing that data are critically important for
improving sector performance, the MoWI established a Central Data Management Team (CDMT) in 2015,
leading to considerable improvements in data accuracy and timely reporting. Moving forward, the sector’s
monitoring systems will include data on institutional performance as well as various proxies for
sustainability.



21 World Bank. 2016. “Implementation Completion Report for the Water Sector Support Project, ICR3737.”
22 Ministry of Water. 2015. “Water Quality Report in 30 LGAs.” (473 water samples were collected and tested).




                                                              4
11.         Institutions, incentives, and impediments. The majority of WSDP-1 funds were allocated to
investments in infrastructure, while very limited financial and human resources were allocated to
maintenance, repair, and the local capacity building and technical backstopping deemed vital to the
sustainability of rural water schemes. This can, in part, be attributed to the lack of political incentives,
resources, and technical capacity at the local government levels. Additionally, there is a growing
recognition that the demand-responsive COWSO approach cannot succeed on its own but requires a
technical backstopping entity or mechanism which was not developed under WSDP-1. Over the last decade,
international experience has shown that such backstopping mechanisms, whether private or public, play a
crucial role in ensuring the sustainability of rural water supply. The GoT is committed to focusing sector
efforts on ensuring that institutional arrangements are put in place to provide sustainable rural water services
by (a) promoting the creation and strengthening the capacity of COWSOs to effectively manage water
schemes; (b) supporting local institutions to establish and operationalize backstopping mechanisms23 for
rural water supply; and (c) strengthening the capacity and changing the institutional arrangements for water
supply at all levels of Government to provide more coherent technical and management support to the
districts. The GoT intends to establish a new delivery model anchored on the creation of a rural water
agency (the Agency) whose mission is to provide sustainable water in rural areas through resource
mobilization, project implementation, capacity building, and operation and maintenance of projects with
the active participation of major stakeholders. The Agency is currently planned to be established by the
GoT around the time of Program effectiveness. Within the agency model, COWSOs have the option to
appoint third-party service providers, including the domestic private sector, to operate and maintain rural
water supply schemes. Adopting this option could help address the sector’s capacity and institutional
challenges. A critical step was made in May of 2018 when GoT announced that district (LGA)
responsibilities for water supply will be transferred to a “district-level water agency”. Following this change
district-level government officials responsible for water supply will report directly to the MoWI as opposed
to the President Office – Regional Administration and Local Government (PO-RALG).

12.         Rural sanitation. Only 11 percent of rural Tanzanians presently have access to an improved
latrine and of the 89 percent who do not, the overwhelming majority use a fixed point unimproved facility
while 14 percent defecate in the open. Access to sanitation in schools is poor. In nearly two-thirds of the
districts across the country, only 50 percent of public schools in rural areas have the required number of
drop holes and only 43 percent have functional handwashing stations. Poor access to sanitation was
exacerbated by a cholera outbreak in 2015 where a total of 30,121 cholera cases and 466 deaths (equivalent
to a case fatality rate of 1.5 percent) were reported. The multifaceted nature of the sanitation challenge in
rural Tanzania requires an integrated approach that addresses sanitation and hygiene across communities,
a prerequisite to reduced stunting and improved health.

13.          The GoT has set itself an ambitious goal of ending open defecation and ensuring that every
Tanzanian uses a Choo Bora (improved latrine) and washes hands with soap after toilet use. In 2012, the
GoT launched the National Sanitation Campaign (NSC) that brought renewed efforts to upgrade toilet
facilities. The NSC’s goals were to encourage households to build improved sanitation facilities and make
communities Open Defecation Free (ODF) through a community-led total sanitation (CLTS) approach and
a planned mass media behavior change communication (BCC) campaign. The scale of the NSC was limited.
An evaluation of NSC-1 (2012–2015) found several barriers to implementation, including systematic delays
in disbursement of funds from the national to the district level, lack of GoT funding commitment, weak
supply chains for sanitation hardware, cancelling of the BCC component, and lack of incentives at the local
level resulting in challenges in monitoring NSC outcomes and coordinating NSC activities.24 In response
to these findings, the U.K. Department for International Development (DFID) has financed the development


23 A third-party support structure that provides daily or periodic technical, operational, and/or managerial support to COWSO.
24 More than 50 percent of monitoring and expenditure reports were delayed or not submitted.




                                                                5
of the national BCC campaign, which was informed by formative research25 and rolled out in December
2017 in collaboration with the Ministry of Health, Community Development, Gender, Elderly, and Children
(MoHCDGEC). Given the strict no subsidy policy of the GoT, the CLTS approach is considered the ‘best
fit’ for Tanzania as it was proven effective during NSC-1. Additionally, the BCC campaign is considered
an important complement to the CLTS approach and in parallel the private sector is for the first time getting
involved with a leading international toilet manufacturer starting production of low-cost plastic sanitation
products in Tanzania and planning to establish six distributors in every district of the country. However,
neither the GoT nor DFID have allocated funds for local governments to roll out the NSC at district and
village levels. Hence, one of the current sanitation priorities is to support the districts to roll out the NSC
and create district-level incentives to support and accelerate the campaign.

14.        Private financing. The opportunity to crowd in private finance has been considered during
Program preparation. However, opportunities currently appear limited given the unsustainable track record
of water systems in the country. By improving the technical and managerial performance of the water
schemes, supported by a solid institutional support system at lower levels, the Program will lay the
groundwork for private sector involvement in the future.

C.        Relationship to the CPF and Rationale for Use of Instrument

15.         Alignment with Country Partnership Framework (CPF). The Program is closely aligned
with the 2017 Systematic Country Diagnostic (Report No. 110894-TZ) and the 2018-2022 CPF (Report
No. 121790-TZ) which focus, among other things, on boosting human capital and social inclusion and
modernizing and improving the efficiency of public institutions. Increasing access to improved water
supply and sanitation contributes directly to human capital by protecting early childhood development from
the effects of stunting and environmental enteropathy. The Program supports modernizing and improving
the efficiency of public institutions through support for the establishment of the Agency and strengthening
of other sector institutions. The GoT’s WSDP and the Program are both closely aligned with the World
Bank Group’s twin goals of ending extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity. The Program will
target the poorest rural areas of the country and will also foster inclusion and shared prosperity in Tanzania
through improvements in rural water supply and sanitation services and their associated economic benefits.

16.         Citizen engagement and gender. Citizen engagement is at the core of the institutional reform
process whereby water will be delivered with greatly increased accountability, transparency, local level
participation, and strengthened grievance mechanisms. The Program aims to foster local initiatives to
improve the quality and sustainability of rural water and sanitation service delivery and provide the
necessary assistance and tools to consult and engage with citizens in the sector. Gender equity will be
encouraged by requiring women’s representation in top leadership positions in water management bodies.
In addition, the Program will support the enrollment of female students at the Water Institute26 by
introducing gender balance in the allocation of student loans. Currently, only 27 percent of the student
population are female and many potential students are not able to finance the cost of the education.

17.         A leadership role for women is a natural evolution of their traditional role of providing water
for their families in rural areas. Women will also be encouraged to actively participate in and contribute to
community consultations for water and sanitation investments. Additionally, the Program will improve
sanitation facilities in schools, which will have separate latrine blocks for girls and boys, lockable doors to
ensure privacy, and hand washing facilities to promote menstrual hygiene management and safety of girls




25 Conducted by a consortium of partners including the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine (LSHTM).
26 The Water Institute is an executive agency of the MoWI established to provide quality education, training, and research.




                                                                6
and boys. Through the Program, the schools will be incentivized to have a designated and active menstrual
female counselor to increase awareness of and provide support to girls on menstrual hygiene management.

18.        Climate resilience. The World Bank’s Climate and Disaster Risk Screening assessment
indicates a potential increase in extreme temperatures, severe storms and floods, as well as recurrent
droughts in the future. The Program will support global goods through mitigation measures such as CO2
emissions reductions achieved by promoting options to replace diesel pumping with photovoltaic (PV)
water pumping.27 The project has been designed to build resilience against local climate risks, including
drought and flooding. Climate change adaptation measures will include improved watershed management
and switching rural villages from seasonal to permanent water sources.

19.         Rationale for use of the Program-for-Results (PforR) instrument. There is an opportunity
and a pressing need for a transformational operation addressing the institutional challenges affecting the
sustainability of rural water supply and sanitation in Tanzania. The rationale for the World Bank’s
involvement through the proposed Program is to maintain the progress on sector reforms initiated by the
previous World Bank-financed projects in Tanzania28 and to address persistent challenges regarding rural
water supply, sanitation and hygiene, and sector capacity. The Program supports the World Bank’s
Investing in Early Years Project (P164758) that is under preparation as well as the World Bank’s portfolio
in education in Tanzania, which includes three PforR operations.29 Lessons from Vietnam, Egypt, and
Mexico and from other PforR operations in Tanzania indicate that a results-based approach can be effective
in creating new incentive frameworks for local institutions to deliver better quality and lasting services to
the population and institutionalizing good practices. The sector is already familiar with the results-based
approach through DFID’s Payment by Results (PbR) operation in the water sector. Use of the PforR
instrument will accelerate the achievement of results in the sector and enable a shift in the current focus of
incentives away from constructing water supply infrastructure to providing sustainable water services. The
PforR verification process will ensure that the results achieved are based on sound designs, good-quality
construction, and sustainable operation and maintenance (O&M) practices. A results-based approach also
gives flexibility to mobilize additional funding for the sector from other donors and to harmonize results.
The results-based approach is being used increasingly by the World Bank in Tanzania, with active PforR
lending operations in the education, health, urban, and energy sectors.

20.         Rationale for use of Investment Project Financing (IPF) for Technical and Program
Management Support. The World Bank’s technical, environmental, and fiduciary assessments identified
a number of technical, institutional, program management, governance, and accountability weaknesses in
GoT systems. A key lesson that has emerged from global and national PforR experience is that the result-
based approach is more effective and can be implemented more efficiently when complemented by
substantial technical assistance to support client governments through the change process and strengthen
systems, capabilities, and procedures. Under WSDP-1, GoT’s procurement of technical assistance was
often underfinanced, delayed, and the scope curtailed and diluted. Relying solely on implementing agencies
(IAs) to procure technical assistance under the Program to provide sufficient capacity support of the
required quality and timeliness would constitute a significant risk to achievement of the Program
Development Objective (PDO) and results delivery. The Program will, therefore, address the capacity
constraints through an IPF instrument whereby World Bank funds are used to pay for ‘specific
expenditures’ to fund a set of selected, discrete assistance and capacity-building activities which are
complementary to those undertaken directly by the Government under the Program, and which will support

27 Only for off-grid deep wells; shallow wells may be better served by hand pumps. PV pumps will be used in approximately 50

percent of new investments.
28 River Basin Management and Smallholder Irrigation Improvement Project (P038570), Rural Water Supply and Sanitation

Project (P047762), First and Second Water Sector Support Projects (P87154, P15036).
29 Tanzania Education Program for Results (P147486), Tanzania Education and Skills for Production Jobs Program (P152810),

and Tanzania Secondary Education Quality Improvement Program (P163439).


                                                              7
the achievement of the Program’s objectives. The IPF instrument allows the GoT the flexibility and
predictable financing to address existing capacity gaps and risks that may otherwise undermine the
achievement of Program results. This is similar to the approach taken for the Tanzania Education Program
for Results (P147486).

II.     PROGRAM DESCRIPTION

A.      Government Program (WSDP)

21.        WSDP-2 runs from 2016 to 2019. WSDP-2 is a national program that is specifically intended to
strengthen sector institutions for integrated WRM and improve access to water supply and sanitation
services across Tanzania. WSDP-2 will be followed by the WSDP-3 from 2020 to 2025. Table 1 provides
an overview of the program. WSDP-2 includes the following components:

        •     Water Resources Management (WRM). To ensure availability of water for socioeconomic
              development and environmental sustainability;
        •     Rural Water Supply. To provide improved quality and quantity of drinking water for the
              rural population, sustained through improved district-level capacity, effective local water user
              entities, private sector participation, and integration of sanitation in the design and
              implementation of rural water projects;
        •     Urban Water Supply and Sewerage. To improve and sustain quality and quantity of water
              supply and sanitation services for urban populations managed by financially autonomous and
              commercially viable Urban Water and Sewerage Authorities while providing efficient and
              cost-effective services;
        •     Sanitation and Hygiene. To provide access to improved sanitation and hygiene facilities to
              75 percent of the population in rural and urban settings by 2019; and
        •     Program Delivery Support. To provide facilitative services that support all other
              components to deliver planned outputs and expected outcomes.

22.    In tandem with the Sanitation and Hygiene component of WSDP-2, the second phase of the NSC
(NSC-2) will target the achievement of the sanitation SDGs with a stronger focus on BCC. School Water
and Sanitation and Hygiene (SWASH) is a key component of the NSC which has been expanded under
WSDP-2 to cover primary schools.

                                Table 1. Water Sector Development Program

        Component                                  Main Goals/Targets                       Funding Needs
  1. WRM                        •   Strengthen the capacity of Basin Water Boards           US$800 million
                                •   Build/rehabilitate 23 dams
                                •   Improve the quantity and quality of WRM data
  2. Rural Water Supply         •   Install 76,000 water points serving 19 million people   US$860 million
  3. Urban Water Supply and     • Provide piped water supply to 2.2 million new people      US$1,300 million
  Sewerage                        in Dar es Salaam and 3.1 million people elsewhere
  4. Sanitation and Hygiene     • Increase improved sanitation coverage to 75 percent       US$150 million
  5. Program Delivery Support   • Expand the use of the water sector management             US$110 million
                                  information system (MIS)

23.    The total financial requirement for WSDP-2 is US$3.3 billion, of which US$1.4 billion has been
pledged mainly from the GoT, the World Bank, and DFID, including the Program.


                                                        8
B.      Program Development Objective and Key Results

24.    The PDO is to increase access to rural water supply and sanitation services in participating districts
and strengthen the capacity of select sector institutions to sustain service delivery.

25.    The proposed key results indicators for the Program are as follows:

        •     Number of people with access to an improved water supply (male and female) - Corporate
              Results Indicator
        •     Number of people with access to an improved sanitation facility (male and female) -Corporate
              Results Indicator
        •     Number of sustainably functioning water points
        •     Number of villages that achieve and sustain community-wide sanitation
        •     Number of participating districts submitting accurate and complete sector M&E data


26.   The complete tables of the Results Framework and intermediary results indicators are provided in
Annex 2.

27.     The estimated number of beneficiaries in the 17 regions under the Program is as follows:
        •     4,000,000 people benefitting from improved sanitation
        •     3,000,000 people benefitting from improved water supply
        •     1,250 community wide sanitation (CWS) villages
        •     1,500 schools benefitting from improved sanitation facilities and support to their O&M


C.      PforR Program Scope

28.         Lessons from the water sector and across the Tanzanian portfolio indicate that large national
programs can be challenging to manage and their quality difficult to ensure, especially during the initial
years of implementation. The Program is designed as the first phase of a long-term engagement in the
sector, with nationwide scale up to follow, based on successful first phase implementation. The Program
will support the Government in implementing a part of WSDP-2, specifically supporting the targets under
Components 2 (rural water supply), 4 (sanitation and hygiene), and 5 (program delivery support) in the
geographic area covering 17 out of Tanzania’s 26 regions. As detailed in Annex 10, the 17 regions have
been selected against the criteria of low access to improved water supply and sanitation, high stunting rates,
and high poverty rates. All 86 rural districts in the 17 selected regions will participate in the Program. DFID
will cover the remaining regions for water supply, and the Government, through its own budget, the NSC
and the National Water Investment Fund, can allocate additional funds to the regions outside the scope of
the World Bank financed Program.

29.         Theory of change. First, to address the dual challenge of increasing and sustaining access to
improved rural water services, the Program will promote a sector-integrated approach with incentives
provided at village, district, and national levels. Under the PforR, both the rehabilitation of existing
nonfunctional water points, as well as the construction of new water schemes, will be promoted through a
strengthened project cycle focusing on improving the technical quality of investments, as well as enhancing
community engagement and ownership. Additionally, districts will be incentivized to sustain the
functionality of existing water points. Second, the Program will address the rural sanitation challenges in
an integrated way through the achievement of CWS villages that facilitate the sanitation health outcomes


                                                      9
including stunting. In the targeted villages, open defecation will be addressed through the CLTS approach.
A national BCC campaign coupled with significant investments in supply-side strengthening will move
village households up the sanitation ladder to improved sanitation. The Program will also incentivize
improvements in household hygiene practices and sanitation in schools. Third, the challenge of providing
sustainable water and sanitation services in rural Tanzania requires an institutional structure to enable
proper policies, funding, implementation, management, and monitoring of services. The Program’s theory
of change is illustrated in Figure 2.

30.         The Program will strengthen institutions and service delivery models, including the
establishment and operationalization of the Agency. Learning from global and Tanzania-specific
experiences and drawing from the theory of change, the Program will have the following three closely
interrelated results areas that are consistent with and support WSDP-2 and other DP activities.

                                         Figure 2. Theory of Change




Results Area 1: Sustainable access to improved water services in rural areas (US$105 million
equivalent)

31.         This results area will be implemented by the MoWI and PO-RALG and support improvements
in sustainable access to water supply services in the participating districts by:

        •    Increasing coverage of well-designed, properly constructed, and well-managed rural water
             supply services that meet community needs in the selected districts. This includes a
             restructuring of MoWI’s quality assurance and quality control mechanisms;

        •    Rehabilitating and repairing nonfunctional water points. The Program will incentivize
             rehabilitation and it is envisaged that the districts will at the onset prioritize the rehabilitation
             of dilapidated water infrastructure; and

        •    Sustaining existing water points to ensure that they remain functional and provide appropriate
             service levels in terms of access, distance, and quantity of water provided. This results area
             will ensure that new sustainability measures, including female participation, are


                                                      10
             institutionalized at the design, construction, and commencement stages for new water
             infrastructure and results area 3 will ensure that the same standards are applied to the existing
             functioning water schemes.

Results Area 2: Increased access to improved sanitation services in rural areas (US$75 million
equivalent)

32.         Under this results area, the Program will address the rural sanitation challenges using an
integrated approach that incentivizes the achievement and sustaining of CWS villages which will contribute
to the Program’s health and stunting outcomes. In the villages targeted for CWS, open defecation will be
addressed through a combination of CLTS activities and the national BCC campaign, with supply-side
private sector strengthening activities. These efforts are also envisaged to move rural households up the
sanitation ladder to improved sanitation and hygiene. In parallel, the Program will incentivize
improvements in household hygiene practices and increase access to sanitation and hygiene in public
schools, including menstrual hygiene. This results area will be implemented by the MoHCDGEC, PO-
RALG, and Ministry of Education Science, and Technology (MoEST).

33.         As under WSDP-1, the districts will implement the NSC and the Program’s technical support
(IPF) will encourage, support, and strengthen the implementation of the planned CLTS and supply-side
strengthening activities through capacity development for key activities including sanitation demand
creation, progress monitoring, and regular follow-ups. The Program will support and encourage local
private sector suppliers and service providers in the marketing and installation of local products, including
plastic pans, user-friendly handwashing stations, and other appropriate products and services for low-cost
upgrading of sanitation and hygiene facilities. Collaboration will be encouraged with local financial
institutions to increase the affordability of sanitation and hygiene products to rural communities.

Results Area 3: Strengthen the capacity of sector institutions to sustain service delivery in rural areas
(US$150 million equivalent)

34.         This results area will be implemented by the MoWI, MoHCDGEC and PO-RALG. At the
system level, Program activities will be strategically designed to enhance the capacity of the national,
regional, and local governments to monitor, ensure quality and improve and sustain water service delivery,
and to strengthen environmental management supervision and mitigation of impacts.

35.         The National WSDP (2006) directed the responsibilities for the O&M of rural water schemes to
be transferred to COWSOs, which are supposed to be established for each rural water scheme. However,
currently only approximately 20 percent of villages (2,880 out of approximately 16,000) have COWSOs.
A first step to enhance the delivery models for rural water supply is to promote the broader creation of
COWSOs and to support their professionalization so that they can operate and maintain the services more
efficiently, to encourage greater representation of women in management bodies, as well as delegate the
O&M functions to a professional third party (an NGO, local private operator, etc.) under their oversight. A
range of O&M models can be considered to improve service sustainability, including clustering and
contracting out O&M services to private sector service providers or forming a water trust that can
subsequently provide technical and managerial support to each COWSO.

36.         The districts will be incentivized to improve the O&M of water supply by registering COWSOs
for existing schemes, improving the financial sustainability of rural water supply, implementing simple
water treatment systems, and establishing backstopping support for COWSOs. The Program will prepare
the sector to leverage private sector participation and investments that improve service levels and drive
efficiency by, among other things, increasing the creditworthiness of rural water schemes. The accuracy




                                                     11
and completeness of monitoring and evaluation (M&E) data will be enhanced for both water and sanitation
to enable the sector to track performance and inform planning.

37.        The Program will support the establishment and operationalization of the Agency, the
centerpiece of the GoT’s new delivery model for the rural water sector. In the districts supported by the
Program, the Agency will be incentivized to work with districts to institutionalize a quality assurance and
quality control protocol, and work with COWSOs to facilitate the establishment of a support mechanism
for management and O&M of rural water supply schemes. The Program aims to influence the establishment
and early operations of the Agency, embedding a core focus on service sustainability.

38.     A more detailed description of the Program is provided in Annex 1.

Financing and Program Costs

39.     The Government’s national budget is expected to allocate US$325 million from the National
Water Investment Fund to support the Program area over the next six years. In the 17 regions
supported by the Program, the total scale of the financing required to implement the Program for rural water
and sanitation is estimated to be US$740 million, as shown in Table 2. Within this context, the GoT seeks
an IDA credit at a funding level of US$350 million. This financing will form a part of the overall national
program budget. This is an aggregate figure; each district does not have a set allocation under the Program.

                                 Table 2. Program Financing (US$, millions)
                        Source                          Amount                 % of Total
           Government                                    325                       44
           IDA                                           350                       47
           Other DPs                                      65                       9
           Total Program Financing                       740                      100

Other Development Partners’ Activities

40.     In 2016, DFID allocated US$102 million to WSDP-2 through a PbR approach with the aim of
improving the number of functioning water points through two output disbursement-linked indicators
(DLIs) that reward the districts for water points kept in operation and for additional newly constructed water
points. The PbR covers all the rural districts in Tanzania, with some US$65 million estimated to be spent
in the Program regions as parallel financing. To date, disbursement under the PbR has been limited, with
approximately US$1.3 million disbursed for 2017. The current spending period is up to 2023.

41.      To maximize impact, DFID and the World Bank have aligned their respective rural water supply
DLIs (DLI 1 and DLI 2 for the World Bank) and associated verification protocols in the 17 regions where
the PbR and the PforR will overlap. This approach allows for future scale-up to other regions in Tanzania
using both World Bank and other donor funds. With regard to disbursement, the Program has incorporated
the following four measures to address the challenges faced by the DFID PbR and to ensure adequate cash
flows for the IAs: (a) a 20.7 percent advance will be transferred to the IAs upon Program effectiveness; (b)
the proposed fund flow is simple and quick and has proven successful under the World Bank’s other PforR
operations in Tanzania; (c) the disbursement is spread across eight DLIs as opposed to DFID’s two; and (d)
the unit costs have been carefully set to ensure that the payouts match the anticipated level of investments
by the IAs.

42.     DFID is also supporting the GoT to deliver a nationwide BCC campaign to ensure adoption and
sustainability of improved sanitation and hygiene practices in Tanzania using a behavior-centered design
approach. Project Clear, the DFID-supported consortium that includes the London School of Hygiene and


                                                     12
Tropical Medicine (LSHTM), is leading the design and supporting the delivery of the BCC campaign which
will also be supported through the IPF component of the Program. The Program will support
implementation of the campaign at the district level.

43.      United States Agency for International Development (USAID), through its Improving WASH
Evidence-based Decision-making Program, supports the development of a national WASH web portal, the
development of a user-friendly manual for National Sanitation Management Information System (NSMIS),
the hiring of ICT staff to strengthen the national help desk, Data Quality Assurance in 10 regions, and the
printing and distribution of 16,000 registers for collection and storage of data at sub-village level. The
Program will support and complement this initiative, incentivizing the MoHCDGEC to strengthen the
accuracy and completeness of sector M&E data and reporting.

D.         Disbursement-Linked Indicators and Verification Protocols

44.        The DLIs are presented in Table 3, with further details provided in Annex 3.

                                     Table 3. Disbursement-Linked Indicators
                               DLI                                   Rationale for Selection of DLIs
      Results Area 1: Sustainable access to improved water services in rural areas
      DLI 1. Number of people with access to an        • Access to reliable, functioning water supply is low in
      improved water supply                                 the Program areas.
      DLI 2: Number of sustainably functioning         • The GoT’s focus has been on constructing new water
      water points                                          supply schemes rather than sustaining existing
                                                            schemes.
      Results Area 2: Increased access to improved sanitation services in rural areas
      DLI 3. Number of people with access to an        • Access to improved sanitation and handwashing
      improved sanitation facility                          practices is low in the Program areas and challenges
      DLI 4. Number of public primary schools with          exist in ensuring adequate access to improved
      access to improved sanitation and hygiene             sanitation and hygiene in schools, which are safe and
      facilities                                            gender sensitive.
      DLI 5. Number of villages that achieve and
      sustain community-wide sanitation status
      Results Area 3: Strengthen the capacity of sector institutions to sustain service delivery in rural areas
      DLI 6. Number of villages with a COWSO with • At the village level, there is a need to support the
      improved O&M capacity for water supply                O&M capacity. Core gaps include lack of legal status,
      services                                              inadequate tariffs structure, and lack of alternatives
      DLI 7. Number of participating districts              from the community-managed delivery model.
      submitting accurate and complete sector M&E      • Data quality within the national M&E systems is weak
      data                                                  and requires sustained improvement.
      DLI 8. Agency established and operationalized    • The GoT requires support to establish, resource, and
                                                            operate the new Agency on time.


45.     The Program’s incentive model consists of eight DLIs grouped into three results areas across six
disbursement periods. DLIs have been developed according to the following criteria: (a) importance for
successful Program implementation; (b) potential to incentivize improvements within the Government
program; and (c) practicality and cost effectiveness of verification.

46.        The three results areas and corresponding DLIs are:




                                                          13
        •    DLIs 1–2: Sustainable access to improved water services in rural areas. These DLIs
             disburse according to the results achieved by districts in increasing access to improved rural
             WASH. DLI 1 rewards the districts for supplying people in rural areas with water, by
             rehabilitating, expanding or building new improved functional water points. DLI 1 is designed
             such that the districts have a financial incentive to prioritize rehabilitation and value-for-
             money/quality investments which reliably provide a sufficient volume of chlorinated water.
             Through the definition of improved water points, the DLI further incentivizes quality
             assurance, quality control, and female involvement in the COWSOs’ leadership. DLI 2
             rewards the districts for sustaining their entire inventory of improved functioning water points
             (including those constructed or rehabilitated under DL1). Through this DLI, the districts are
             incentivized to constantly maintain their functioning water points and repair broken-down
             systems.

        •    DLIs 3-5: Increased access to improved sanitation services in rural areas. DLI 3, DLI 4,
             and DLI 5 are closely interlinked through a stepped approach that is designed to increase and
             sustain access to sanitation and improve hygiene practices in rural Tanzania. This approach
             rewards districts for moving rural households up the sanitation ladder to improved sanitation
             through strengthening the supply and marketing of improved sanitation products and services.
             Through the definition of improved sanitation facilities, districts are specifically incentivized
             to improve sanitation and hygiene in schools and address menstrual hygiene. Achievement of
             DLI 3 and DLI 4 contributes to the achievement of CWS villages (DLI 5).

        •    DLI 6-8: Strengthen the capacity of sector institutions to sustain service delivery in rural
             areas. DLI 6 is focused on developing the capacity of water and sanitation institutions at the
             district level to enable them to carry out their mandates effectively. The DLI will be
             considered fulfilled by the following: officially registering COWSOs, improving COWSO
             financial management and record keeping, achieving a sustainable operating cost ratio for
             COWSOs, improving water quality, ensuring female participation in leadership positions, and
             establishing local backstopping mechanisms for rural water supply. The fundamental
             objective of this DLI is to enhance institutional strengthening of the districts, resulting in
             sustainable, long-term improvements in the management of rural water supply. DLI 7
             disburses according to results achieved in strengthening the accuracy and completeness of
             sector M&E data and gradually introduces core sustainability indicators. DLI 8 supports the
             establishment and operationalization of the Agency according to specific milestones, thus
             ensuring that sustainability becomes its core institutional focus.

Verification Protocols

47.      The results reported by the MoWI, as achieved under the Program, will be verified through a paper
audit, physical inspection, and phone calls that test the accuracy and quality of results claimed. In
accordance with good audit practice, physical verification will take place against a sampling framework.
The Independent Verification Agent (IVA) will prepare a Results Verification Report which will be shared
with the MoWI and the World Bank. The Results Verification Report will be used to determine the amount
of the eligible disbursement to be made based on the results achieved. Further details on the verification
process for each DLI are included in Annex 3.

E.      Capacity Building and Institutional Strengthening
48.    In light of the challenges identified and lessons learned in WSDP-1, the Program is designed to use
a combination of results-based disbursements to incentivize performance and technical support during




                                                     14
implementation. The key capacity-building activities, which will be delivered according to the capacity
development plan are described here and in further detail in Annex 1.

49.      Incentivizing institutional improvements through DLIs. DLIs are used to incentivize improved
management and quality of implementation, providing a critical complement to the delivery of
infrastructure. Some of the challenges identified during the implementation of WSDP-1 included high unit
costs and substandard construction. Limits on per capita costs are being used through the DLIs to incentivize
the districts to prioritize areas where schemes can be rehabilitated or extended, and where new schemes can
use more cost-effective designs. The DLIs will incentivize the districts to ensure appropriate designs,
quality assurance of both the design and subsequent construction, value for money, and standardization and
increase transparency and accountability and management capacity at the village level. They will also
improve monitoring and control of environmental impacts through a comprehensive regulatory framework,
capacity building and training, and monitoring tools. The DLI framework contains specific incentives to
strengthen the districts’ institutional capacity to ensure sustainability and to ensure the assets are properly
designed and constructed in the first place.

50.     Technical support (US$ 20 million equivalent). Although the Technical Assessment, the
Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA), and the Fiduciary Systems Assessment (FSA)
carried out by the World Bank found the GoT systems to be fundamentally sound, a number of capacity
gaps and institutional deficiencies have been identified that require addressing. The Program will fund
technical support activities to address these gaps and deficiencies. The below specific support activities will
be implemented through the Program’s IPF-funding window, each managed by the responsible IA.
         (a)    Strategic Program Support Consultant (Responsible IA: MoWI). To optimize and fast-
                track Program implementation, this technical support package will assist the GoT in (a)
                Program coordination and local-level technical support for the implementation of the PforR
                Program approach; (b) undertaking of planning, systems strengthening, capacity building, and
                financial management improvement activities aiming to improve the overall quality of rural
                water supply and sanitation services; (c) establishment and institutionalization of quality
                assurance and value-for-money procedures for water supply, sanitation and hygiene activities
                including cross-learning between districts; (d) M&E activities including impact evaluations
                and qualitative assessments of Program results; (e) the establishment and operationalization
                of the Agency; and (f) technical support for the procurement and supervision of the additional
                identified technical support activities under the Program. This support will focus on building
                the capacity of the GoT staff and systems at all levels to sustain the gains beyond the end of
                this support.
         (b) M&E System Enhancement (MoWI). This activity will support delivery of DLI 7 through
             strengthening the capacity of the MoWI, MoHCDGEC, and PO-RALG to collect, consolidate,
             and use real-time data on service delivery for planning and monitoring Program activities.
         (c)    Field-level Leadership Development Initiative (FiLDI) (MoWI). Building on the success
                of Dar es Salaam Water and Sewerage Corporation’s participation in the FiLDI (see box 1.1
                in Annex 1), the Program will facilitate a similar low-cost leadership and change management
                exercise for key officials in the rural water and sanitation subsectors.
         (d) Independent Verification Agent (MoWI). A detailed verification protocol will be
             developed and a qualified IVA will be engaged throughout the Program period.
         (e)    Behavior Communication Change Campaign (MoHCDGEC). The Program will fund the
                extension of the BCC campaign for the NSC.30


30 The IPF will not fund airtime for the BCC campaign.




                                                         15
            (f)    Water Institute and the Drilling and Dam Construction Agency. The Program will support
                   the Water Institute in increasing the human capacity of the water sector, and in addition
                   support training, technical advisory services and acquisition of the relevant equipment for the
                   Drilling and Dam Construction Agency.
            (g) Specific Technical Support (MoWI). Support to the districts in improving borehole drilling
                supervision, engineering designs, and standardization of equipment, including the provision
                of simple water treatment applications.

III.        PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION
A.          Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
51.     The Program will largely be implemented through the systems established for WSDP-2. The
exception is for rural water supply, which is expected to be implemented by the Agency. The Program will
directly support the MoHCDGEC in the execution of the NSC, provide technical support for the
implementation of the Program, and assist in the timely establishment of the Agency. It is anticipated, that
the Agency will be responsible for development, management, and ensuring sustainability of rural water
supply and sanitation services. The Agency will operate at the national, regional and district levels under
the MoWI and would be formed under the Executive Agency Act Cap. 245 (R.E. 2002) or through
amendment of the Water Supply and Sanitation Act, No. 12 of 2009.

52.     As the national ‘Program owner’, the MoWI will coordinate the implementation of the
Program, through a national steering committee comprising the MoWI, MoHCDGEC, MoEST, PO-
RALG, MoFP, and the Agency. Fully empowered teams will be established nationally to monitor and
support implementation. Activities at the regional and district levels will be implemented through the
Regional Water and Sanitation Teams (RWSTs) and the Council Water and Sanitation Teams (CWSTs)
and coordinated by the district health officers and district water engineers. The RWST and CWST are
formal structures at the regional and district levels responsible for the coordination of the WSDP. The
Program’s overall institutional arrangement is illustrated in Figure 3.

53.      The MoWI will implement activities to achieve sustainable access to improved water supply.
For rural water supply, the newly established “district water units”31 will be the main executing entities and
report directly to the MoWI and possibly the Agency in the future. At the Regional Secretariats (RSs) level,
the “regional water unit” will be responsible for coordination, supervision, and technical support to the
districts on achievement of the DLIs and for assuring the quality of implementation and report directly to
MoWI and possibly the Agency in the future.

54.      At the national level, the MoHCDGEC will lead the implementation of the sanitation and
hygiene promotion activities in coordination with PO-RALG. The districts will be the main executing
entities with support from the RSs and the MoHCDGEC. The districts will be responsible for the
procurement and construction of facilities in dispensaries and health centers.

55.      SWASH will be implemented by the MoEST in coordination with PO-RALG. The districts
will be the main executing entities with support from the RSs and the MoEST. The districts will coordinate
and supervise the SWASH activities but responsibility for procurement will be assigned to the schools
through funds transfers to their accounts. This approach was used successfully under WSDP-1. The
experience from 11 African countries shows that community delegation of school construction has been the




31
     The official names for these units have not yet been established.


                                                                  16
most effective.32 This experience also shows that the quality of the works done by local contractors is
heavily dependent on the efficiency of the technical supervision and community ownership.

                                         Figure 3. Institutional Arrangements




  VPO-DoE




56.         PO-RALG supervises and coordinates the implementation of water supply and sanitation
services in rural areas. PO-RALG’s 26 RSs are administratively placed between the national ministries
and the 185 districts. The RSs are responsible for monitoring, supervising, and providing technical
backstopping and capacity building to the districts. At the local level, the districts execute and coordinate
district-level WASH activities through the District CWST. District responsibilities include establishing,
regulating, and supporting COWSOs; implementing the NSC; and coordinating the implementation of
WASH in schools and health facilities.

57.      Strengthened institutional capacity to manage the WSDP will be delivered through both the
MoWI and the MoHCDGEC. Activities related to rural water will be implemented by the MoWI and those
related to sanitation and hygiene by the MoHCDGEC.

58.      The Vice-President’s Office, Division of Environment (VPO-DoE) is responsible for the
preparation of the Environmental Management Act (EMA) regulations, jointly with key National
Environmental Management Council (NEMC) members, and in close consultation with all relevant
ministries, agencies, districts, and nongovernment stakeholders. VPO-DoE will also be responsible for the
environmental inspectors, which will be placed at national, regional and district levels for the execution of
their functions.

59.     The Agency. The GoT is expected to establish the Agency which is intended to assume PO-
RALG’s responsibilities relating to developing, managing, and ensuring sustainability of rural water supply
and sanitation services. The Program will incentivize and assist in the establishment and operationalization


32 World Bank. 2009. “School Construction Strategies for Universal Primary Education in Africa, Should Communities be

Empowered to Build Their Schools?”


                                                            17
of the Agency, which will progressively assume responsibilities from PO-RALG. The transition has already
commenced with the planned establishment of the district and regional water units.

60.      Independent Verification Agent (IVA). The IVA role is to provide independent confirmation of
the results reported by the districts through the MoWI. The Internal Auditor General (IAG) has been
selected to verify Program results using protocols agreed with the World Bank. This choice is based on
IAG’s role as an institution with both the independence and the mandate to conduct audits at the district
level. IAG has good experience in acting as the IVA for the Tanzania Strengthening Primary Health Care
for Results Program (P152736) since 2015 and can subcontract verification activities for which it does not
have the technical expertise in-house.

61.     Experience sharing. To facilitate knowledge sharing and problem solving, there will be a biannual
meeting at the management level to review progress, identify and propose remedies for any weaknesses,
and identify and propose modalities for scaling up successes beyond the Program.

62.      Midterm review (MTR). The MTR will be an opportunity to assess the status of the program
implementation. Such review shall include an assessment of the following: (i) overall progress in
implementation; (ii) results of monitoring and evaluation activities; (iii) progress on procurement and
disbursement; (iv) implementation arrangements; and (v) the need to make any adjustments to the
Operation and reallocate funds to improve performance. The MTR will be in addition to the annual
verification exercise and is expected to be held in mid-2021.

B.       Results Monitoring and Evaluation
63.      The CDMT has one of the most comprehensive water point data sets in the Africa region with over
90,000 georeferenced observations. The Program will utilize and strengthen the WSDP’s existing M&E
system to include additional indicators on service provision and sustainability and improve the accuracy
and completeness of the data reported by the participating districts, including the results submitted for
verification under the Program.

64.      The collection and reporting of data will take place through MIS including the National Water Point
Mapping System (WPMS), the NSMIS, and the Education Management Information System (EMIS),
through which data relating to SWASH will be collected. Results reporting will take place on an annual
cycle linked to the national planning and budgeting process, and the reports will be made publicly available.
The World Bank will work closely with the MoWI to assess the potential to adopt Sistema de Informacion
de Agua y Saneamiento Rural (SIASAR) and the World Bank’s global water indicators.33

65.     The Program will require several of the results indicators to be disaggregated by gender (Annex 2).
This will facilitate gender-related planning and management of the Program.

C.       Disbursement Arrangements
66.      The DLIs for the Program are provided in Annex 3, together with the disbursement amounts for
each of the DLIs and the protocols for their verification. Funds will pass from the central level to the districts
in the 86 participating rural districts. Fund allocations will be made according to the achievements under
the Program. These funds will be used to finance the WSDP, including water supply, sanitation, hygiene
promotion, and institutional strengthening. It will be the responsibility of the districts in each of the 86
recipient districts to plan and execute activities and investments in accordance with the WSDP guidelines.
The RSs will receive around 2 percent of the allocation for supervision, coordination, and technical


33 Proposed indicators drawn from ‘Toward a Universal Measure of What Works on Rural Water Supply: Rural Water Metrics

Global Framework’.


                                                           18
assistance purposes. For national-level activities, funding will be allocated directly to the related ministries.
Four Project Holding Pooled Accounts will be opened at the Bank of Tanzania for the following line
ministries: MoWI, MoHCDGEC, and MoEST.

67.     The implementing line ministries and the Strategic Program Support Consultant (SPSC) will
support the districts in measuring progress using the existing M&E system and will collate the results to
assess progress in achieving the DLIs. The results across the Program region will be aggregated as the basis
for meeting the DLIs. Once they are satisfied with the accuracy of the reporting, respective ministries will
present evidence of the DLI achievement to IAG which, as the IVA, is tasked with verifying the results. To
validate the disbursement request submitted by the MoWI, the IVA will verify the reported results against
all DLIs.

68.     Advance payment. Given the financial resource constraints currently experienced under the
existing program (WSDP) and the significant up-front infrastructure investments needed before funds can
be disbursed through the DLIs, an advance of up to US$72.5 million will be available when the operation
becomes effective. The advance is critical for district cash flow purposes. With respect to Results Area 2,
the NSC is expected to have gained a national momentum by effectiveness and the districts will immediately
need sufficient resources for field implementation. The advance has been tailored to the absorption capacity
and the specific cash flow requirements for each of the implementing entities.

IV.     ASSESSMENT SUMMARY

A.      Technical

69.      Given the considerable challenges of providing sustainable access to rural water and sanitation
service in Sub-Saharan Africa, the WSDP is technically assessed as a reasonably sound program to deliver
rural water supply and sanitation investments in Tanzania. A key program element that requires
strengthening is the sustainability of investments in the sector. The following summarizes the Technical
Assessment of the WSDP.

70.     Technical soundness of the WSDP. The main technical observations are as follows and described
in more detail in Annex 4.

        •     Water supply. The COWSOs’ capacity gaps and the village-level delivery model for rural
              water supply remain the major challenges that need to be addressed at scale by reshaping local
              institutional procedures and the prevailing incentive structures. Water supply investments
              mainly support capital investment in new water supply schemes. Insufficient priority is given
              to sustaining existing schemes that often fall into a state of disrepair. The failure of water
              points can be due to minor faults such as broken taps or more serious issues including borehole
              failure. In the areas targeted by the Program, 65 percent of water points are nonfunctional.
              Where water points are functional, only 60 percent supply sufficient water. With regard to
              new construction and rehabilitation, measures are necessary to enable institutions to provide
              quality assurance, standardization, and enforce value-for-money considerations. Another
              critical issue involves the COWSOs’ capacity in financial and operational management. These
              challenges often originate from the tariff, and range from limitations in the beneficiaries’
              ability to pay but also from the COWSOs’ ability to charge a reasonability tariff to cover their
              operational and maintenance costs.

        •     Sanitation and hygiene. There is insufficient focus on creating demand for household
              sanitation and improving the supply of affordable and locally available sanitation and hygiene
              products. Although soap and handwashing facilities are often available at the household level


                                                       19
             and people are aware of the importance of washing hands with soap, knowledge does not
             translate into handwashing practice. There is a clear need to strengthen sanitation and hygiene
             behavior change. Coverage of sanitation facilities in schools is often insufficient and facilities
             are typically unclean and poorly maintained.

        •    Institutionally, both national and regional-/district-level staff show limited leadership and
             motivation to fully deliver on their responsibilities, and the coordination of the NSC at the
             district level is weak due to a lack of NSC coordination staff and coordination mechanisms.
             A key challenge is the lack of funds allocated to sanitation and delays in disbursement of
             funds to the district level. From the national to regional and district levels, there is a need for
             additional technical support. The delivery mechanism for rural water supply is also weak with
             varying levels of technical capacity at the key local executing institutions. The GoT is
             addressing this through its initiative to establish an agency for rural water supply (the Agency)
             to support the development, management, and ensuring sustainability of rural water supply
             services.

Program Expenditure Framework

71.     Tanzania has prioritized development projects over recurrent spending. On average, development
spending has been allocated about 40 percent of total government budget public expenditure since FY2015-
16. There has been a shift toward prioritizing development projects compared to the previous administration
which allocated an average of 4-5 percent of GDP to development projects as compared to around 16-17
percent of GDP for recurrent expenditures. The increased development spending has been possible due to
controlled recurrent expenditures, increased domestic revenue collection, and increased borrowing
especially on non-concessional terms. On the other hand, the non-salary recurrent spending (other charges
(OC)) has been reduced to half in the last two years. All of this points to the GoT’s commitment to improved
development spending while maintaining fiscal discipline.

72.      The water sector continues to be among the GoT’s priority sectors with higher budget allocations
in recent years, but budget execution is very weak. Over the past five years, the water sector has received
an average of 2.5 percent of GDP. In the past two years, the allocation to the water sector has increased,
most notably in FY2016-17 when the entire sector budget increased by about 79 percent. Despite the
significant increase in budget allocations, the sector has experienced low budget execution, resulting in low
actual spending. Actual water sector expenditures over the last five years have been around 40 percent of
the sector approved budgets. Most notably, in 2016/17 despite large increases in the entire sector budget
(to about TZS 1 trillion), execution rate was only 27 percent of the approved budget. The limited spending
on the water sector is largely due to shortfalls in released budgeted funds or delays in disbursements,
especially for development projects.

73.     The largest share of the total water sector budget and actual spending is directed to development
projects. On average, 90 percent of the total water sector budget and expenditures in the last five years has
been directed to development spending. Salaries and wages (personal emoluments) account for a small
share of the sector budget and expenditure (an average of four percent).

74.     While recurrent spending is a small share of the entire sector budget, it has shown a consistent
upward trend (in both allocations and actual spending) compared to sector development spending which
has been relatively unpredictable. Likewise, the sector recurrent budget has shown a better execution rate
compared to the sector development budget. On average between FY 2010/11 and FY 2017/18, 51 percent
of the sector development budget has been funded through foreign sources, with local financing of the
sector budget growing. Approved estimates of FY 2017/18 show local funding to the sector budget
increased by 26 percent while foreign funding declined by 55 percent (compared to the previous year


                                                     20
approved estimates). The MoWI is allocated the largest share (an average of about 85 percent) of the entire
sector spending, followed by the districts (14 percent) and regions (around one percent) over the last five
years.

75.      Rural water sector - allocation and expenditures. Rural water projects continue to receive the
largest share of the WSDP. Between FY2013/14 and FY2017/18, rural water projects received over 40
percent of the entire WSDP budget and actual spending. Despite high allocations, funding to the rural water
sector has been unpredictable. Trends over the last five years indicate an erratic allocation and spending in
the rural water component with a 27 percent decline in FY 2017/18 approved estimates. Actual expenditures
in the component have consistently been below the approved estimate.

Main Challenges
76.      Despite the Government’s clear effort to increase spending in key sectors, including water, budget
execution has faced challenges, including securing project financing, achieving domestic revenue targets,
and addressing high payment of arrears. As a result, actual spending in the sector, particularly in the rural
water supply component, has fallen short of the approved budgets. This also indicates the actual capacity
to use funds particularly in the rural water sector where this is more acute.

77.      The IFMIS data does not provide enough details to analyses actual release of funds to the rural
water component of the sector, and thus there is not enough evidence to assess capacity to utilize funds.
This will pose challenges in identifying budget utilization gaps at the different levels of government from
the central government to the districts which is important for the PforR program implementation. The IFMS
system needs to be modified to incorporate this information going forward.

78.      To avoid service delivery disruptions, it is important to ensure adequate levels of non-salary
recurrent expenditures, while controlling overall recurrent spending. The GoT will also need to monitor the
significant level of debt and debt service, leveraging more concessional financing. The share of the foreign
funding to the budget has been fluctuating and fund utilization has varied from year to year.

Rationale for DLI Allocations

79.      Taking the lessons from the technical assessment, the Program is designed in such a way that it
allocates major parts of the funds for rural water infrastructure through institutional DLIs (DLI 2, 6, 7 and
8). With this approach, local implementing entities are highly incentivized to prioritize core capacity
building and institutional strengthening activities. The unit costs of the DLIs favor institutional
strengthening over infrastructure investment; rural supply infrastructure (DLI 1) can only be fully financed
or accelerated when critical steps on building the sustainability of rural water supply have been achieved.
The incentive structure around rural sanitation is different - the unit costs here more directly match the cost
of the infrastructure.

Results Framework and M&E

80.      Achievements against the WSDP-2 PDO are measured through the results monitoring framework
developed for the program. The institutional arrangements for monitoring are clearly defined for the sector,
although there is a need to strengthen the three MIS that exist in the sector: the WPMS, the NSMIS, and
the EMIS, which is used to report on SWASH. The reporting systems for the three MIS require
improvements at the local level using mobile electronic data collection devices, as well as water and
sanitation dashboards for results areas and district staff to provide them with an overview of the status of
WASH in their areas. A CDMT is needed to manage data from the NSMIS.




                                                      21
Program Economic Justification

81.      The Program is expected to directly benefit 7 million people with access to safe and clean water
and improved sanitation facilities among the rural people of the selected 17 regions of Tanzania. The
Economic Analysis is based on DLIs 1–5 that fund the improvement of rural water and sanitation facilities,
comprising nearly 55 percent of the credit. DLIs 6–8 are expected to generate long-term improvements in
institutional capacity, thereby enhancing and sustaining the accrued benefits of the other DLIs as well as
strengthening governance. The life of the Program investments is assumed to be 20 years and the cash flow
is discounted at the rate of 10 percent, which is the opportunity cost of capital. A benefit-cost framework
using ‘with’ and ‘without’ project methodology has been used to calculate the economic internal rate of
return (EIRR) and the net present value (NPV) of the project. Program costs comprise initial capital cost
and the O&M cost throughout the horizon of 20 years. The benefits include the time cost savings due to the
convenience of having water supply near home; savings from avoided illnesses due to improvement in
WASH, particularly diarrheal diseases; and the cost of water points that would be saved because of the
improved water provisioned in the Program.

82.      Assuming the IDA credit will be disbursed according to the DLIs in the next six years (2019–2024),
the NPV of cash flow discounted at 10 percent over a 20-year period is positive, with the EIRR at 20.1
percent in the base case. Benefit over cost ratio for the same period is 1.6, indicating that for every U.S.
dollar spent on this investment, there will be an estimated US$1.6 benefit to the economy. The sensitivity
of the EIRR due to potential risks to these investments was tested by simultaneously increasing costs and
decreasing benefits; a 20 percent increase in capital costs and 20 percent decrease in benefits will result in
an EIRR of 16.5 percent and 11.5 percent, respectively. These scenarios still provided significant net
benefits at a higher rate than 10 percent, which is assumed to be the cost of capital. If the benefits accruing
from investment in strengthening institutional capacity (DLIs 6–8) were included, the economic returns as
measured by the EIRR would be much higher.

83.      In conclusion, the Technical Assessment confirmed the strategic relevance of the Program, that the
technical approach is sound and that the Borrower has adequate institutional capacity to implement WSDP-
2 if the proposed institutional and capacity strengthening measures are adopted.

B.      Fiduciary

84.     A Fiduciary Systems Assessment (FSA) was carried out with the objective of determining whether
the Program fiduciary systems provide reasonable assurance that the financing proceeds will be used for
the intended purposes, with due attention to the principles of economy, efficiency, effectiveness,
transparency, and accountability.

85.      The financial management risk for the Program is assessed as Substantial. Key risks include
the challenge of dealing with underfunding of the GoT’s development budget which involves securing the
Program’s funds. Key risks include unreliable cashflow, budget shortfalls, noncompliance with internal
control systems, poor Internet connectivity, poor record keeping, underutilization of Epicor, and weak
capacity at districts. Other risks include delays in preparation and submission of reports, weak internal audit
functions, and weak audit committees. There is a need to strengthen these functions for them to monitor
how identified issues are being addressed. The challenge of delays in receiving financial reports from the
schools to the districts will be addressed through capacity building of the staff involved. Underfunding at
the CAG level will be mitigated through the allocation of funds from the Program for audit purposes. Risks
associated with auditing a large number of local institutions across the country and timely submission of
reports (within nine months after the end of the financial year) will be mitigated by contracting out the audit
to private external audit firms that are acceptable to IDA.




                                                      22
86.      The procurement risk of the participating entities in the Program is Substantial. The
experience of procurement officers in the districts varies significantly from one district to another. There
are districts with experienced procurement officers while others have junior procurement officers with
inadequate experience. Due to lack of adequate numbers of staff in most of the districts, procurement
management unit members are drawn from different user departments to form ad hoc committees to handle
procurement issues, which is contrary to the requirement of the Public Procurement Act (PPA). Also, there
is insufficient knowledge in the application of provisions of the newly enacted PPA 2011 as amended
through the 2016 Public Procurement (Amendment) Act and its regulations. The districts should assess the
staffing requirements based on the programs, recruit/appoint qualified and experienced staff to fill any gaps
as appropriate, and conduct tailored trainings on PPA and its regulations and on contract management for
the staff in procurement management units and technical departments.

87.      The overall fiduciary risk rating is assessed as Substantial. The procurement and financial
management systems are adequate to provide reasonable assurance that the funds will be used for the
intended purposes with due attention to the principles of economy, efficiency, effectiveness, transparency,
and accountability. To mitigate the risks, the GoT will need to implement the Program Action Plan (PAP)
(see Annex 8) as well as the mitigating measures suggested in Annex 5. The main mitigation measures
include: (i) earmarked accounting codes for Program funds; (ii) training of accounting staff at both the
central and local government on the use of IPSAS; (iii) strengthening of internal audit units; and (iv) annual
procurement and performance (value-for-money) audits.

88.     For the IPF component, the World Bank’s fiduciary procedures will apply. The MoWI and the
MoHCDGEC are familiar with the World Bank’s fiduciary requirements through the implementation of
other World Bank-financed projects. Both the MoWI and the MoHCDGEC will benefit from experienced
fiduciary consultants hired to support implementation of the Program.

89.     Procurement under the IPF component will be carried out in accordance with World Bank policies
and procedures. The MoWI and the MoHCDGEC have jointly developed the Procurement Plan for the first
18 months to provide the basis for procurement/selection methods. For better implementation of the
amended Act, a set of regulations have been issued: The Public Procurement (Amendments) Regulations,
2016; vide Government Notice No. 333 of December 30, 2016. These are supplemented by the districts’
(Establishment and Proceeding of the Tender Boards) Government Notice No. 177 of 2007 for
procurements under the districts. The PCCB, as the mandated organization in Tanzania for implementing
the Prevention and Combating of Corruption Act (2007), will undertake investigations of all incidences of
F&C under the project. The Prevention and Combating of Corruption Act permits the PCCB to cooperate
and collaborate with the World Bank in the fight against corruption and permits the PCCB and the World
Bank to undertake joint investigations of sanctionable practices if and when the parties so agree. This does
not preclude the World Bank from undertaking its own investigations of F&C allegations under the
Program, if it is desirable.

90.      An assessment of the capacity of the MoWI and the MoHCDGEC to implement procurement
activities under the IPF component has been carried out. The assessment included a review of the
organizational structure, functions, staff skills and experience, and adequacy for implementation of the
project. The assessment revealed a number of issues, including (a) a lack of staff dedicated to procurement
records management; (b) procurement staff lacking experience in undertaking procurement of goods and
large-value consultancy services contracts through Open International Competitive Procurement
procedures; (c) inefficiencies in processing procurement activities in terms of preparation of Terms of
References (ToRs), specifications, bidding documents, request for proposals, and bids/proposals
evaluations, due to delays from user/technical departments; (d) inefficiencies in the internal procedures for
adjudication and approval of procurement transactions; (e) weak procurement filing and record
management system; and (f) weak contract management. The mitigation measures to these risks include (i)


                                                     23
dedicating staff specifically for handling procurement records; (ii) ensuring that procurements are processed
as per the timelines in the procurement plans, including timely preparation of ToRs and specifications by
user departments and adjudication by Tender Boards; and (iii) providing training to staff on procurement
under World Bank procedures.

C.      Environmental and Social Effects

91.      The anticipated negative environmental and social effects of the Program are not expected to be
significant. While the Program focuses on functionality and rehabilitation of existing facilities and services,
it also aims to expand services and will finance limited civil works for rural water supply and sanitation
and health activities. Small construction activities will include (a) construction and rehabilitation of rural
schemes—drilling of boreholes, shallow wells, gravity, and hand pump schemes; (b) construction of new
water points and rehabilitation of nonfunctional water points; (c) installation of water distribution systems;
(d) construction and upgrading of sanitation and hygiene facilities in public schools and health clinics; and
(e) installation of sanitation products including plastic pans and user-friendly handwashing stations. The
physical interventions are expected to have limited footprints in terms of impact on the ecology, loss of
land or assets, and land acquisition. The expected impacts are predictable and easily manageable with the
application of known mitigation measures.

92.     The social benefits of Program interventions are expected to include poverty and inequity
(economic and health vulnerability) reduction; positive changes in beliefs and traditions related to sanitation
and hygiene management; gender responsiveness in water and sanitation management; adoption of GBV
inclusive community consultation; participation and representation in water development planning;
community capacity building to sustainably operate, manage, and maintain rural water supply facilities;
and existence, functionality, and effectiveness of mechanisms to promote accountability and transparency
including consultations, feedback, and grievance redress at village and district levels.

93.     The Environmental and Social Management System Assessment (ESSA) was undertaken by the
World Bank to ensure consistency with the six core principles outlined in the World Bank’s Operational
Policy 5.04 - PforR Financing. The ESSA found that overall the national regulatory framework and
technical guidelines for environmental and social due diligence with respect to the Program are adequate
and the existence of environmental practices and procedures under the existing World Bank-funded water,
health/sanitation, and social safety net programs has helped close any existing gaps. The Program will
benefit from the measures defined in the existing Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) prepared for the World Bank-funded Second Tanzania Water Sector Support Project (P150361),
the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) prepared for the World Bank-funded Water Sector Support
Project (P087154), and the Vulnerable Groups Plan prepared for the Tanzania Social Action Fund under
the Tanzania Productive Social Safety Net (P124045). In addition, guidelines have been produced by the
MoWI (Guidelines of Good Environmental and Social Practices for the Water and Sewerage Sector) to
ensure the implementation of environmental and social measures in the design, construction, and operation
of the water and sewerage projects. PMO-RALG (currently PO-RALG), with technical guidance from the
World Bank, has also developed a Technical Manual for Environmental and Social Management to guide
the environmental and social impact assessment process of investments under the Urban Local Government
Strengthening Program.

94.      The Program will not finance subprojects that pose significant environmental risk, and any physical
or economic displacement is expected to be minor. However, there are certain inadequacies and gaps
identified through this ESSA. The assessed weaknesses related to weak enforcement and compliance with
existing laws, regulations, and guidelines governing environmental and social management. Additional
weaknesses include (a) inadequate attention to environmental, health, and safety concerns; (b) land
acquisition management and resettlement practices; (c) inadequate screening of projects for environmental


                                                      24
and social risks; (d) quality assurance of environmental studies that have been conducted; (e) monitoring
of the implementation of impact management recommendations; (f) weak system for environmental and
social management, systematic collection and reporting of data; (g) weak coordination among agencies are
other factors affecting the system; and (h) limited collaboration between the Environmental Management
Committees and other committees at the district level.

95.      The ESSA analysis identifies strengths, gaps, and opportunities in Tanzania’s environmental and
social management system with respect to addressing the environmental and social risks associated with
the Program. The analysis identified the following main areas for action to ensure that the Program
interventions are aligned with Core Principles 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 of OP/BP 9.00 applicable to the Program:
(a) defining system for environmental and social management; (b) technical guidance and institutional
capacity; (c) addressing capacity constraints; and (d) improved systems for information disclosure and
stakeholder consultation. The gaps identified through the ESSA and subsequent actions to fill those gaps
are expected to directly contribute to the Program’s anticipated results for enhancing improved access to
water, improved access to safely managed sanitation, and strengthened institutional capacities for water and
sanitation delivery.

96.      The following key measures will mitigate some of the abovementioned gaps: (a) A capacity
building plan, including provision for strengthening safeguards screening and monitoring arrangements,
will be developed early in year 1 of Program implementation, as part of the ‘Foundational Activities’ (DLI
1), and included in the Operations Manual. Central to this will be the mainstreaming of environmental and
social capacity strengthening under the IPF Technical Support; (b) Through the IPF-funded SPSC
consultancy and its 17 field-based consultants, the Program will support capacity building at the local and
national levels. In addition, the Program will incentivize compliance through the DLIs and the PAP; (c)
Progress made on capacity building will be provided by the verification of DLI 7; and (d) the Program’s
capacity building plan will include measures for good practices on inclusion of Vulnerable and
Disadvantaged Communities in culturally appropriate consultations in their local language of
understanding. This action is also included in the verification for DLIs 1 and 2.

Consultations and Information Disclosure

97.      The World Bank organized several consultations during the preparation of this Program. Initial
consultations with the MoWI were held in October and November 2017. World Bank specialists undertook
a series of meetings and consultations with different stakeholders including national and local government
agencies and COWSOs. A multi-stakeholder consultation meeting took place in Dar es Salaam on January
18, 2018, on the draft ESSA report, to receive specific feedback on its findings and recommendations. A
description of the workshop, consultation participants, and main issues raised is provided in the ESSA. The
ESSA was disclosed on March 13, 2018, in-country and on the World Bank’s external website.

98.      An exception to the Riparian Notification requirement under Paragraph 7(a) of OP 7.50 was
approved by management on February 6, 2018. In a high consumption scenario, it is estimated that the total
related extraction would constitute less than 2 percent of the domestic consumption of the rural population
in the Program’s geographical area. This impact is considered marginal and it is highly unlikely to affect
the downstream flows of the lakes and rivers. Thus, the exception to the riparian notification requirement
under paragraph 7(a) of OP 7.50 applies and no notification was required.

Gender

99.     Key beneficiaries of the Program are girls and boys, men and women in Tanzania and key program
indicators will be monitored by gender. The gender assessment undertaken for the Program identified
constraints and suggested interventions aimed at promoting gender equality in the context of water


                                                    25
utilization across the beneficiary communities as well as institutionalizing gender in both management as
well as operations under the Program. These include, among others, development and adoption of a rural
water gender mainstreaming strategy, extension of the current quota system to include leadership positions,
exploring ways of promoting female water technicians and engineers, training of both men and boys on
sanitation and hygiene to promote their active participation, and continuous sensitization of all sectors on
social and cultural discriminatory practices and norms underpinning gender inequalities and discrimination
against women with the aim of correcting them. To promote the participation of women in governance and
COWSOs, the Program will adopt a dedicated gender action plan to be implemented at PO-RALG, district,
and COWSOs and build women’s capacity to lead and manage COWSOs.

100.     Because women are the primary users and managers of rural household water, they have a major
stake in rural water matters and must be involved in decisions about water issues. To narrow the gender gap
at all levels of the rural water sector and to ensure water security for all, women need to have greater
involvement in decision making. Gender parity in COWSOs is yet to be achieved although growing number
of women are elected into COWSOs. National policies and legislation such as the NAWAPO acknowledge
the key roles and practical interest of women in rural water provision, and through the policy, COWSOs
are encouraged to have at least 50 percent female representation.

101.     A rural water supply and sanitation sector gender assessment was undertaken to identify critical
institutional and operational actions necessary to further gender equality in WASH service delivery. It found
that although the NAWAPO and the WSDP were in place, there is still little consultation of both men and
women in selecting and managing rural water supply schemes nor is there equal participation of women in
water committees and in leadership positions. In certain communities, women are rarely involved in
decisions relating to water policies and strategies, WRM, or tariff setting and technology choices due to
traditional patriarchal norms. Through DLI 1 and 6 the Program incentivizes women representation in the
leadership and management positions of COWSOs by requiring that at least one out of the three leadership
positions is held by woman.

102.    An inclusive consultation ensures that the needs and preferences of women, men, girls, and boys
are considered in decision-making processes at different levels. Important decisions such as tariff setting
and modes of payment as well as physical location of water facilities have significant ramifications for
accessing services by women and other vulnerable groups. Lessons drawn from water facilities globally
also show that sexual harassment at water facilities is a common occurrence that needs to be monitored and
addressed. Issues of quality, affordability, and design of sanitation and hygiene facilities for inclusive
services to adolescent girls, pregnant women, newly married women, and persons with disability need to
be addressed for the full realization of health benefits.

103.    Gender-based violence (GBV) and violence against children (VAC). Mutual respect and fair
treatment between those working on the project and local communities is critical to a safe, respectful, and
productive workplace and operating environment. GBV and VAC can be one of the most serious violations
of respect and fair treatment which can harm the local community and significantly damage trust and
cooperation between parties. The Program, through standard bidding and procurement documents, will
introduce codes of conduct and an action plan to prevent GBV and VAC. The application of the above will
help prevent and/or mitigate the risks of GBV and VAC in the Program. These codes of conduct are to be
adopted by those working on the Program and are meant to (a) create common awareness about GBV and
VAC; (b) ensure a shared understanding that they have no place in the Program; and (c) create a clear
system for identifying, responding to, and sanctioning GBV and VAC incidents.




                                                     26
Grievance Redress

104.    The Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) operates at the national and/or local levels. At the
national level, there is a government portal (the online open data portal for the GoT) for registering
complaints. In addition, the water sector, through the MoWI, has a portal for registering complaints. The
existence of this mechanism needs to be widely disseminated. In addition, the implementers of both portals
need to have a person identified for responding to the complainant (with a given time frame) or forward the
complaint to the relevant person for redressal. At the local level, the following systems are in place:

        •     Districts have a complaint box to receive complaints and provide resolutions.

        •     Village committees/sub-ward committees also have a similar mechanism for handling
              complaints. They respond to the complainants or forward the complaints to the next higher
              level for redress of issues that are beyond their jurisdiction.

105.     The Program will focus on enhancing existing mechanisms for grievance redress and dispute
resolution, as well as increasing awareness on health, sanitation, and other environmental and social issues
and better coordination between ministries, agencies, and donor partners on environmental and social
aspects. The analysis has identified the following main areas for action: procedures and documentation for
land donation and land acquisition, consultation, and inclusion of vulnerable groups. Key measures to
strengthen system performance for environmental and social management are summarized in Annex 6 and
selected actions will be included in PAP.

106.    Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected as a result of a World
Bank supported PforR operation, as defined by the applicable policy and procedures, may submit
complaints to the existing program grievance redress mechanism or the World Bank Group’s Grievance
Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to
address pertinent concerns. Affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the World
Bank Independent Inspection Panel which determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, as a result of
WB non-compliance with its policies and procedures. Complaints may be submitted at any time after
concerns have been brought directly to the World Bank's attention, and Bank Management has been given
an opportunity to respond. For information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank’s corporate
Grievance Redress Service (GRS), please visit http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For information on how to
submit complaints to the World Bank Inspection Panel, please visit www.inspectionpanel.org.

107.     Climate change mitigation, adaptation, and co-benefits. The adaptation co-benefits are based
on specific activities supported by the DLIs, mainly due to water supply infrastructure being designed to be
climate resilient against climate-change-induced shocks such as droughts. The results-based approach will
improve quality and climate resilience of water scheme design while driving the districts to seek efficiency
and reduce life cycle costs. Given the high operating costs of diesel pumping systems, districts are expected
to adopt lower-cost solar PV pumping technology, in at least 50 percent of new water points, which would
have climate mitigation co-benefits through a reduction in fossil fuel usage. In addition, improved O&M
activities incentivized through the Program will reduce losses, increase efficiency, and reduce energy costs.

D.      Risk Assessment

108.     The risk assessment is informed by the results of the Technical, Fiduciary, and Environmental and
Social Systems Assessments. In view of the substantial level of technical, fiduciary risk, the overall risk
rating of the operation is Substantial.




                                                     27
                      Table 4. Systematic Operations Risk-Rating Tool (SORT)
                                          Risk                                     Rating
             Political and Governance                                             Moderate
             Macroeconomic                                                          Low
             Sector Strategies and Policies                                       Moderate
             Technical Design of Program                                         Substantial
             Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability        Substantial
             Fiduciary                                                           Substantial
             Environmental and Social                                             Moderate
             Stakeholders                                                         Moderate
             Overall                                                             Substantial


109.     Technical design of Program. The assessments have highlighted a few technical challenges with
the GoT’s program (WSDP), such as: poorly designed, constructed, and operated water systems; limited
construction of improved sanitation facilities; failure to install school and health center WASH facilities;
failure to provide technical backstopping to water schemes; etc. The Program is designed to mitigate these
technical risks through the incentives built into the DLIs and the technical definitions and requirements
which will be agreed in the Operations Manual (OM). There are also risks associated with the timing of the
Agency’s establishment, but these are largely mitigated through the Program’s strong focus on results
delivery through the districts.

110.    Institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability. The assessments have identified
capacity gaps at all levels of government and at the community level in terms of staffing, policy
implementation, and system design and operation. To mitigate these risks, the GoT will need to implement
the PAP (see Annex 8) as well as the mitigating measures suggested in Annex 4 including the establishment
of a rural water agency and strong incentives on sustainability of rural water supply through the PforR
instrument. The IPF component of the Program will provide specific capacity support to the GoT and IAs
for Program implementation.

111.    Fiduciary. Some weaknesses have been identified relating to staff capacity and experience,
procurement processes and procedures, and contract management. To mitigate the risks, the GoT will need
to implement the PAP (see Annex 8) and the mitigating measures suggested in Annex 5 including
earmarked accounting codes for Program funds, training of accounting staff at both the central and local
government levels on the use of IPSAS, strengthening of internal audit units, and annual procurement and
value-for-money audits.

112.     Environment and social. The Program will finance activities with limited footprints. These
include construction and rehabilitation of rural schemes, installation of distribution systems, and
construction and upgrading of sanitation and hygiene facilities in public schools and clinics. These will
avoid environmentally sensitive sites and have limited requirements for land acquisition and involuntary
displacement of persons. The assessment identified challenges in capacity within the IAs related to
insufficient staff numbers to adequately screen and manage the environmental and social impacts of the
Program interventions; absence of appropriate participatory mechanisms and measures to facilitate gender,
vulnerable, and disadvantaged community inclusion in the Program; and gaps in legislation to address risks
associated with land acquisition and donation. The Program will adopt gap filling measures recommended
in Annex 6, including a capacity building plan which will be developed early in year 1 of Program
implementation, as part of the ‘Foundational Activities’ (DLI 1), and included in the Operations Manual.
Through the IPF-funded SPSC consultancy and its 17 field-based consultants, the Program will support the
capacity building of environment and social safeguards measures at the local and national levels.


                                                    28
E.      Program Action Plan

113.     The PAP includes legally binding actions that are considered crucial for advancing rural water and
sanitation service deliveries in Tanzania and were identified as potential constraints in the three assessments
(Technical, Fiduciary, and ESSA). The PAP will be monitored through regular supervision missions and
will be reported on annually by the MoWI. The implementation of the PAP actions will require central
Government orders that direct and guide ministries and the districts in how to implement the actions. The
actions will be executed through instructions contained in the OM. The OM sets forth (a) the GoT
regulations and laws that will govern the various aspects of the Program and (b) the supplemental provisions
necessary to address the gaps identified in the PAP. Each of the participating districts will be required to
follow the actions of the PAP and put in place the necessary arrangements described in the OM.

114.     The GoT has agreed to follow the World Bank’s anti-corruption guidelines (ACG) that apply to all
PforR lending operations including: Paragraph 5 of the Appendix to the Program General Conditions of the
“Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and Corruption in Program-for-Results Financing,” dated
February 1, 2012, and revised July 10, 2015; and paragraph 5 of the Appendix to the Project General
Conditions the “Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and Corruption in Projects Financed by
IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants”, dated October 15, 2006 and revised in January 2011 and as of
July 1, 2016.

115.     Key arrangements for the implementation of these guidelines, including at the district level, will be
included in the OM. This will set out the steps that the GoT will take to (a) report on allegations of fraud
and corruption (F&C) in the Program and how they are handled; (b) apply the World Bank’s debarment list
to the Program; and (c) assist any World Bank investigation under the ACG by ensuring cooperation from
those involved in the Program, including ensuring that these participants will be obligated to cooperate with
the World Bank. As noted earlier, items (a) and (b) are folded into actions in the PAP and will be covenanted
in the Legal Agreement. In relation to item (c), a covenant has not been included because the Government
has submitted, to IDA, evidence of a written communication from a competent central Government
authority to the relevant provincial authorities which sets out the obligations of those authorized to
cooperate with any investigations under the Program, including any investigations that may be necessary
by the World Bank’s Integrity Vice-Presidency (INT). The World Bank will monitor the arrangements for
the implementation of the ACG, taking into account the experience of the existing PforR operations in
Tanzania, and consider updates to the OM, as appropriate.

116.    A list of the actions agreed upon is provided in Annex 8.




                                                      29
                                   Annex 1. Detailed Program Description

1.      The Program will fully utilize and enhance key elements of the GoT’s WSDP. Although
WSDP-1 prioritized construction of new infrastructure rather than sustaining the existing facilities and
lacked an effective sanitation component, the MoWI is already on a positive trajectory toward addressing
the water supply, sanitation, and hygiene challenges facing rural Tanzania through WSDP-2. Some progress
has already been made on addressing sustainability in the sector. The MoWI has finalized a Sustainability
Strategy and a Trainers Manual for COWSO capacity building and the MoHCDGEC has relaunched the
NSC. To assist the sector in achieving the WSDP-2 targets, the Program will support key elements of
WSDP-2 including rural water supply, sanitation and hygiene, and program delivery support. Through the
Program, incentives will be provided for the GoT to increase access to rural water supply and sanitation
services in participating districts and strengthen the capacity of select sector institutions to sustain service
delivery.

2.      Table 1.1 summarizes the results that have been achieved to date against the WSDP’s targets.

                               Table 1.1. WSDP-2 Indicator Targets and Results

                                                               Overall        Achieved by
                           Indicator                                                          % Achieved
                                                               target          June 2017
     Households with basic toilets                             2,500,000        944,223            38
     Households with improved toilets                          5,600,000        519,444            9
     Households with handwashing facilities                    5,600,000        701,788            13
     Households with safe drinking water storage facilities    5,600,000        934,477            17
     Health facilities with improved toilets                     1,000            441              44
     Bus stops with improved toilets                              550              72              13
     Villages/Mitaa with 100% toilet coverage (ODF)             13,000            735              6

3.      Geographical targeting. The Program supports 17 out of Tanzania’s 26 regions, based on rankings
of current water coverage, sanitation coverage, poverty and stunting—as detailed in Annex 10. This
includes Kigoma region, the third poorest region in the country, which hosts a large refugee population and
where host communities are characterized by lack of access to safe drinking water and sanitation. The
Program will support investments to improve and sustain access to water, sanitation, and hygiene for the
host communities.

4.       Learning from global and Tanzania-specific experiences, the Program will have the following three
closely interrelated results areas corresponding to WSDP-2 and activities being carried out by other DPs.

Results Area 1: Sustainable access to improved water services in rural areas (US$105 million
equivalent)

5.      Results Area 1 will increase the coverage of improved water supply services in rural Tanzania and
improve standardization and quality assurance for design and construction of water schemes. Nonfunctional
water points will be rehabilitated and their operation sustained to ensure that they remain functional and
provide defined service levels in terms of access distance and quality and quantity of water provided.

6.       This results area will be implemented by the MoWI and PO-RALG and will support investments
in access to water supply services in the participating regions and districts. The DLIs and the rationale for
their selection are explained in Table 1.2.




                                                         30
                         Table 1.2. DLIs under Results Area 1: Rural Water Supply
                        DLI                                    Rationale for Selection of DLIs
   Results Area 1: Sustainable access to improved water services in rural areas
   DLI 1. Number of people with access to an       • Access to reliable, safe, and functioning water
   improved water supply                              supply is low in the Program areas.
   DLI 2: Number of sustainably functioning water  •  The GoT’s focus on constructing new water supply
   points                                             schemes rather than sustaining existing schemes has
                                                      resulted in a high scheme failure rate.

7.       DLI 1. The DLI 1 rewards districts for supplying people in rural areas with water, by rehabilitating,
expanding, or building new improved functional water points. DLI 1 is designed such that the districts have
a financial incentive to prioritize rehabilitation and value-for-money/quality investments which reliably
provide a sufficient volume of chlorinated water. The districts will be required to support the registration
of a COWSO to manage each water scheme and the setting of a cost reflective tariff for water. Through the
definition of improved water points, the DLI further incentivizes quality assurance, quality control, and
female involvement in the COWSOs’ leadership. The districts will be paid according to their achievements
and 2 percent of this allocation will be paid to the district’s RS, with a further 2 percent going to the MoWI
at the national level. The MoWI and the RSs are thereby incentivized to intensify their technical support to
the districts.

8.       DLI 2. The DLI rewards districts for sustaining their entire inventory of improved functioning
water points (including those constructed or rehabilitated under DLI). Through this DLI, the districts are
incentivized to constantly maintain their functioning water points and repair broken down systems. The
districts will be paid according to their achievements and 2 percent of this allocation will be paid to the
district’s RS, with a further 2 percent going to the MoWI at the national level. The MoWI and the RSs are
thereby incentivized to intensify their technical support to the districts.

Results Area 2: Increased access to improved sanitation services in rural areas (US$75 million
equivalent)

9.       This results area will incentivize an integrated approach to improve sanitation and hygiene in local
communities. Incentives will be provided to the districts to tackle the lack of household access to improved
sanitation, poor hand hygiene, and open defecation. Access to sanitation in schools will also be improved
and the districts will be further rewarded for combining these improvements so that villages achieve the
greater health benefits of ‘CWS’ (see DLI 5). The definition of improved sanitation facility ensures that
they are safe and gender informed.

10.     This results area will be implemented by the MoHCDGEC, PO-RALG, and MoEST and will
support NSC-2 and the rollout of the DFID-supported sanitation and hygiene BCC campaign. SWASH will
be implemented by the MoEST in coordination with PO-RALG. The districts will be the main executing
entity with support from the RSs and the MoEST. The districts will coordinate the SWASH activities but
responsibility for procurement will be assigned to the schools through funds transfers to their accounts. As
under WSDP-1, the districts will implement the NSC at the local level, and the Program’s IPF TA will
encourage and support the implementation of the planned CLTS activities to address open defecation. The
DLIs under Results Area 2 and the rationale for their selection are presented in Table 1.3.




                                                     31
                        Table 1.3. DLIs under Results Area 2: Sanitation and Hygiene
                         DLI                                    Rationale for Selection of DLIs
   Results Area 2: Increased access to improved sanitation services in rural areas
   DLI 3. Number of people with access to an       Access to improved sanitation and hygiene practices is low
   improved sanitation facility                    in the Program areas and challenges exist in ensuring
                                                   adequate access to improved sanitation in schools, which
   DLI 4. Number of public primary schools with    are safe and gender sensitive.
   access to improved sanitation and hygiene
   facilities

   DLI 5. Number of villages that achieve and
   sustain community-wide sanitation status

11.      DLI 3. DLI 3 rewards districts for facilitating a process of social awakening, hygiene BCC, and
supply-side strengthening that will stimulate households to construct and use improved toilets. The districts
will be rewarded for moving rural households up the sanitation ladder to improved sanitation through
strengthening the supply and marketing of improved sanitation products and services. Given the limited
success of prior rural sanitation marketing interventions in Tanzania, efforts to strengthen rural sanitation
supply chains and extend the marketing of sanitation products and services into rural communities will be
intensified through the NSC which is collaborating with a leading international toilet manufacturer
producing low-cost plastic sanitation products in Tanzania. The DLI is designed such that the districts have
a financial incentive to promote improved sanitation to communities and ensure that appropriate sanitation
products and services are available to meet local demand. The districts will be paid according to their
achievements. Of the disbursement under this DLI, 3 percent will be allocated to the RS (Regional Medical
Officer) and a further 5 percent will be allocated to the MoHCDGEC. The RSs and the MoHCDGEC are
thereby incentivized to intensify their technical and coordinating support to the districts. Disbursements
from this DLI will be transferred to the districts’ budget for sanitation, which falls under the MoHCDGEC.

12.      DLI 4. This DLI rewards districts for constructing and upgrading sanitation and hygiene facilities
in public primary schools. The definition of SWASH will include handwashing facilities, cleanliness of
sanitation facilities, and a teacher focal point for sensitization on menstrual hygiene. The districts will be
paid according to their achievements.

13.       DLI 5. This DLI rewards districts for establishing CWS villages, which includes increasing access
to improved sanitation and handwashing facilities at the household level, improving sanitation and hygiene
facilities in public schools, and addressing open defecation. In keeping with the new SDG handwashing
indicator, which is the proportion of the population with handwashing facilities with soap and water at
home, the Program will use the presence of household handwashing stations with soap and water as a proxy
for good handwashing hygiene. The DLI is designed such that the districts have a financial incentive to
prioritize CLTS triggering and critical follow-up visits with the communities to tackle open defecation. Of
the disbursement under this DLI, 3 percent will be allocated to the RS (Regional Medical Officer) and a
further 5 percent will be allocated to the MoHCDGEC. The MoHCDGEC and the RSs are thereby
incentivized to intensify their technical and coordination support to the districts. Disbursements under this
DLI will be transferred to the districts’ budget for sanitation, which falls under the MoHCDGEC.

Results Area 3: Strengthen the capacity of sector institutions to sustain service delivery in rural areas
(US$150 million equivalent).

14.     Program activities are strategically designed to enhance the capacity of the national, regional, and
local government to monitor, ensure quality, and improve and sustain water service delivery. Districts will
be incentivized to improve the O&M of water supply by engaging with communities to establish fairly



                                                      32
elected, gender-balanced COWSOs; registering COWSOs at existing schemes as autonomous entities that
have a separate auditable bank account; creating a forum for district water engineers to interact with
COWSOSs where water and sanitation challenges can be discussed and knowledge exchanged; improving
the financial sustainability of rural water supply; implementing simple water treatment systems; and
establishing backstopping support for COWSOs.

15.     Although M&E systems are in place, accuracy and completeness of M&E data will be enhanced
for both water and sanitation to enable the sector to adequately track performance and inform planning.

16.     The Program intends to strengthen institutions and service delivery models through incentivizing
the establishment and operationalization of the Agency, the GoTs new agency for delivering water supply
services. The Agency will be responsible for delivering rural water services in line with its mission: to
provide sustainable potable water in rural areas through resource mobilization, project implementation,
capacity building, and O&M of project with the active participation of major stakeholders. Under the
Program, support will be provided to establish the structure of the Agency as well as develop and implement
budget and resource plans to roll out the agency at the national, regional, and local levels. The Agency is
expected to work with the districts and COWSOs under Results Area 3 to facilitate the establishment of a
mechanism to support management, O&M of rural water supply schemes through COWSOs. The
mechanisms may include private sector participation in the provision of water and sanitation services and
hygiene promotion in rural areas, including incorporating international good practices by establishing local
third-party service providers to fill the existing capacity gap between the districts and COWSOs. The
Agency is to play a leading role on sustainability, mainstreaming good practice delivery models and
working as a facilitator and regulator for these approaches.

17.      This results area comprises three DLIs. Activities relevant to rural water will be implemented by
the MoWI. At the system level, Program activities will be strategically designed to enhance the capacity of
the Government to monitor, ensure quality, and improve and sustain WASH service delivery. This area will
support the high-level coordination and cooperation between ministries and different levels of government
that will be required for successful implementation of the Program. The rationale for the DLI selection is
described in Table 1.4.

                         Table 1.4. DLIs under Results Area 3: Institutional Capacity
                          DLI                                    Rationale for Selection of DLIs
   Results Area 3: Strengthen the capacity of sector institutions to sustain service delivery in rural areas

   DLI 6. Number of villages with a COWSO with       •    At the village level, there is a need to support the
   improved O&M capacity for water supply                 O&M capacity. Core gaps include lack of legal
   services                                               status, inadequate tariffs structure, and lack of
                                                          alternatives to the community-managed delivery
   DLI 7. Number of participating districts               model.
   submitting accurate and complete sector M&E       •    Data quality within national M&E systems is weak
   data                                                   and requires sustained improvement.
                                                     •    The GoT requires support to establish, resource, and
   DLI 8. Agency established and operationalized          operate the new Agency.


18.     DLI 6. This DLI rewards districts for incremental achievements in improving COWSO O&M
capacity for water supply against two different levels. Level I requires the district to (a) officially register
COWSOs and ensure female representation in leadership positions; (b) improve COWSO financial
management and record keeping; (c) ensure that COWSOs attend biannual community of practice meetings;
and (d) ensure COWSOs achieve a sustainable operating cost ratio. Level II requires the districts to ensure
that COWSOs meet the requirements of Level I and in addition, chlorinate water and establish local


                                                         33
backstopping mechanisms for rural water supply at the district level. The districts will be paid according to
their achievements and 2 percent of this allocation will be paid to the district’s RS, with a further 2 percent
paid to the MoWI at the national level.

19.     DLI 7. This DLI rewards the MoWI and the MoHCDGEC for strengthened M&E systems that
improve timeliness, accuracy and completeness of sector M&E data against performance criteria that will
be defined in the OM.

20.      DLI 8. This DLI rewards MoWI for establishing and operationalizing the Agency including (a)
establishing the Agency; (b) agreeing the structure and resource plan for operationalization of the Agency;
and (c) implementing the budget and resource plan with a focus on sustainability of rural water supply.

Climate Co-benefits

21.      The adaptation co-benefits are based on specific activities supported by the DLIs, mainly due to
water supply infrastructure being designed to be climate resilient. The results-based approach will improve
quality and climate resilience of water scheme design while driving districts to seek efficiency and reduce
life cycle costs. Given the high operating costs of diesel pumping systems, districts are expected to adopt
lower life cycle cost solar PV pumping technology under DLI 1 which would have climate mitigation co-
benefits through a reduction in fossil fuel usage. In addition, improved O&M activities incentivized through
DLI 6 will curb losses, increase efficiency, and reduce energy costs.

Verification

22.      Verification of the DLIs will include both desk-based review of reports, records, and meeting
minutes as well as phone calls to COWSO members and physical sampling in the field. Geographic
Information System (GIS) analysis will be used to verify population served under DLI 1. The MoWI and
the participating districts will also be encouraged to strengthen internal data verification mechanisms and
the use of routine monitoring data to improve data reliability, strengthen progress tracking, and develop
feedback loops that enable districts to take rapid and appropriate action when any project areas or results
are found to be off track.

Investment Project Financing (IPF) Component

23.      The World Bank’s Technical, Fiduciary, and Environmental and Social Assessments identified a
number of technical, institutional, program management, governance, and accountability weaknesses in the
GoT systems. International experience from other PforRs strongly suggests that these weaknesses must be
addressed for the successful implementation of the PforR. Addressing these weaknesses will be supported
through an IPF instrument whereby World Bank funds are used to pay for ‘specific expenditures’ to fund a
set of selected, discrete technical support and capacity-building activities which are complementary to those
undertaken directly by the Government under the Program, and which will support the achievement of the
Program’s objectives.

24.      The proposed activities will be implemented through the Program’s IPF funding window. The focus
of all activities under the IPF will be to strengthen the GoT systems rather than provide parallel assistance.
The TA includes seven IPF activities, each managed by the responsible IA. Table 1.5 shows the detailed
activities for the IPF activities.




                                                      34
                      Table 1.5. Description of the IPF Technical Support Component
  Activity Title                                     Description                                          Readiness
Strategic            The SPSC will involve (a) technical support to the PCU; (b) support to            ToR drafted;
Program Support      the establishment and rollout of the Agency; (c) one local Program                Procurement
Consultant           support consultant per region; (d) technical support to establishment and         process to start
(SPSC)               institutionalization of quality assurance and value-for-money                     immediately
                     procedures; (e) M&E activities including impact evaluations and
                     qualitative assessments of Program results; (f) Program awareness
                     campaign for relevant civil servants including posters, infographics on
                     project cycle, DLIs, core actions, and verification; (g) modernization of
                     the MoWI design manual, including analysis and recommendations on
                     standardization, quality assurance, and quality control; chlorination
                     systems; borehole supervision enhancement program; coordination of
                     FiLDI activities; results verification support; and (h) technical support
                     for the procurement and supervision of the additional identified technical
                     assistance activities under the Program.
M&E System           This support will strengthen the capacity of WSDP-2 to collect,                   ToR to be
Enhancement          consolidate, and use real-time data on service delivery for planning and          developed
                     monitoring of Program activities. It will also explore the potential to
                     implement the Rural Water and Sanitation Information System,
                     SIASAR, successfully adopted by 11 countries in Latin America and
                     supported by the World Bank. The implementation is envisaged to be
                     cost-effective and will supply actionable data to the districts, a critical
                     aspect of strengthening the sustainability of rural water supply.
Field-level          Specialized training to rollout the FiLDI, an approach aimed at creating          ToR drafted;
Leadership           a broad cadre of change champions at all levels in the public service             Procurement
Development          delivery agencies. This training will support and kickstart the                   process to start
Initiative (FiLDI)   establishment and rollout of the Agency under DLI 8. For more                     immediately
                     information see Box 1.1.
IVA                  A detailed verification protocol will be developed and a qualified IVA            ToR drafted;
                     will be engaged throughout the Program period.                                    Procurement
                                                                                                       process to start
                                                                                                       immediately
BCC Campaign         It will fund the extension of the BCC campaign for the NSC. DFID is               Needs will be
                     funding the initial design and rollout of the campaign and the Program            determined by
                     will, through the IPF component, fund an extension of the campaign.               the
                     The IPF will not fund airtime.                                                    MoHCDGEC.
Support for the      It will support the Water Institute to train staff to fill staffing gaps in the   Scope to be
Water Institute      water sector. Support will address insufficient facilities and equipment          agreed
and the Drilling     for practical and demonstration purposes (operating software,
and Dam              computers, furniture, laboratories, and other equipment will be financed
Construction         as per the Water Institute capacity development plan) as well as
Agency               academic and administrative staffing shortages. Water Institute will
                     ensure that the sector has sufficient human resources in the future
                     through both long courses and shorter two-week training courses that
                     specifically support the achievement of the DLIs such as on how to
                     involve the private sector and install chlorinators. It will support the
                     Drilling and Dam Construction Agency in training, facilities and
                     equipment.
Specific             It will support the districts in improving borehole drilling supervision,         ToRs to be
Technical            engineering designs, standardized equipment, including the provision of           developed
Assistance           simple water treatment applications.




                                                          35
25.    Box 1.1 provides details of the FiLDI which will be rolled out across sector institutions under the
Program.

 Box 1.1. Field-level Leadership Development Initiative
 The FiLDI approach is aimed at creating a broad cadre of change champions at all levels in the public service
 delivery agencies. This approach, first developed and implemented in the public service departments of the
 Government of Tamil Nadu in southern India, has demonstrated positive changes in the attitude and behavior of
 civil servants and significantly improved project performance in the targeted areas as compared to the control areas
 under the same projects. The key elements of the approach are (a) creating a safe space for open dialogue for staff
 of the project IAs; (b) encouraging the optimistic and entrepreneurial individuals to emerge and self-organize into
 informal groups; and (c) encouraging these informal groups of change leaders to explore process improvements,
 better community outreach, and taking on self-assigned results targets.
 Dar es Salaam Water and Sewerage Corporation and Dar es Salaam Water and Sewerage Authority have
 successfully implemented the FiLDI approach, through World Bank support in 2016. This has resulted in a positive
 movement of change led by the staff, with significant accompanying improvements in utility performance.

Program Implementation Plan (2018–2019)
26.     The implementation plan for the first Program period is shown in Table 1.6. Two stakeholder
workshops are planned around the time of the Program effectiveness. The first stakeholder workshop is
intended for regional and ministerial staff with the purpose of providing detailed information about the
Program, the implementation cycle, eligible expenditures, verification protocol, reporting requirements,
and action plans. The second workshop, covering the same topics, will include representation from the
regions and districts and focus on district results delivery mechanisms and fund allocation scenarios.

                   Table 1.6. Implementation Milestones and Timeline for Program Period 1
Activities - Year 1                 May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun                Jul Aug
Program for Results
World Bank Approval
Program Effectiveness
Advance Funds Transfer
Stakeholder Workshops                    RS       LGAs
Baseline Verification
Implementation
Comprehensive Results Report
Annual Verification
Annual Verification Report
Disbursement Request & Disbursement
IPF - Procurement
Strategic PforR Support Consultancy         Award
FiLDI                                       Award
Independent Verification Agent                          Award

Water Institute Activities                              Award
Specific Technical Assistance                                   Award



27.      The SPSC and the FiLDI consultancies are expected to participate and contribute to the workshops.
Because the sector has substantial data from which the baseline can be derived, the baseline verification
will be executed as a desk study. The procurements of the IVA consultant and the Water Institute activities
will commence shortly after effectiveness. Toward the end of April each year of the Program, the districts
will submit comprehensive results reports which will start the verification process in May and June. The
disbursement will be transferred in July or August.




                                                         36
Gender
28.      The National Strategy for Gender Development (2009) builds on the Tanzania Development Vision
2025, the Women and Gender Development policy, structural reforms, a National Strategy for Growth and
Reduction of Poverty, the Millennium Declaration, and the Millennium (now Sustainable) Development
Goals. The NAWAPO (2002) acknowledges the key roles and practical interest of women in rural water
provision. The policy recommends a 50 percent women’s representation in the formal water management
structures at the village level, particularly in the Village Council and Water Committees. The Village Water
Committee is responsible for managing village water projects on behalf of the village and reports to the
Village Council. The NAWAPO further requires a merit-based gender-sensitive recruitment policy within
all water sector institutions. The National Water Development Strategy (2006–2015) states that there is still
little consultation of both men and women in selecting and managing rural water supply schemes. The
Program will promote the operationalization of gender issues through three specific activities.

          (a)    Increase women’s participation in leadership positions. Through the definition of DLIs 1
                 and 6, the Program will ensure that in every COWSO, at least either the treasurer, secretary,
                 or the chairperson is female.

          (b) Increase the Water Institute’s enrollment of female students by 25 percent. This will be
              achieved through allocating a larger percentage of the student loans to female students.34

          (c)    Support menstrual hygiene facilities in public schools. This will be achieved through
                 ensuring that sanitation facilities in schools correspond to the definition of an improved
                 sanitation facility, which are safe and gender informed and ensuring that each school has a
                 teacher focal point for menstrual hygiene where a female teacher is on the school staff.

29.     Complementarity with other donor initiatives. In 2016, DFID allocated US$102 million to
WSDP-2 through a PbR approach with the aim of improving the number of functioning water points
through two output DLIs that reward districts for water points kept in operation and for additional newly
constructed water points. The PbR now includes all of the rural districts in Tanzania. To avoid confusion
on the part of the GoT, DFID and the World Bank have aligned their respective DLIs (DLI 1 and DLI 2 for
the World Bank Program) and the verification protocol for rural water supply in the 17 regions where the
PbR and the PforR overlap and will both reward the participating districts for their achievements under DLI
1 and DLI 2. This approach allows for future scale-up to other geographic areas of Tanzania using both
World Bank and other donor funds.

30.      Both DFID and USAID are providing support to the sector M&E system. DFID is supporting the
MoWI to strengthen the CDMT, data reporting by the districts, and technical aspects of the WPMS. USAID
is assisting the MoHCDGEC develop the NSMIS platform and reporting system. The Program will
complement these efforts by incentivizing the reporting of accurate and complete data through the NSMIS.

Implementation Arrangements

31.       The Program will be implemented through the systems established for WSDP-2.

32.     As national ‘Program owner’, the MoWI will coordinate the implementation of the Program,
through a national steering committee comprising the MoWI, MoHCDGEC, MoEST, PO-RALG, MoFP,
and the Agency. Fully empowered teams will be established to monitor and support the implementation.
The Program’s overall institutional arrangement is illustrated in Figure 1.1.


34 It has been agreed with the Water Institute that the female students could be prioritized through the allocation of student loans.




                                                                 37
33.      The MoHCDGEC is responsible for developing policy, strategy, and standards relating to rural
sanitation and hygiene. The MoHCDGEC coordinates the implementation of the NSC under WSDP-2
including monitoring of the NSC, updating the NSMIS and coordinating quarterly and annual reports for
submission to the MoWI.

34.     The MoEST holds overall responsibility for delivering SWASH in collaboration with three other
ministries: the MoHCDGEC, the MoWI, and PO-RALG. A Memorandum of Understanding between these
ministries, signed in 2010, defines a framework for cooperation and responsibilities. A national SWASH
strategy has been developed and in 2010, the MoEST and the MoHCDGEC established the SWASH
Technical Working Group at the ministerial level. All SWASH activities at the MoEST are coordinated by
the SWASH Coordinator. The MoEST is also responsible for coordinating the development of
implementation guidelines for SWASH in collaboration with other stakeholders and for monitoring the
implementation of SWASH.

                                  Figure 1.1. Institutional Arrangements




  VPO-DoE




35.      PO-RALG has the responsibility of supervising and coordinating provision of water supply and
sanitation services in rural areas. PO-RALG acts as the interface between the central and sector ministries,
DPs, non-state actors, RSs, and districts in relation to water and sanitation issues. PO-RALG is responsible
for coordinating and enabling the RSs and districts to implement water and sanitation projects including
the NSC and ensuring sustainable delivery of services. PO-RALG also coordinates the provision of
technical assistance and capacity building to the districts and RSs and consolidates reports from the RSs
and districts on implementation of the WSDP.

36.      VPO-DoE will be responsible for the preparation of the EMA regulations, jointly with NEMC, and
in close consultation with all relevant ministries, agencies, districts, and nongovernment stakeholders.

37.      The GoT is establishing the Agency which is intended to support PO-RALG’s responsibilities
relating to development, management, and ensuring sustainability of rural water supply and sanitation
services. The Program will incentivize and assist in the establishment and operationalization of the Agency
which will progressively assume responsibilities from PO-RALG.


                                                    38
38.      At the regional level, the RSs are responsible for monitoring and evaluating the districts’ WASH
activities and providing technical backstopping and capacity building to the districts. The RSs also
supervise, monitor, and provide technical advice to the districts for implementation of SWASH.

39.     At the local level, the districts are responsible for leading and coordinating on district-level WASH
through the district CWST. The districts promote the establishment of local COWSOs, regulate their
performance, and provide technical support. On sanitation, the districts are responsible for implementing
the NSC through the district’s network of health extension workers and village health workers. The districts
also coordinate the implementation of WASH in schools and health facilities at the ward and village levels.

40.      COWSOs are the owners of the water supply schemes and have the front-line responsibility for
sustaining rural water supply services on behalf of the community. The main responsibilities of COWSOs
include (a) carrying out day-to-day O&M of water supply; (b) financial management including setting
tariffs and collecting revenue from water sales; (c) water source protection; and (d) reporting to the district
on water supply status.

41.      The MoWI intends to create an Agency for rural water services. The current institutional
arrangements described earlier will migrate to the Agency, which will become the key agency responsible
for delivering and sustaining rural water supply in Tanzania. International experience shows that strong
incentives are needed to support the establishment and rollout of national agencies of this type. DLI 8 will
provide the necessary incentives against specific milestones linked to establishment, resource planning, and
budget.

42.     Independent Verification Agent (IVA). The IVA role is to provide independent confirmation of
the results reported by the districts through the MoWI. IAG has been selected to verify Program results
using protocols agreed with the World Bank. This selection is based on IAG’s role as an institution with
both the independence and the mandate to conduct audits at the district level. IAG has good experience in
acting as the IVA for the Tanzania Strengthening PHC for Results Program (P152736) PforR lending
operation since 2015 and can sub-contract verification activities for which it does not have the technical
expertise in-house.

43.      Progress reviews. The Government and the World Bank have a shared interest in seeing the
Program succeed and the successful experience be put to broader use within WSDP-2. To facilitate such
knowledge sharing and problem solving, a biannual meeting at the management level will review progress,
identify and propose remedies for any weaknesses, and identify and propose modalities for scaling up
successes beyond the Program. In addition to regular implementation support missions, annual reviews will
be critical for early identification of problems and opportunities with the Program.

44.      Mid-term review (MTR). The MTR will be an opportunity to review the WSDP framework and
potentially make alterations to the DLIs. This includes the options of reallocation of disbursement amounts
between the DLIs or cancellation of DLIs. An impact evaluation will also be undertaken to determine the
net contribution of particular components of the Program and its interventions. The impact evaluation will
be undertaken in close collaboration with the World Bank’s Development Impact Evaluation team who are
already undertaking an evaluation of DFID’s PbR in Tanzania. The following key elements will be
incorporated into the evaluation: (a) a detailed qualitative assessment of the Program’s impact on local
officials’ incentives to invest in the water sector; (b) a process evaluation of the implementation of the
Program’s payments; (c) a randomized control trial that assesses the quantitative impact of the Program
(donor funded); (d) quantify the impacts of the BCC campaign; and (e) assess the quality and impact of the
institutional capacity-building activities. The MTR will be in addition to the annual verification exercise
and is expected to be held in mid-2021.




                                                      39
Flow of Funds

45.      WSDP-1 experienced extensive delays in the transfer of funds from the Designated Account to the
IAs. This resulted in the poor performance of numerous contracts due to delay in payment for executed
activities. There have since been significant improvements in flow of funds under the existing PforR
Programs in Tanzania, due to a direct disbursement of funds from the Bank of Tanzania to lower-level IAs.
The Program will adopt the same approach.

46.      Upon verification of the achievements of the DLIs, the World Bank will disburse appropriate funds
into a designated GoT account denominated in U.S. dollars at the Bank of Tanzania. Funds will be
transferred from this account into the Program subaccount in the Consolidated Fund Account at Bank of
Tanzania (BoT), denominated in Tanzania shillings. Funds will then be transferred from this account to the
development bank account of the MoWI.

47.      The MoWI will transfer a portion of the funds to designated and ring-fenced bank accounts
managed by the MoHCDGEC, and the MoEST for payment of verified results achieved. The ministry will
retain in the account funds for the MoWI to pay its service providers, the RS, and the districts for results
related to water. The respective ministries will pay to the RSs, the districts, and its own service providers
upon receipt of independent verification reports for results achieved in relation to their respective areas.

48.      Figure 1.2 reflects the proposed funds flow. In addition, direct payments from IDA to third parties,
on the instruction of the implementing entities, can be carried out under the IPF component.

                                        Figure 1.2. Project Fund Flow


                                                                                        Direct Payments for
                                                    IDA
                                                                                         IPF Component



                                     US$ Holding (Designated) Account -
                                                  at BoT



                                         Program Sub-Account in the
                                      Consolidated Fund Account - at BoT
                                                    (TZS)


                                 Development Sub-Account of MoWI - at BoT



                  MoWI’s own payments for                     Payments to other ministries’
                                                             ring-fenced program accounts
                 water-related results achieved
                                                             for respective results achieved
                  including to RS and LGAs                     including to RS and LGAs




                                                     40
                                                                      Annex 2. Results Framework Matrix

                                                                                                                   Targets                                                               Data
    Results Indicators            Core   DLI    Unit     Baseline                                                                                                         Period        Source/
                                                                       Year 1         Year 2            Year 3            Year 4            Year 5          Year 6                     Collection
PDO: Increase access to rural water supply and sanitation services in participating districts and strengthen the capacity of select sector institutions to sustain service delivery.

PDO 1: Number of people          X       #1    Number                                                                                                                                  Annual
with access to an improved                                            450,000        1,140,000         1,830,000         2,520,000         3,000,000       3,000,000                   verification
water supply                                   Percent       0                                                                                                            Annual       of results,
                                                                         50              50                50                 50              50               50
of which female                                                                                                                                                                        IVA
PDO 2: Number of sustainably             #2    Number                                                                                                                                  Annual
functioning water points                                                                                                                                                               verification
                                                          31,811       33,611          36,371           39,131               41,891          43,811          43,811       Annual       of results,
                                                                                                                                                                                       CDMT,
                                                                                                                                                                                       IVA
PDO 3: Number of people          X       #3    Number                                                                                                                                  Annual
with access to an improved                                            400,000        1,300,000         2,200,000         3,100,000         4,000,000       4,000,000                   verification
                                               Percent       0                                                                                                            Annual
sanitation facility                                                      50              50                50                 50              50               50                      of results,
of which female                                                                                                                                                                        IVA
PDO 4: Number of villages                #5    Number                                                                                                                                  Annual
that achieve and sustain                                                                                                                                                               verification
                                                             0           50             350               650                 950            1,250           1,250        Annual
community-wide sanitation                                                                                                                                                              of results,
                                                                                                                                                                                       IVA
PDO 5: Number of                         #7    Number                                                                                                                                  Annual
participating districts                                                                                                                                                                verification
                                                                         86              86                86                 86              86               86         Annual
submitting accurate and                                                                                                                                                                of results,
complete sector M&E data                                                                                                                                                               IVA




                                                                                                41
                                                                                                                        Targets
                                                  Core
                                                                                                                                                                                 Data Source/
       Intermediate Results Indicators                   DLI     Unit      Baseline                                                                                Period
                                                                                                                                                                                  Collection
                                                                                        Year 1        Year 2   Year 3      Year 4       Year 5       Year 6
 PDO: Increase access to rural water supply and sanitation services in participating districts and strengthen the capacity of select sector institutions to sustain service delivery.

 Intermediate Results Indicator 1: Number                                                                                                                                       Annual
 of public primary schools with access to                #4    Number         0           100          450       800        1,150        1,500        1,500      Annual         verification of
 improved sanitation and hygiene facilities                                                                                                                                     results, IVA
 Intermediate Results Indicator 2: Number                                                                                                                                       Annual
 of villages with a COWSO with improved                  #6    Number         0           550         1,330     2,109       2,888        3,667        3,667      Annual         verification of
 O&M capacity for water supply services                                                                                                                                         results, IVA
 Intermediate Results Indicator 3: Number
 of health facilities and dispensaries with
                                                               Number         0           100          450       800        1,150        1,500        1,500      Annual         NSMIS
 access to improved sanitation and hygiene
 facilities35
 Intermediate Results Indicator 4: Number                                                                                                                                       Annual
 of COWSO with female members in                               Number         036         550         1,330     2,109       2,888        3,667        3,667      Annual         verification of
 leadership positions                                                                                                                                                           results, IVA
 Intermediate Results Indicator 5:                                                                                                                                              Annual
 Enrolment ratio of female students for the                    Percent        28          28            30        32          33           34           35       Annual         verification of
 Water Institute                                                                                                                                                                results, IVA
 Intermediate Results Indicator 6: Number                                                                                                                                       Annual
 of district community of practice meetings              #6    Number         0           86           172       258         344          430          430       Annual         verification of
 with citizen engagement                                                                                                                                                        results, IVA
 Intermediate Results Indicator 7: Increase
 in access to handwashing facilities among the                 Percent                                            15                                    30       Mid-term       Impact evaluation
 target population
 Intermediate Results Indicator 8: Agency                                                                                                                                       Annual
                                                                                      Agency
 established and operational                             #8    Milestone                                                                                         Annual         verification of
                                                                                      established
                                                                                                                                                                                results, IVA




35
     As per the definition in the OM.
36 The baseline will be established at inception.




                                                                                                 42
                           Annex 3. Disbursement Linked Indicators, Disbursement Arrangements and Verification Protocols

                                               Table 3.1. DLI Matrix (Targets are for each year/period and not cumulative)
                                                         Total DLI      As % of
                                                         Allocation      Total             DLI                                   Timeline for DLI Achievement
                                                           (US$,       Financing         Baseline
                                                         millions)      Amount                         Year 1           Year 2          Year 3           Year 4           Year 5        Year 637
DLIs 1–2: Sustainable access to improved water services in rural areas
DLI 1: Number of people with access to an improved
                                                             75           23                0         450,000          690,000          690,000         690,000          480,000
water supply
Allocated amount:                                                                                       11.2             17.3             17.3            17.3             11.9            0
DLI 2: Number of sustainably functioning water points          30              9          31,811       33,611           36,371          39,131           41,891           43,811
Allocated amount:                                                                                        5.2              5.5             6.0              6.4              6.9            0
DLIs 3–5: Increased access to improved sanitation services in rural areas
DLI 3: Number of people with access to an improved
                                                               20              6             0        400,000          900,000          900,000         900,000          900,000
sanitation facility
Allocated amount:                                                                                         2               4.5             4.5              4.5              4.5            0
DLI 4: Number of public primary schools with access to
                                                               30              9             0           100             350              350              350             350
improved sanitation and hygiene facilities
Allocated amount:                                                                                         2                7               7                7                7             0
DLI 5: Number of villages that achieve and sustain
                                                               25              7             0            50             350              650              950            1,250
community-wide sanitation status
Allocated amount:                                                                                         1                5               5                7                7             0
DLIs 6–8: Strengthen the capacity of sector institutions to sustain service delivery in rural areas
DLI 6: Number of villages with a COWSO with
                                                              110              34            0           550             780              779              779             779
improved O&M capacity for water supply services
Allocated amount:                                                                                       16.4             23.4             23.4            23.4             23.4            0
DLI 7: Number of participating districts submitting
                                                               20              6             0            86               86              86               86              86
accurate and complete sector M&E data
Allocated amount:                                                                                         4                4               4                4                4             0
                                                                                                                    Agency audit unit Tech. support    Tech. support    Tech. support
                                                                                                        Agency       and QA&AC        implemented in implemented in 30 implemented in
DLI 8: Agency established and operationalized                  20              6            0         established     mechanism        10 percent of     percent of     50 percent of
                                                                                                                      operational       COWSOs           COWSOs          COWSOs
Allocated amount:                                                                                         4                4               4                4                4             0
Total Financing Allocated:                                    330             100




37 Close out year, no results anticipated for verification.




                                                                                         43
                                                                        Table 3.2. DLI Verification Protocol Table
                                                                                                                    Protocol to evaluate achievement of the DLI and data/result verification
                                                                                             Scalability of
                                                                                                               Data
 #           DLI                    Definition38/ Description of achievement                 Disbursements               Verification
                                                                                                              Source/                                                Procedure39
                                                                                                (Yes/No)                    Entity
                                                                                                              Agency
 1    DLI 1: Number of     Payments will be made in proportion to achievements. The          Yes              MoWI      IVA               Eligibility criteria will be checked through desk-based
      people with access   water points must be constructed, extended, or rehabilitated                                                   review of records and meeting minutes. The IVA will make
      to an improved       under the Program to be considered for disbursement.                                                           phone calls to all COWSO Chairpersons and Treasurers of
      water supply         People must be served by a functioning water point that is                                                     the submitted water schemes, for verbal verification of the
                           new, extended, or rehabilitated after the beginning of the                                                     functioning of all water points in a village as reported by
                           Program period and which meets the eligibility criteria, that                                                  the CDMT. Physical visits to villages will take place on a
                           will be defined in the OM. Any water point which is                                                            random basis to verify CDMT and verbal data by sampling
                           classified as nonfunctional at the baseline is eligible for                                                    in each scheme (90 percent confidence interval).
                           rehabilitation under the Program.                                                                              Population served by each water point will be calculated by
                           A person will be eligible to count toward the DLI 1 target if                                                  GIS analysis of GoT census data. If verification finds that
                           the following applies to the associated improved water                                                         less than 80 percent of the population reported with access
                           point: (a) a registered COWSO is managing the water                                                            to water actually have access, the district will not be
                           scheme and community has been consulted during the                                                             eligible to receive any disbursement for those results under
                           design phase; (b) a cost-reflective tariff is charged for water                                                DLI 1 in the current Program period. However, the district
                           supplied by the scheme; (c) quality assurance and quality                                                      may then resubmit the same results for verification in the
                           control procedures have been followed and the designated                                                       following year.
                           offices have approved the scheme design and quality of
                           construction (this includes social and environmental
                           safeguards); (d) At least one of the three key COWSO
                           positions should be female; and (e) the water supply scheme
                           includes a simple operational chlorination system (hand
                           pumps are excepted).
                           A functioning water point that is verified as new, extended,
                           or rehabilitated in one Program period which subsequently
                           falls into disrepair will not be eligible for resubmission in a
                           subsequent Program period for additional disbursement
                           under DLI 1.
                           Eligible water supply typologies: A household connection,
                           public tap or standpipe connection to a piped water supply
                           system, borehole or protected dug well with a hand pump,
                           protected spring or rainwater tank. A water point must be
                           within 30 minutes roundtrip collection time (a 1,000 m
                           radius) of the population served and a user is able to fill a
                           20 liter bucket in less than 1 minute. Upon development of
                           the water source, the water quality must have been certified
                           as fit for human consumption. Further details are provided
                           in the OM.
                           The total allocation to this DLI, targets, and unit payments
                           are subject to adjustment at MTR.

38 Additional definitions are given below.
39 Actual sampling methodology and size may be subject to modification.




                                                                                                   44
                                                                                                                 Protocol to evaluate achievement of the DLI and data/result verification
                                                                                          Scalability of
                                                                                                            Data
#          DLI                     Definition38/ Description of achievement               Disbursements               Verification
                                                                                                           Source/                                                Procedure39
                                                                                             (Yes/No)                    Entity
                                                                                                           Agency
    DLI 2: Number of      Payments will be made in proportion to achievements. A          Yes              MoWI      IVA               Eligibility criteria will be assessed through desk-based
    sustainably           water point must be a functioning water point, serve a                                                       review and physical sampling. The IVA will make phone
    functioning water     population, and meet the eligibility criteria, that will be                                                  calls to all COWSO chairpersons and treasurers, for verbal
    points                defined in the OM. The water point has not been submitted                                                    verification of functioning of all water points in a village as
                          under DLI 1 in the same Program period.                                                                      reported by the CDMT. Physical visits to villages will take
                          A sustainably functioning water point is eligible for                                                        place on a random basis to verify CDMT and verbal data.
                          disbursement in each Program period. The total allocation                                                    The sample size for verbal verification would be
                          to this DLI target is subject to adjustment at MTR.                                                          approximately 20 villages per district, covering an average
                                                                                                                                       of 7 water points in each village equivalent to 140 water
                          Eligible water supply typologies: A household connection;                                                    points per district. GIS analysis of census data will be used
                          public tap or standpipe connection to a piped water supply                                                   to verify that water points serve a population.
                          system; borehole or protected dug well with a handpump;
                          protected spring or rainwater tank; a water point must be
                          within 30 minutes roundtrip collection time (1,000 m
                          radius) of the population served and a user is able to fill a
                          20 liter bucket in less than 1 minute. Upon development of
                          the water source, the water quality must have been certified
                          as fit for human consumption. Further details will be
                          provided in the OM.
2   DLI 3: Number of      Payments will be made in proportion to achievements. An         Yes              MoHCD       IVA               Verification to be representative at the district level—
    people with access    improved sanitation facility at household level is defined as                    GEC                           baseline average coverage will be 12 percent. Sampling
    to an improved        a toilet with a washable floor, a lockable door, and a                                                         through physical inspection of no less than 2 percent of
    sanitation facility   superstructure with no holes other than the drop hole. A                                                       households per sampled village. DLIs 3 and 5 will be
                          more detailed definition will be provided in the OM.                                                           independently sampled, but samples may overlap. If
                                                                                                                                         verification finds that less than 80 percent of the
                                                                                                                                         households reported with access to an improved sanitation
                                                                                                                                         facility actually have access, the district will not be eligible
                                                                                                                                         to receive any disbursement for those results under DLI 3
                                                                                                                                         in the current Program period; however, the district may
                                                                                                                                         then resubmit the same results for verification in a
                                                                                                                                         subsequent Program period.
    DLI 4: Number of      Payments will be made in proportion to the achievements.        Yes              MoHCD       IVA               The IVA shall carry out a desk review of reports and data
    public primary        There is no payment for partial achievement. A public                            GEC                           maintained by the district and the EMIS; physical
    schools with          primary school must have improved sanitation and                                                               inspection of all facilities in 100 percent of schools in
    access to improved    handwashing facilities.                                                                                        sampled villages.
    sanitation and        Improved sanitation facilities in schools includes the
    hygiene facilities    following features: pupil/latrine ratio: 1:40 for girls and
                          1:50 for boys (a special ratio for schools with a student
                          enrolment above 1,000 will be provided in the OM); each
                          school has separate latrine blocks for girls and boys;
                          segregated block of latrines for teachers; latrines are kept
                          clean and in good condition; the task of cleaning or
                          maintaining sanitary facilities should be shared equally
                          among girls and boys; there is at least one drop hole
                          available and suitable for pupils with disabilities; the
                          schools have a designated and active menstrual counselor



                                                                                                45
                                                                                                                  Protocol to evaluate achievement of the DLI and data/result verification
                                                                                           Scalability of
                                                                                                             Data
#          DLI                     Definition38/ Description of achievement                Disbursements               Verification
                                                                                                            Source/                                          Procedure39
                                                                                              (Yes/No)                    Entity
                                                                                                            Agency
                          (teacher) where a female teacher is on the staff; all schools
                          have at least one handwashing facility for every 100 pupils.
                          Further details are provided in the OM.
    DLI 5: Number of      Payments will be made in proportion to the achievements.         Yes              MoHCD      IVA             The IVA shall carry out (a) a desk review of reports and
    villages that         Each village targeted will pass or fail in a given year. There                    GEC                        data maintained by the district and the CDMT and(b)
    achieve and sustain   is no payment for partial achievement; however, villages                                                     physical verification of a random sample of no less than 5
    community-wide        can be resubmitted each year until all indicators are reached                                                percent of villages to confirm CWS status. Physical
    sanitation status     and CWS status is achieved. Communities which already                                                        inspection of all facilities in 100 percent of schools in
                          meet the CWS criteria at the start of the Program will only                                                  sampled villages. Random inspection of no less than 5
                          be eligible for sustaining CWS.                                                                              percent of households in sampled villages to check
                                                                                                                                       coverage of domestic sanitation and handwashing facilities.
                          A village that has been verified as having achieved CWS
                          status in a previous year/period will be considered to have
                          sustained CWS status in the current period if all schools in                                                 DLIs 3, 4, and 5 will be independently sampled, but
                          the village have improved sanitation and handwashing                                                         samples may overlap.
                          facilities. CWS is further defined in the OM.

                          A village is considered to have achieved CWS status if the
                          village is free of open defecation, 50 percent of households
                          in the village have access to an improved sanitation facility,
                          25 percent of households in the village have access to a
                          handwashing facility, and all public primary schools on the
                          village have improved sanitation and handwashing
                          facilities. Further details are provided in the OM.

3   DLI 6: Number of      The COWSO Level I and II criteria for improved O&M               Yes, by          MoWI       IVA             Level I: Review of COWSO registration records at the
    villages with a       capacity for water supply services are as follows:               COWSO            (CDMT)                     district level and CDMT data. Phone calls to COWSO
    COWSO with                                                                                                                         chairperson and treasurer. The biannual community of
    improved O&M          Level I (all four criteria must be achieved):                                                                practice meeting will be verified through review of meeting
    capacity for water    1. Be registered, have an active management team                                                             minutes and outputs. Review of cash book, tariff, and
    supply services       2. At least one of the three key COWSO positions should                                                      COWSO bank statements. The records will be collected
                              be female                                                                                                during the biannual community of practice meeting at the
                          3. Participate in at least one of the biannual district-level                                                district level.
                              community of practice meetings
                          4. Have a well-maintained cash book with an Operating                                                        Level II: Review of COWSO registration records at the
                              Cost Ratio of ≤ 1 (cost-reflective tariff)                                                               district level and CDMT data. Phone calls to COWSO
                                                                                                                                       chairperson and treasurer. The biannual community of
                          Level II (highest level):                                                                                    practice meeting will be verified through review of meeting
                          1. Achieved Level I                                                                                          minutes and outputs. Review of cash book, tariff, and
                          2. The water scheme has a functioning chlorination system                                                    COWSO bank statements. The records will be collected
                          3. Has backstopping mechanism for maintenance and                                                            during the biannual community of practice meeting at the
                              repair and passed an annual assessment                                                                   district level. Review of backstopping mechanism
                          Further details are provided in the OM.                                                                      assessment visit checklist and meeting minutes.
                                                                                                                                       Background check of all third-party service providers.




                                                                                                 46
                                                                                                                 Protocol to evaluate achievement of the DLI and data/result verification
                                                                                          Scalability of
                                                                                                            Data
#          DLI                      Definition38/ Description of achievement              Disbursements               Verification
                                                                                                           Source/                                            Procedure39
                                                                                             (Yes/No)                    Entity
                                                                                                           Agency
    DLI: 7: Number of      Payments will be made in proportion to the achievements.       Yes, by          MoWI,     IVA               Assessment against performance criteria for water supply
    participating          In each district, villages must report accurate and complete   district         MoHCD                       and sanitation M&E data accuracy and completeness, as
    districts submitting   water and sanitation M&E data as per the following:                             GEC                         detailed in the OM
    accurate and            1. Timely: The districts need to submit reports on time.
    complete sector         2. Accurate: The reports need to adhere to the accuracy
    M&E data                    criterion.
                            3. Complete: The reports need to adhere to the
                                completeness criterion.
                            Further details are provided in the OM.
    DLI 8: Agency          Payments will be made in proportion to the achievements.       No               MoWI,       IVA             Review of documentation relating to the establishment of
    established and        Agency established and operational against the following                        MoHCD                       the Agency including the resource plan, budget,
    operationalized        sequential milestones:                                                          GEC                         expenditure program, and tech. support agreement
                             1. Agency established
                             2. Agency audit unit and quality assurance and quality                                                    Physical inspection of a sample of local Agency offices and
                                control mechanism operational                                                                          focus group discussions with staff to assess outputs of the
                             3. Tech. support agreement signed and implemented with                                                    resource and expenditure plans
                                10 percent of COWSOs
                             4. Tech. support agreement signed and implemented with
                                30 percent of COWSOs
                             5. Tech. support agreement signed and implemented with
                                50 percent of COWSOs
                           The milestone requirements are further defined in the OM.




                                                                                                47
                                                                  Table 3.3. Bank Disbursement Table

                              Bank        Of which Financing                                                      Target DLI
                                                                                       Minimum DLI value to
                            financing        available for                                                        value(s) for        Determination of Financing Amount to be
#                                                               Deadline for DLI        be achieved to trigger
           DLI             allocated to                                                                              Bank            disbursed against achieved and verified DLI
                                           Prior    Advances     Achievement           disbursements of Bank
                             the DLI                                                                             disbursements                         value(s)
                                          results                                            Financing
                          (US$ million)                                                                             purposes
1   DLI 1: Number of            75          0        18.75     Results will be                   >0              3,000,000       An amount of US$25 per person who gained access
    people with                                                reported and verified                             people          to an improved water supply may be made available
    access to an                                               annually in the                                                   by the Association for withdrawal by the recipient.
    improved water                                             month of June.                                                    2 percent of the disbursement under this DLI will be
    supply                                                                                                                       allocated to the RS (Regional Water Office) and a
                                                                                                                                 further 2 percent of the disbursement will be allocated
                                                                                                                                 to the central ministries (MoWI and PO-RALG).
    DLI 2: Number of           30           0          7.5     Results will be                   >0              43,811 water    An amount of US$164.00 per sustainably functioning
    sustainably                                                reported and verified                             points          water point per year may be made available by the
    functioning water                                          annually in the                                   sustained       Association for withdrawal by the recipient.
    points                                                     month of June.
                                                                                                                                 No funds will be disbursed for a Program period if, in
                                                                                                                                 that Program period, the number of water points that
                                                                                                                                 are functional falls below 75 percent of the total of
                                                                                                                                 the baseline number of functional water points at the
                                                                                                                                 start of the Program + the number of newly
                                                                                                                                 constructed water points which have passed
                                                                                                                                 verification under DLI 1 since the beginning of the
                                                                                                                                 Program.
                                                                                                                                 Undisbursed amounts in any given year can be rolled
                                                                                                                                 over to the next year. 2 percent of the disbursement
                                                                                                                                 under this DLI will be allocated to the RS (Regional
                                                                                                                                 Water Office) and another 2 percent of the
                                                                                                                                 disbursement will be allocated to the central
                                                                                                                                 ministries (MoWI and PO-RALG).
2   DLI 3: Number of           20           0          5       Results will be                   >0              4 million       An amount of US$5 per person who gained access to
    people with                                                reported and verified                             people          an improved sanitation facility may be made
    access to an                                               annually in the                                                   available by the Association for withdrawal by the
    improved                                                   month of June.                                                    recipient.
    sanitation facility                                                                                                          Undisbursed amounts in any given year can be rolled
                                                                                                                                 over to the next year.
                                                                                                                                 3 percent of the disbursement under this DLI will be
                                                                                                                                 allocated to the RS (Regional Medical Officer) and a
                                                                                                                                 further 5 percent of the disbursement will be allocated
                                                                                                                                 to the MoHCDGEC.
    DLI 4: Number of           30           0          7.5     Results will be                   >0              1,500           An amount of US$20,000 per public school that
    public primary                                             reported and verified                                             gained access to an improved sanitation and hygiene
    schools with                                               annually in the                                                   facility may be made available by the Association for
    access to                                                  month of June.                                                    withdrawal by the recipient.
    improved                                                                                                                     Undisbursed amounts in any given year can be rolled
    sanitation and                                                                                                               over to the next year.
    hygiene facilities



                                                                                       48
                             Bank        Of which Financing                                                      Target DLI
                                                                                      Minimum DLI value to
                           financing        available for                                                        value(s) for        Determination of Financing Amount to be
#                                                              Deadline for DLI        be achieved to trigger
          DLI             allocated to                                                                               Bank           disbursed against achieved and verified DLI
                                          Prior    Advances     Achievement           disbursements of Bank
                            the DLI                                                                             disbursements                         value(s)
                                         results                                            Financing
                         (US$ million)                                                                             purposes
    DLI 5: Number of           25          0         6.25     Results will be                   >0              1,250 CWS       For each village that achieves CWS status, an amount
    villages that                                             reported and verified                             villages        of US$16,000 may be made available by the
    achieve and                                               annually in the                                                   Association for withdrawal by the recipient.
    sustain                                                   month of June                                                     For each village that sustain CWS status for one year
    community-wide                                                                                                              within the Program period, an amount of US$2,500
    sanitation status                                                                                                           may be made available by the Association for
                                                                                                                                withdrawal by the recipient.
                                                                                                                                Undisbursed amounts in any given year can be rolled
                                                                                                                                over to the next year.
                                                                                                                                3 percent of the disbursement under this DLI will be
                                                                                                                                allocated to the RS (Regional Medical Officer) and a
                                                                                                                                further 5 percent of the disbursement will be allocated
                                                                                                                                to the MoHCDGEC.
3   DLI 6: Number of         110           0         27.5     Results will be                   >0              3,667           For each village that achieves COWSO Level I, an
    villages with a                                           verified biannually                               COWSOs          amount of US$15,000 may be made available by the
    COWSO with                                                and reported in                                                   association for withdrawal by the recipient.
    improved O&M                                              December and June.                                                For each village that achieves COWSO Level II, an
    capacity for water                                                                                                          amount of US$15,000 may be made available by the
    supply services                                                                                                             Association for withdrawal by the recipient.
                                                                                                                                Undisbursed amounts in any given year can be rolled
                                                                                                                                over to the next year.
                                                                                                                                2 percent of the disbursement under this DLI will be
                                                                                                                                allocated to the RS (Regional Water Office) and
                                                                                                                                another 2 percent of the disbursement will be
                                                                                                                                allocated to the central ministries (MoWI and PO-
                                                                                                                                RALG).
    DLI 7: Number of          20           0          0       Results will be                   >0              86 districts    For each participating district that achieves the
    participating                                             verified biannually                                               defined annual reporting criteria for rural water
    districts                                                 and reported in                                                   supply, an amount of US$23,000 may be made
    submitting                                                December and June.                                                available by the Association for withdrawal by the
    accurate and                                                                                                                Recipient.
    complete sector                                                                                                             For each participating district that achieves the
    M&E data                                                                                                                    defined annual reporting criteria for rural sanitation
                                                                                                                                and hygiene, an amount of US$23,000 may be made
                                                                                                                                available by the Association for withdrawal by the
                                                                                                                                recipient.
                                                                                                                                Undisbursed amounts in any given year cannot be
                                                                                                                                rolled over to the next year.
                                                                                                                                2 percent of the disbursement under this DLI will be
                                                                                                                                allocated to the regional government and another 2
                                                                                                                                percent of the disbursement will be allocated to the
                                                                                                                                central ministries.




                                                                                      49
                          Bank        Of which Financing                                                      Target DLI
                                                                                  Minimum DLI value to
                        financing        available for                                                        value(s) for        Determination of Financing Amount to be
#                                                           Deadline for DLI       be achieved to trigger
          DLI          allocated to                                                                              Bank            disbursed against achieved and verified DLI
                                       Prior    Advances     Achievement          disbursements of Bank
                         the DLI                                                                            disbursements                          value(s)
                                      results                                           Financing
                      (US$ million)                                                                            purposes
    DLI 8: Agency           20          0          0       Results will be       Agency established         Agency           Disbursement-Linked Result (DLR) 8.1: Upon the
    established and                                        verified when a                                  structure and    establishment of Agency, an amount of
    operationalized                                        relevant action has                              resource plan    US$4,000,000 may be made available by the
                                                           been taken by the                                fully            Association for withdrawal by the recipient.
                                                           MoWI.                                            implemented      DLR 8.2: Upon approval of the Agency’s
                                                                                                                             operationalization of its audit unit and quality
                                                                                                                             assurance and quality control mechanism, an amount
                                                                                                                             of US$4,000,000 may be made available by the
                                                                                                                             Association for withdrawal by the recipient.
                                                                                                                             DLR 8.3: Upon approval of the Agency’s first year
                                                                                                                             sector performance report published, and tech.
                                                                                                                             support agreement signed and implemented with 10
                                                                                                                             percent of COWSOs, an amount of US$4,000,000
                                                                                                                             may be made available by the Association for
                                                                                                                             withdrawal by the recipient.
                                                                                                                             DLR 8.4: Upon approval of the Agency’s second year
                                                                                                                             sector performance report published, and technical
                                                                                                                             support agreement signed and implemented with 30
                                                                                                                             percent of COWSOs, an amount of US$4,000,000
                                                                                                                             may be made available by the Association for
                                                                                                                             withdrawal by the recipient.
                                                                                                                             DLR 8.5: Upon approval of the Agency’s technical
                                                                                                                             support agreement signed and implemented with 50
                                                                                                                             percent of COWSOs, an amount of US$4,000,000
                                                                                                                             may be made available by the Association for
                                                                                                                             withdrawal by the recipient.
                                                                                                                             Early achievement is permitted. Undisbursed amounts
                                                                                                                             in any given year may be rolled over to the next year.




                                                                                  50
                               Annex 4. Summary Technical Assessment

1.      This Technical Assessment has been carried out as a part of the preparation phase of the Program.
The purpose of the Technical Assessment is to evaluate, with the GoT support, the adequacy of the WSDP-
2 arrangements and the performance in four areas: strategic relevance and technical soundness; expenditure
framework, results framework, and M&E capacity; and economic justification.

2.       Working closely with the GoT, the task team has identified a number of weaknesses and possible
improvements which have been formulated into specific proposed recommendations and actions to be taken
by the GoT with support of the World Bank. This Technical Assessment also identifies relevant key risks
to the achievement of the Program’s stated results and associated mitigation measures.

Government of Tanzania Water Sector Development Program

3.       The GoT has an existing WSDP that is fully aligned with the national development vision and
goals. The overall objective of the WSDP is to achieve universal access to water and sanitation by 2025.
The program is structured under four components: (a) WRM; (b) rural water supply; (c) urban water supply
and sewerage; and (d) sanitation and hygiene. The GoT has demonstrated commitment to the objectives of
its program by developing relevant policies and guidelines for program implementation, allocating requisite
financial resources, and putting in place mechanisms to strengthen decentralized sector governance
structures. WSDP-1 was implemented from 2006 to 2015, with a total investment of US$1.4 billion. Most
of the funds (about 40 percent) went to rural areas. In 2016, the GoT launched the second phase of the
program with an ambitious target of achieving 80 percent access to improved water supply and 75 percent
access to improved sanitation in rural areas by 2019.

4.        The World Bank will support a portion of this program over a six-year period (2018–2024),
focusing on four primary categories of activities: (a) results-based financing for increasing access to
improved water supply in selected rural districts; (b) incentives for improving functionality of water
systems in selected rural districts; (c) results-based financing for increasing access to improved sanitation
facilities in selected rural districts—at both household and community level; and (d) incentives for
strengthening O&M capacity, M&E of the rural water, and sanitation components of the WSDP.

5.       The GoT proposes to call this the World Bank-supported portion of its Program. The GoT has also
identified the following medium-term goals for World Bank support: (a) increasing access to improved
water services in selected rural districts; (b) increasing access to improved sanitation services in selected
rural districts; and (c) strengthening institutional capacity for water and sanitation service delivery.

Strategic Relevance

6.       The GoT has outlined its medium-term objective of becoming a middle-income country through
the Tanzania Development Vision 2025 which, among other things, aims to build an educated population,
a competitive economy, and achieve 90 percent rural access to safe water by 2025. From an environmental
and social perspective, improving access to water as well as hygiene and sanitary conditions in rural
populations will reduce disease incidence and improve the quality of life of the rural population. From an
economic perspective, sanitation is a sound investment in support of a return to strong and inclusive growth
for the country. The WSDP is, therefore, considered to be a highly strategic intervention that will contribute
toward achieving the country’s National Development Vision to 2025.




                                                     51
Institutional Context

7.      At the central level, the key institutions are the MoWI which leads the coordination of the WSDP;
the MoHCDGEC, which coordinates the implementation of the NSC under the WSDP; the MoEST, which
holds overall responsibility for delivering SWASH under the NSC; the PO-RALG, which supervises and
coordinates provision of water supply and sanitation services in rural areas; and the VPO-DoE, in charge
of nationwide environmental management and enforcement of regulations.

Program Institutional Arrangements

8.      The institutional arrangements for the Program are described below:

        •    The MoWI will coordinate the implementation of the Program, through a national steering
             committee comprising the MoWI, MoHCDGEC, PO-RALG, and MoFP.

        •    Results Area 1, Sustainable access to improved water services in rural areas, will be
             implemented by the MoWI and the PO-RALG.

        •    Results Area 2, Increased access to improved sanitation services in rural areas, will be
             implemented by the MoHCDGEC, MoEST, and PO-RALG.

        •    Results Area 3, Strengthen the capacity of sector institutions to sustain service delivery in
             rural areas, will be implemented by the MoWI and MoHCDGEC. Activities relevant for rural
             water will be implemented by the MoWI whereas technical support activities pertaining to
             sanitation and hygiene will be implemented by the MoHCDGEC.

        •    Activities at the regional and district levels will be coordinated through the RWSTs and the
             Community Water and Sanitation Teams (CWSTs).

        •    The GoT is establishing the Agency which is intended to support PO-RALG’s responsibilities
             relating to development, management, and ensuring sustainability of rural water supply and
             sanitation services. The Program will incentivize and assist in the establishment and
             operationalization of the Agency which will progressively assume from PO-RALG.

        •    IVA. The IVA’s role is to provide independent confirmation of the results reported by the
             provinces through the MoWI. The IAG was selected to verify Program results using protocols
             agreed with the World Bank. This choice is based on the IAG’s role as a constitutional body
             with both the independence and the mandate to conduct national audits. The IAG has good
             management capacity and can subcontract verification work for which it does not have the
             technical expertise in-house.

Technical Soundness of Investments

Sanitation and Hygiene

9.       In terms of sanitation and hygiene, there is insufficient focus on creating demand for household
sanitation and improving the supply of affordable and locally available sanitation and hygiene products.
Although most rural households now have a designated handwashing station (just over 80 percent in either
a fixed or mobile place), handwashing facilities with soap and water are available in only 22 percent of




                                                   52
rural households.40 Evaluation of handwashing programs has revealed that it is extremely difficult to get
households to adopt handwashing practices, especially at critical junctures to avoid infection (Briceño et
al. 201541). There is a clear need to strengthen sanitation and hygiene behavior change, which falls short of
international best practices. Coverage of sanitation facilities in schools is often insufficient and facilities
are typically unclean and poorly maintained. Data collected from almost 3,000 rural schools showed that in
only 32 percent of toilets were clean.

10.      Institutionally, both national and field level staff lack the leadership and motivation to fully deliver
on their responsibilities and the coordination of the NSC at the district level is weak due to a lack of NSC
coordination staff and coordination mechanisms. A key challenge is the lack of funds allocated to sanitation
and delays in disbursement of funds to the district level. TZS 12 billion were allocated as budget for
sanitation and hygiene in 2015–2016 according to the MoWI, but by mid-2017, there was no expenditure
for this allocation.

Water Supply

11.      Water supply investments mainly support capital investment in new water supply schemes.
Insufficient priority is given to sustaining existing schemes which often fall into a state of disrepair. In the
areas targeted by the proposed Program, 33 percent of water points are non-functional. Where water points
are functional, only 63 percent supply sufficient water.42 Key challenges include the following:

         •     Adequate, cost-effective design standards for water supply schemes do not exist and there is
               a lack of guidance for districts on where responsibilities lie for different types of major and
               minor repairs of water supply schemes.

         •     There is insufficient focus on ensuring the technical quality of implementation of water
               supply, in part due to a lack of skilled water staff at the district level to provide technical
               backstopping.

         •     At the village level there are acute gaps in COWSOs’ capacity, including on tariff setting and
               financial and operational management. Many COWSOs are yet to be formally registered.

         •     There is insufficient and cost-effective institutional strengthening to address capacity gaps at
               the district level.

         •     Upstream water resources mismanagement and lack of enforcement of environmental
               regulations lead to degradation of water sources.

12.      Based on the findings of the assessment, the key technical recommendation for water supply is for
institutions at the national and local level including the MoWI, RSs, districts, and COWSOs to be
strengthened to promote the sustainability and quality of water supply. Key aspects to focus on include
strengthening management, leadership, and technical capacity at all levels including through involvement
of the private sector; developing guidelines for scheme maintenance and repair; and registering COWSOs.
Improved environmental inspections for an increased enforcement of regulations is also recommended.



40 Demographic Health Survey 2016.
41 Briceño, B., A. Coville, and S. Martinez. 2015. “Promoting Handwashing and Sanitation: Evidence from a Large-Scale

Randomized Trial in Rural Tanzania.” Policy Research Working Paper 7164. World Bank Group Water Global Practice Group
and Development Research Group Impact Evaluation Team, January 2015. World Bank, Washington, DC.
42 25 liter per capita per day.




                                                             53
Results Framework, Monitoring and Evaluation

13.     Achievements against the WSDP-2 PDO are measured through the results monitoring framework
developed for the Program. The institutional arrangements for monitoring are clearly defined for the sector.
However, there is a need to strengthen the three MIS that exist in the sector: the WPMS; the NSMIS; and
the educational MIS, which is used to report on SWASH. The reporting systems for the three MIS require
improvements at the local level through the use of mobile electronic data collection devices as well as water
and sanitation dashboards for results areas and district staff to provide them with an overview of the status
of WASH in their areas. A CDMT is needed to manage data from the NSMIS.

Economic Analysis

14.      The GoT recognizes that water and sanitation services offer a mix of private and public benefits.
The existence of private benefits from water supply and sanitation services provides an avenue to mobilize
private financial resources to complement public resources. Improvements to rural water supply and
sanitation in the targeted regions of Tanzania are expected to generate an EIRR of 20.1 percent (base-case).
Benefit over cost ratio is forecasted to be 1.6, indicating that for every U.S. dollar spent on this investment,
there will be an estimated US$1.6 benefit to the economy of the 17 regions. In addition to the time cost
savings that result from the proximity of water supply to the home, further benefits include savings from
avoided illnesses, particularly diarrheal diseases, and the revenues earned by the districts from the water
schemes.

Expenditure Framework

15.      The fifth Government of the United Republic of Tanzania has prioritized development projects
over recurrent spending. On average, development spending has been allocated about 40 percent of total
Government budget public expenditure since FY 2015/16. There has been a shift towards prioritizing
development projects compared to the previous administration where an average of 4-5 percent of GDP
was directed to development projects as compared around 16-17 percent of GDP which was directed to
recurrent expenditures. The increased development spending has been possible due to controlled recurrent
expenditures, increased domestic revenue collection, and increased borrowing especially on non-
concessional terms. On the other hand, the non-salary recurrent spending (OC) has been reduced to a half
in the last two years. All of this points to the GoT’s commitment to improved development spending while
maintaining fiscal discipline.

16.     The water sector continues to be among the GoT’s priority sectors with higher budget allocations
recently, but budget execution is very weak. Over the past five years, the water sector has received an
average of 2.5 percent of GDP. In the past two years, the allocation to the water sector has increased, most
notably in FY 2016/17, where the entire sector budget increased by about 79 percent. Despite the huge
increase in budget allocations, the sector has experienced low budget execution, resulting into low actual
spending. Actual water sector expenditures over the last five years have been around 40 percent of the
sector approved estimates. The limited spending on water sector is largely due to shortfalls in released
budgeted funds or delays in disbursements, especially for development projects.

17.     The largest share of the total water sector budget and actual spending is directed to development
projects. On average, 90 percent of the total water sector budget and expenditures in the last five years has
been directed to development spending. Salaries and wages (personal emoluments) account for a small
share of the sector budget and expenditure (an average of 4 percent). While recurrent spending is a small
share of the entire sector budget, it has shown a consistent upward trend (in both allocations and actual
spending) compared to sector development spending which has been relatively unpredictable. Likewise,
the sector recurrent budget has shown a better execution rate compared to the sector development budget.


                                                      54
18.      On average between FY 2010/11 to FY 2017/18, 51 percent of the sector development budget has
been funded through foreign sources, with local financing of the sector budget growing. Approved estimates
of FY 2017/18 show local funding to the sector budget increased by 26 percent while foreign funding
declined by 55 percent (compared to the previous year approved estimates). The MoWI is allocated the
largest share (an average of about 85 percent) of the entire sector spending, followed by the districts (14
percent) and regions (around 1percent) over the last five years.

19.      Rural water sector - allocation and expenditures: Rural water projects continue to receive the largest
share of the WSDP. Between FY 2013/14 and FY 2017/18, rural water projects received over 40 percent
of the entire WSDP budget and actual spending. Despite high allocations, funding to the rural water sector
has been unpredictable. Trends over the last five years indicate an erratic allocation and spending in the
rural water component with a 27 percent decline in FY 2017/18 approved estimates. Actual expenditures
in the component have consistently been below the approved estimate. Poor component budget execution
could be due to incomplete or late release of funds.

20.      Allocation of budget. The WSDP expenditures under the geographical defined area of the Program
will be split into two major budget expenditure categories: capital expenditures (investments in improved
access to rural water supply and sanitation services) and operating expenditures (the operating costs of the
MoWI, maintenance of rural water points, capacity building of COWSOs, and other expenses linked to
sustainability of rural water supply). Based on the historical budgetary trends, capital expenditures normally
comprise 90 percent of the total expenditures, while 10 percent is allocated for operating expenditures.
However, two key factors are expected to slightly shift this historical trend toward operating expenditures.
The establishment of the Agency, which is likely to require higher salaries and other establishment costs,
and the Program’s focus on sustainability will lead to a higher budget allocation for non-salary recurrent
spending. With the Agency and the continuing staff increases in the sector, it is expected that expenditures
on wages will move from 4 percent to 6 percent and non-salary recurrent spending will move up from the
current 6 percent to 11 percent to reflect the focus on sustainability. The capital expenditures will decline
accordingly from the current 90 percent to 83 percent. The tentative WSDP allocations for the Program
area are detailed in Table 4.1.
                                   Table 4.1 Tentative Program Allocation

                      Budget Items                                               US$
                      Capital Expenditures                                       613
                       Rural water supply investments                            562
                       Rural sanitation facilities investments                    51
                      Operating Expenditures                                     127
                       Wages and salaries                                         35
                       Non-salary recurrent spending                              91
                      Total                                                      740

21.      Capacity to utilize budget allocation. Despite the Government’s clear effort to increase spending
in key sectors, including water, budget execution has faced major challenges, including securing project
financing, achieving ambitious domestic revenue targets, and addressing high payment of arrears. As a
result, actual spending in the sector, particularly in the rural water supply component, has fallen short of
the approved budgets. This also indicates the actual capacity to use funds particularly in the rural water
sector where this is more acute.

22.     The IFMIS data does not provide enough details to analyses actual release of funds to the rural
water component of the sector, there is no enough evidence to assess capacity to utilize funds. This will
pose challenges in identifying budget utilization gaps at the different levels of government from the central
government to the districts which is important for the PforR program implementation. The IFMS system
needs to be modified to incorporate this information going forward.


                                                        55
                           Annex 5. Summary Fiduciary Systems Assessment

1.       A FSA was carried out with the objective of determining whether the Program’s fiduciary systems
provide reasonable assurance that the financing proceeds will be used for the intended purposes, with due
attention to the principles of economy, efficiency, effectiveness, transparency, and accountability. The
assessment was carried out in line with Operational Policy/Bank Procedure (OP/BP) 9.00 and PforR
Fiduciary Systems Assessment Guidance Note, issued June 30, 2017, and effective June 30, 2017.

2.      The financial management risk for the Program is assessed as Substantial. Key risks include
unreliable cashflow, budget shortfalls, noncompliance with internal control systems, poor Internet
connectivity, poor record keeping, underutilization of Epicor, and weak capacity at districts. Other risks
include delays in preparation and submission of reports, weak internal audit functions, and weak audit
committees. There is a need to strengthen these functions for them to monitor how identified issues are
being addressed.

3.       The procurement risk of the participating entities in the Program is Substantial. The FSA
entailed a review of the capacity of the participating entities in view of (a) staffing level, managing program
resources, recording, controlling, and producing timely, understandable, relevant, and reliable information
for the borrower and the World Bank; (b) following procurement rules and procedures, with performance
focusing on procurement performance indicators and the extent to which the capacity and performance
supports the PDOs; and (c) ensuring that implementation arrangements are adequate and risks are
reasonably mitigated by the existing framework. The approach for the FSA for the Agency operations builds
on the initial assessment under WSDP-2, including measures undertaken to mitigate identified risks at the
design stage of WSDP-2 Program. The fiduciary assessment revealed the following: (a) the district’s water,
health, and sanitation departments lack logistical facilities for site supervision for the Program owing to the
size of the water and sanitation activities anticipated to cover a wide area at the community levels; (b) the
districts will need to reinforce the technical teams (water and health and sanitation) to be able to supervise
the Program activities taking place at the remote areas as well as providing necessary logistical facilities
for effective supervision of works under the Program; (c) it was also observed that most districts have
inadequate working facilities including offices, computers, printers, photocopiers, binding machines, and
Internet facilities; and (d) the technical teams have limited knowledge and skills in the contract
managements. The F&C risks have been identified and embedded as part of the broader fiduciary risks, and
mitigation measures have been identified.

4.     The overall fiduciary risk rating is assessed as Substantial. The fiduciary system’s capacity and
performance are adequate to provide reasonable assurance that the funds will be used for the intended
purposes with due attention to the principles of economy, efficiency, effectiveness, transparency, and
accountability.

Scope

5.       The assessment covered the MoWI, MoHCDGEC, PO-RALG, and a sample of the participating
districts. The assessment also takes into consideration the CAG’s Report for the districts and Central
Government for FY16, Tanzania PEFA Report 2017, Annual Performance Evaluation Report of the Public
Procurement Regulatory Authority (PPRA), the Procurement and Value for Money Audits Reports of
selected districts, and the Baseline Study Report on Enhancement of Procurement Capacity of districts.

6.      The FSA was done to assess the Program’s institutional and implementation arrangements,
fiduciary management capacity, and implementation performance. The legal and regulatory framework for
this Program’s fiduciary systems was found to be comprehensive and in line with international principles




                                                      56
and standards for public procurement and financial management. The assessment also considered how
existing systems handle the F&C risks.

7.       The Program will be implemented by the MoWI for activities relating to rural water, the
MoHCDGEC for activities pertaining to rural sanitation and hygiene including in health centers and
dispensaries, and the MoEST for activities relating to WASH services in primary schools. Most of the
procurement activities will happen at the district level while procurement activities at the ministerial level,
in particular the technical assistance, will be handled by the MoWI and PO-RALG. Both the MoWI and
PO-RALG have capacity to handle procurement of any magnitude under the Program as they have been
previously involved in the implementation of various World Bank projects. PO-RALG will provide overall
coordination and implementation support for the Program.

Review of Public Financial Management Cycle

Planning and Budgeting

Adequacy of Budgets

8.       The planning and budget preparation processes are considered reasonably participatory and
adequate for the Program. The main shortcoming is the absence of a reliable cash-flow budget to align
implementation of planned activities and timing of cash availability. Given the current environment under
which the districts rely on intergovernmental transfers for over 90 percent of budget resources, and these
transfers are largely uncertain, both as to amount and timing, cash-flow projections are important and should
form part of the budget, especially as Tanzania is moving toward having a program budget mechanism. For
example, the districts’ budgets for OC to support program monitoring, supervision, and administration on
annual basis. However, disbursements of OC from the central Government to the districts have been a
challenge in the past two years.

Procurement Planning

9.       The PPA and its regulations require all procuring entities to prepare Annual Procurement Plans as
part of the annual work plans and budget. To maximize economy and efficiency in its procurement, all
procuring entities are required to aggregate their requirements within the departments of the institution. In
compiling such plans, procuring entities are required to establish appropriate method of procurement and
timescale for each package to be calculated on the basis of the standard processing times prescribed in the
regulations. It is also mandatory that procuring entities should advertise the Annual Procurement Plans in
the form of General Procurement Notice in the newspapers and submit a copy to the PPRA for publishing
in their website and for monitoring purposes. It was observed that Annual Procurement Plans are prepared
based on the annual work plan of different departments within the districts and linked with the budget.

10.      The World Bank’s review has found that most of the requirements are not appropriately aggregated;
there is an excessive use of competitive quotations as a default method and thereby splitting of contracts.
Procurement plans are not used as an instrument to monitor progress of implementation of procurement
activities, but rather compliance with the law.

11.     Most of the goods/services in the districts are procured through Common Used Items Systems
(CUIS) under Framework Agreements introduced by the Government in February 2011 and are managed
by the Government Procurement Services Agency (GPSA), an Executive Agency of the Ministry of
Finance, established under the Executive Agencies Act No. 30 of 1997, responsible for overseeing the
implementation of the CUIS in the country. The Framework Agreements are entered between the GPSA
and respective suppliers and/or service providers. districts are required to send call-off orders to preselected



                                                      57
suppliers’ competitive prices. This shift of paradigm has resulted in some districts preparing procurement
plans for a few goods or services which are not covered under common used items. Works contracts are not
subjected to this system. The use of Framework Agreement has replaced the conventional shopping method.
This approach will, in addition, minimize the scale of F&C practices that was entrenched in the shopping
procedures.

Procurement Profile of the Program

12.       Procurement activities under the Program will mainly be for investments aimed at (a) supporting
comprehensive improvements in sustainable access to water supply services in the participating regions and
districts by increasing coverage of water supply services by financing investments identified in district
WASH plans with a focus on low-coverage communities as well as rehabilitating and repairing non-
functional and partly functional water points and (b) supporting NSC-2 through the CLTS activities to
achieve improved household sanitation and ODF villages, including investments in sanitation and hygiene
facilities in public schools and health facilities.

13.     Procurement activities at the district level will be managed by the Procurement Management Unit
supported by the Water Department of the districts which are responsible for administering water sector
programs as well as the Education and Health Departments for the activities related to their sectors. The
Water Department will also be responsible for the management of the contracts for the water supply
schemes including payments to contractors, suppliers, and service providers.

Budget Execution

Treasury Management and Funds Flow

14.      The Program funds will be received from IDA into a Project Holding Pooled Account denominated
in U.S. dollars and then, transferred to the Consolidated Fund subaccount for the project denominated in
local currency. The MoWI, MoHCDGEC, PO-RALG, and districts will be paid through the Exchequer
Issue Notification and transfers from the Consolidated Fund subaccount for the project will be made to their
bank accounts mainly held by commercial banks. Payments will then be made from these accounts for
eligible expenditure. These accounts and their signatories should be submitted to the World Bank between
the signing of the credit and its effectiveness. Eligible project expenditure will include all expenditure
related to the achievement of the DLIs.

15.     The assessment noted smooth flow of funds under other programs implemented using PforR in
Tanzania. There has been significant improvement on flow of funds under the ongoing PforR Programs due
to direct disbursement of funds to lower level IAs. Also, the PforR Program arrangement includes
disbursement of funds as a performance indicator element. Effective from FY2013–14, the budget approval
process and endorsement by the Parliament are tabled in April to June each year. Before this change,
budgets were tabled and approved in the July–August parliament session which impacted timely release of
development funds. Program implementation starts in July each year. The impact of the change in the GoT
budget cycle is yet to be formally assessed, but interviews with PO-RALG, the MoWI, the MoHCDGEC,
and the districts’ finance staff indicated that funds from Treasury are released on time when available in
the Government Consolidated Fund. The current arrangement where funds are sent directly to lower-level
IAs should be adopted for the Program as appropriate.

16.     However, there is concern regarding the unpredictable nature of releases of funds by the MoFP,
particularly on OC. Discussions with LGAs indicated that funds for implementation support for most
projects comes from OC. Due to the unpredictable nature of OC, implementation support in terms of
monitoring has been negatively affected in most of the programs. Without reasonable predictability, it is



                                                    58
difficult to plan and support implementation of projects. The envisaged project needs to commit some
resources for monitoring and supervision. To enhance transparency and accountability on project funds,
there will be need for displaying amounts transferred and received on notice boards and their websites at
all levels.

Accounting and Financial Reporting

17.     The accounting policies and procedures for both the central and local governments were found to
be up to date and robust. However, there is a need to enhance the skills of staff, especially at the districts
level on how to utilize them effectively while producing accounts. The Epicor accounting system needs to
be configured at the district level to be able to generate financial reports.

18.      Government Accounting Circular No. 1 of 1999/2000 requires that all Government transactions to
be processed under the Integrated Financial Management Information System (IFMIS); that is, Epicor
accounting software. The accounting software is being used by most of the districts. The Epicor accounting
software has limitations in terms of its inability to produce annual financial reports. Additionally, the asset
management module of the system has not yet been fully developed to record assets on the system.
Generally, the connectivity of the Epicor system has improved over time at the districts. However, there
are instances of low connectivity which creates inefficiency in processing transactions. The Plan-Rep tool
is used for planning and budgeting at the districts but once the budget is complete, the tool cannot
automatically upload the budget to Epicor as it is manually done and subject to errors. To address the matter,
there is a need to have an integrator for the two systems. The reporting module for Epicor needs to be
enhanced to produce useful reports for the management to take action. Finally, the CAG Report on districts
(2015–2016), released in March 2017, noted that Epicor 9.05 is being implemented but has limited usage
in terms of generating annual financial statement and management reports for decision making, thus leading
to preparing the reports manually. PO-RALG and the Ministry of Finance have an action plan they are
working on to improve on the Epicor system.

19.     The central Government and all the districts have adopted International Public Sector Accounting
Standards (IPSAS) using accrual basis of accounting in preparation of annual financial statements. IPSAS
reporting is a remarkable development in the public sector. Continuous training will be required to ensure
robust reporting for use by all stakeholders.

20.      The Program will be complex due to involvement of multiple implementing entities. There will be
risks of delay in submission of various financial reports given the multiple implementing entities. This is
largely because reports will have to be generated right from the districts’ level and consolidated at the
regional level before submission to PO-RALG for review and finally, to the MoWI for activities relevant
to rural water; and to the MoHCDGEC, for activities pertaining to sanitation and hygiene. Staff training
and continuous communication will ensure timely reporting during implementation.

21.      There will be potential risk of comingle resources and double count expenditures between the PforR
and IPF instruments. The two instruments will be applied simultaneously in the proposed program
particularly at the MoWI and the MoHCDGEC. To mitigate the above risk, a sub-donor code to earmark
funding from each instrument needs to be created in Epicor at both the MoWI and the MoHCDGEC to track
resources and expenditure associated with each instrument separately. Additionally, staff will need to be
trained before Program effectiveness. The training objectives will include understanding and application of
the two instruments from accounting perspective and hence facilitate timely and accurate financial
reporting.




                                                      59
Procurement Processes and Procedures

22.      The Legal and Regulatory Framework to govern the Program’s procurement shall be the PPA No.
7 of 2011 as amended through the Public Procurement (amendment) Act of 2016. Public procurement in
Tanzania is governed by the new law, effective July 7, 2016. The associated regulations for the new Act
have been published. Under the new Act, procurement functions remain decentralized to procuring entities
with the PPRA continuing to provide oversight functions in public procurement. In addition, the new Act
has maintained the definitions of F&C with regard to coercive practices, collusive practices, and obstructive
practices. Since enactment and application of PPA 2011 and its regulations, there has been significant
achievements in public procurement processes though there were some concerns that resulted into its
amendments. Some of the reasons which led to the amendments include long duration of procurement
process, issues surrounding integrity and professionalism, constraints to commercially oriented
Government companies/institutions, lack of and failure to apply approved standards for common items and
services required by Government, differences between procurement procedures used by districts and those
used by other procuring entities. The amendments also lay emphasis on submitting details and not just a list
of procurement contracts awarded and the use of Procurement Management Information System. Removal
of ‘closed’ Framework Agreement within the procurement of Common Use Item Service. The amendment
Act protects local content and firms.

23.      The new Act has strengthened some functions of the PPRA including powers to cancel procurement
proceedings after investigating and reasonably being satisfied that there is a breach of the Act. The new Act
has also reduced the cool-off period from 14 to 7 days, during which an intention to award the contract is
communicated to all bidders giving them opportunity to submit a complaint if any on the proposed award.
Furthermore, the procurement complaint review process has been changed to two tiers with the PPRA no
longer being involved in the review of complaints, thus a substantial reduction in the overall time for
handling a complaint. Otherwise, the overall basic principles of the public procurement and general
institutional arrangements have remained the same.

24.      The PPA complies with applicable obligations derived from national and international
requirements. The procurement policies are based on the need to make the best possible use of public funds,
while conducting all procurement with integrity and fairness. All public officers and members of tender
boards undertaking or approving procurement are required to be guided by the basic considerations of the
public procurement policy including the need for economy and efficiency in the use of public funds; give
all eligible bidders/consultants equal opportunities to compete in providing goods or executing works or
providing services; and encourage national manufacturing, contracting, and service industries and the
importance of integrity, accountability, fairness, and transparency in the procurement process.

25.     For better implementation of the amended Act, a set of regulations have been issued; the Public
Procurement (Amendments) Regulations, 2016; vide Government Notice No. 333 of December 30, 2016.
These are supplemented by the districts’ (Establishment and Proceeding of the Tender Boards) Government
Notice No. 177 of 2007 for procurements under the districts.

26.     In line with the issued regulations, the PPRA has issued various documents as working tools
including Standard Bidding Documents for Works, Goods, and Non-consulting Services; Standard Request
for Proposals; Guidelines on the Tenders Evaluation (Works, Goods and Non-consulting Services);
Guidelines on the Technical and Financial Proposals Evaluation and Report Preparation; Guidelines for
Preparing Responsive Proposal; and Guidelines for Preparing Responsive Bids and Procedural Forms. All
these documents are accessible on the PPRA’s website.

27.     The PPA and its associated regulations require procuring entities wishing to commence competitive
tendering to provide all eligible bidders with timely and adequate notification of the procuring entity’s


                                                     60
requirements and an equal opportunity to tender for the required goods, works, or services. The regulations
spell out the contents of invitation to tender and it is mandatory that invitations to tender to be made through
written invitations. The format used to publish the adverts is issued by the PPRA and it contains adequate
information to prospective bidders to make a decision to participate. It is mandatory that the solicitation
documents are issued immediately after first publication of the tender notice to all bidders who respond to
the tender notice. The minimum tendering period for National Competitive Bidding (NCB), which is the
most widely used method, is 14 days. The bids are opened in public in the presence of
bidders/representatives who choose to attend. Minutes of bids opened are prepared although in most cases,
they are not sent to bidders who submitted bids.

28.      Generally, PO-RALG and all the districts use these Standard Bidding Documents issued by the
PPRA. The regulations provide the contents of solicitation documents and all the requirements stipulated
in the regulations have been incorporated in the Standard Bidding Documents. The Standard Bidding
Documents contain the evaluation criteria relating to eligibility of the bidders and qualification of the
bidders, and it is mandatory to disclose evaluation criteria to be used in determining the successful bid in
the solicitation documents. Regulations are clear on the evaluation criteria to be used in the evaluation of
the bids and there is emphasis that procuring entities’ determination of a tender’s responsiveness should be
based on the contents of the tender itself without recourse to extrinsic evidence.

29.     The Standard Bidding Documents issued by the PPRA have been reviewed and found to be
acceptable to the World Bank with some exception on the NCB procedures. However, the challenge has
been to customize the bidding documents to suit the requirements of particular procurement. The review of
the sample bidding documents during assessment revealed that information provided in the data sheet and
special conditions of contract was adequate although improvement is required in the
evaluation/qualification criteria. In terms of specifications, especially for works contract, the district relies
on the specification issued by the Ministry of Works with minor modifications depending on the
circumstance.

30.     Bids evaluations are carried out by evaluation committees constituted according to the PPA and its
regulations. Normally, evaluation committees comprise a minimum of three members for works, goods,
non-consulting services, and financial proposals and a minimum of five for technical proposals. Evaluation
committees comprise members from the user departments, technical staff, and sometimes from outside the
Procuring Entity where expertise is lacking internally. Generally, evaluations follow the
evaluation/qualification criteria specified in the bidding documents although it has been noted that at times
no reasons are recorded as to why particular bidders are disqualified. Evaluations are done in three stages:
preliminary examination, detailed evaluation, and post-qualification analysis, and these stages are adhered
to in most of the evaluation reports reviewed by the World Bank, especially in the works contracts.
Sometimes, however, the provisions in the PPA and its regulations have not been abided by the evaluation
committees as well as the Tender Board.

31.      Significant delays have been noted in bid evaluations including adjudication of the evaluation
reports and awards recommendations. Delays in getting necessary approvals lead to tenders being awarded
after expiration of bids’ validity period. Unsuccessful bidders are informed on the award decisions and
publications of awards are placed at the districts notice board. Transparency is among the fundamental
pillars of public procurement, and disclosure of information is one of the elements of transparency. The law
requires the PPRA to publish contracts awards in its journal and website, the names of those who have been
awarded the contracts, contract amount, the date when the awards were made, contracts period, and final
contracts amount. For the PPRA to fulfill this requirement, procuring entities are required to notify the
PPRA on the awarded contracts so that they can be published. However, from the audit reports, it is reported
that the compliance on the publication of contract awards has been a problem since the PPRA commenced
procurement audits.


                                                       61
Contract Administration

32.      Contract management for the procurement of goods, works, or services contracts is the
responsibility of procuring entities. The procuring entities are required to ensure that the contracts are
implemented in accordance with the terms and conditions governing those contracts, and to take or initiate
steps to correct any deviations from the requirements of the contracts. Contract management in the districts
has been observed to be improving with the exception of the management of securities that were found to
have expired with no extension to appropriately cover the contractor’s and/or suppliers’ obligations. This
is attributed to limited capacity of human resources, knowledge, experience, and logistical constraints that
inhibit effective administration of the contracts. Most of the contracts are not completed on time, with late
payments to contractors, delayed decision making to contract variations, and poor enforcement for non-
performers.

33.      Training will be required for both procurement and technical staff in contract management to ensure
that they are knowledgeable of the requirements of contract management.

Internal Controls

Internal Controls Systems

34.     The MoWI, PO-RALG and MoHCDGEC internal controls systems are based on the Public Finance
Regulations 2001 (revised 2004).

35.     The basis for internal control procedures in districts is the Local Authority Accounting Manual of
2009 and the Local Authority Financial Memorandum of 2010. The two documents set out detailed
processes to be followed and documentation necessary for comprehensive accounting system, segregation
of duties, approval hierarchies, and filing of documents. However, in view of regular observations made
and audit queries raised by the CAG in annual reports, recommended procedures are not always adhered
to, which has resulted in regular audit queries from the internal and external auditors.

36.      The major internal control challenges faced by the districts include inefficient performance of both
internal auditors and audit committees and inadequate internal control environment. There is a need to
strengthen the capacity of the internal audit structures.

37.      The Government has taken a number of initiatives to address noncompliance and strengthen
oversight to ensure that audit findings are addressed on time and adequately by ministries and the districts,
but more needs to be done especially at the district level. Steps taken include the creation of an Internal
Audit Unit in each ministry and district; the appointment of the IAG with five assistants, including Assistant
IAG responsible for local government and another one for line ministries; and rollout of audit committees
at PO-RALG, the MoWI, the MoHCDGEC, and the districts but which still need to have their skills
enhanced to follow up audit issues to ensure they are addressed. Another development that has enhanced
the monitoring of the districts to address audit issues is the administrative authority granted to the regional
commissioners to chair districts’ council meetings to address issues raised by the CAG. Also, the CAG
audit planning calendar and overall audit strategy is shared with regional commissioners to ensure that the
districts are aware of areas of focus during the FY. Most district Internal Audit Units have vehicles to
support performance of duties.




                                                      62
Internal Audit

38.       Internal Audit Units have improved in terms of functions by putting in place annual internal audit
plans, audit strategy and adoption of risk based audit. Despite having functioning Internal Audit Units, there
are still challenges, which makes the work of the units difficult.

39.     Most of the district Internal Audit Units visited by the World Bank mission are still facing
challenges. The Internal Audit Units lack working tools and information technology equipment to support
out-of-office work, funding for the units are inadequate, and the units had average of two to three staff
including the Chief Internal Auditor. The staffing level is below the requirement of five staff per district
based on the GoT staff assessment.

40.      In general, 72 percent (94 out of 130 districts) and 73 percent (95 out of 130 districts) had
insufficient budget and shortage of internal audit staff, respectively, to enable the districts’ Internal Audit
Units carry out their functions effectively43.

41.      There is a need for PO-RALG to address internal audit staff shortage on time. Also, it is important
to facilitate the internal auditors with working tools and budget to visit the schools to conduct quarterly
internal audits. Annual internal audit plans should include schools to be visited and audit risk
considerations.

Program Governance and Anticorruption Arrangements

Sharing Information on F&C Allegations

42.      In line with the ACGs, the Government, through the MoWI, will share with the World Bank all
information on F&C allegations, investigations, and actions taken on the Program, including on financial
management and procurement as needed. The GoT’s legal system provides for the Prevention and
Combating of Corruption Bureau (PCCB) as the primary agency for investigating F&C. The PCCB has 29
regional offices and 86 district offices with resident investigative staff in each office. In this context, F&C
allegations made with respect to Program funds should be referred by the beneficiaries to the district offices
of the PCCB. The authority to refer these allegations to the PCCB is with the district Director who is the
accounting officer. The PCCB gets monthly reports from its regional offices on F&C and other relevant
activities. For this Program, the PCCB will compile and share information on F&C once every year to the
MoWI, who will share with the World Bank. The details of this reporting would include the types of
allegations and the status of actions taken.

Investigations of F&C allegations

43.       The PCCB, as the mandated organization in Tanzania for implementing the Prevention and
Combating of Corruption Act (2007), will undertake investigations of all incidences of F&C under the
project. Where the World Bank finds it of interest, it will formally state its intention to participate in
investigation. The Prevention and Combating of Corruption Act permits the PCCB to cooperate and
collaborate with the World Bank in the fight against corruption and permits the PCCB and the World Bank
to undertake joint investigations of sanctionable practices if and when the parties so agree. This does not
preclude the World Bank from undertaking its own investigations of F&C allegations under the Program,
if it is desirable. In this context, the investigation of F&C allegations under the Program will be handled
through three possible modalities, depending on circumstances.


43 Source: FY2015–2016 CAG - LGAs Audit Report issued in April 2017.




                                                         63
44.     The PCCB will undertake its own independent corruption investigations arising from allegations
reported to it according to the law and mandate.

45.     The PCCB and INT will undertake joint corruption investigations. The initiation, scope, and
operational procedures will be decided on a case-by-case basis by the PCCB and INT.

46.     The INT will undertake its own F&C investigations. To this extent, the Program Participation
Agreements to be entered between the MoEST and PO-RALG will ensure that both entities and the INT
are able to acquire all records and documentation that they may reasonably request from the Program
Implementation Units regarding the use of Program funding.

47.      In practice, in Tanzania, there are several F&C allegations that are raised in public meetings
between political appointees, such as the Regional Commissioner/District Commissioner, with citizens.
Usually these are not recorded in the formal system but often appear in the press. It is important that the
allegations in connection with the Program as well and the action taken be reported and recorded. There is
a need to ensure districts that receive funding under the Program (a) have functional complaint-handling
mechanisms that are used to register and process formal and informal (received through public meetings)
complaints; (b) take action to address registered complaints; and (c) report on the action taken on the
registered complaints to PO-RALG and the MoEST.

48.      The PPA (as amended in 2016) has also enhanced the definition of F&C in a broader term by
including definitions of coercive practices, collusive practices, and obstructive practices that were missing
in the PPA 2004. Furthermore, the new Act has given powers to the PPRA to blacklist and debar a bidder
who has been debarred by international organizations, such as the World Bank, in cases related or unrelated
to F&C for such period as it is debarred by the international organization plus a further period of ten years
(for F&C cases) or five years (for non-F&C cases). The new Act has introduced, among others, (a)
mandatory inclusion of local firms and experts in consultancy contracts; (b) domestic preference to both
international and national competitive bidding; (c) a requirement to set aside contracts to be used for
capacity building of local firms; and (d) a requirement to set aside contracts below a defined threshold to
be awarded to local firms only.

49.     The Borrower will need to make a commitment that persons or entities debarred or suspended by
the World Bank are not awarded a contract under the Program during the period of such debarment or
suspension. This will mean that suppliers, contractors, and consultants must be checked against the World
Bank’s debarment and temporary suspension lists before contracts are awarded.

Auditing
50.      The Public Audit Act no. 11 of 2008 grants the CAG exclusive powers to audit public funds,
including this Program’s funds. The CAG has sole responsibility for statutory audit of all ministries,
departments, and agencies and districts.44 The CAG discharges this responsibility either directly or through
private auditors contracted as agents. Outsourcing of the audits partly solves the challenge of staff
constraints at the CAG office. The CAG has regularly carried out external audits in time and issued reports
within the nine months of the year end, as stipulated under the law. Audit reports in Tanzania are published
on the CAG website and scrutinized at Parliament by the Public Accounts Committee and Local
Government Accounts Committee. Audit terms of reference will be agreed on an annual basis between the
CAG and other stakeholders, that is, the MoWI, MoHCDGEC, PO-RALG, districts, and IDA to ensure
there is an agreeable scope covered, given the risk of the Program. Should there be a need to conduct other



44 Audit at LGAs is governed by the Local Government Finances Act No. 9 of 1982 (revised in 2000), which stipulates that

accounts of every LGA shall be audited by the National Audit Office (NAO).


                                                             64
forms of audit, for example, forensic and value-for-money audits, these will be done by the CAG that has
departments handling these types of audits.

Procurement and Financial Management Capacity

Financial Management Capacity

51.      Given the nature of this operation with numerous implementing entities, there will be financial
management capacity challenges that will need to be addressed. This is because of the various levels of
implementation. Thus, a number of interventions will be required to keep the capacity levels high to support
this kind of program. These will go in line with the risk mitigation measures that are recommended below.

Procurement Management Capacity

52.      In all the districts visited, there were procurement officers although the number of staff is
inadequate to match the procurement volumes. Currently, experience of procurement officers varies
significantly from one district to the other as there are districts with officers who have experience and others
with junior officers who do not have adequate experience. Due to the lack of adequate number of staff in
most of the districts, the PMU members are drawn from different user departments to form ad hoc
committees to handle procurement issues, contrary to the requirement of the PPA. Generally, the assessment
revealed that there is inadequate knowledge in the application of provisions of the newly enacted PPA 2011
as amended through the Public Procurement (Amendment) Act 2016 and its regulations.

53.      The districts should assess the staffing requirements based on the programs and recruit/appoint
qualified and experienced staff to fill any gaps as appropriate and conduct tailored trainings on the PPA and
its regulations and contract management for the staff in Procurement Managements Units and Technical
Departments.

Program Systems and Capacity Improvements

54.     Table 5.1 summarizes the integrated fiduciary risks and associated mitigation measures.

                        Table 5.1. Integrated Fiduciary Risk and Mitigation Measures
  Fiduciary
                    Description                Mitigation Measures                Due Date       Responsibility
     Risk
 Financial Management Risk
 Planning      Unfunded budgets and      (a) The Program funds to be            During           MoWI,
 and           absence of reliable       earmarked using accounting codes       implementation   MoHCDGEC,
 budgeting     cashflow budget to        at the Consolidated Fund using a                        MoFP, and
               align implementation      subaccount for the Program under                        PO-RALG
               of planned activities     the MoWI, MoHCDGEC and PO-
               and timing of cash        RALG, to ensure program budgets
               availability              are funded
                                         (b) Reliable cash flow budgets to
                                         be prepared
 Accounting      (a) Poor connectivity   (a) Strengthen the connectivity in     During           MoWI,
 and financial   between the districts   Epicor to efficiently use the          implementation   PO-RALG,
 reporting       and the central         system.                                                 MoHCDGEC,
                 servers. Failure to     (b) There is also a need to activate                    and MoFP
                 record assets at all    the asset management module of
                 levels.                 the system to record all the assets
                                         at each district.



                                                       65
 Fiduciary
                  Description                 Mitigation Measures                 Due Date       Responsibility
   Risk
             (b) Epicor is not being    (b) The financial reporting module
             used now to record         for Epicor needs to be enhanced to
             assets acquired by the     produce useful reports for
             districts in the system.   management to take action.
             (c) Weak capacity,         (c) There is a need to train all
             especially at the          accounting staff at both the central
             districts, to implement    and local government on the use of
             IPSAS using accrual        IPSAS.
             basis of accounting.       (d) There will be a need to train
             (d) Delays in              staff who consistently send reports
             submission of various      late to enhance their skills as well
             financial reports given    as closely monitor them at the
             that there could be        district levels to ensure timely
             communication and          financial reports are received.
             consolidation              (e) Include subdonor code in
             challenges at the          Epicor to earmark funding from
             districts, PO-RALG,        each instrument and provide
             and ministries.            training to staff to be familiar with
             (e) Potential risk to      accounting for the funds under
             comingle resources         both instruments (PforR and IPF).
             and double count of
             expenditures between
             PforR and IPF
             instruments.
Treasury     (a) Under-funding by       (a) Set aside program resources for     During           MoFP,
management   the GoT of budget          monitoring and supervision at all       implementation   MoWI,
and funds    may impact on project      levels of implementation.                                MoHCDGEC,
flow         implementation,                                                                     PO-RALG,
             monitoring, and                                                                     and districts
             supervision
Internal     (a) Noncompliance          The Internal Audit Units need to        During           MoWI,
controls     with internal control      be strengthened in terms of staff,      implementation   MoHCDGEC
(including   systems at both the        equipment such as laptops, and                           PO-RALG,
internal     central and local          budget for travel to effectively                         and districts.
audit)       government levels          monitor compliance of the internal
             (b) Weak internal          control systems and report on a
             audit function in          quarterly basis on the audit
             terms of adequacy of       findings for the management of the
             staff, equipment, and      MoWI, MoHCDGEC, PO-RALG,
             budget to monitor the      and districts. Action will need to
             internal controls put      be taken by the management to
             in place                   address audit issues and this will
             (c) Weak audit             need to be monitored on a
             committees to ensure       quarterly basis by audit
             that audit issues are      committees whose skills will need
             followed up and            to be strengthened through
             addressed                  training. The administrative
                                        authority granted to regional
                                        commissioners to chair districts
                                        council meetings to address issues
                                        raised by the CAG will also ensure
                                        there is compliance in addressing
                                        audit issues.



                                                      66
   Fiduciary
                      Description              Mitigation Measures                Due Date       Responsibility
     Risk
 Risks for Procurement at the districts’ Level
 Procurement Inadequate technical        Recruit/appoint qualified and          Within 6         PO-RALG
 capacity       staff in districts’      experienced staff to fill the gaps.    months of the
                works department                                                Program
                                                                                implementation
                 Staff has inadequate      Conduct tailor-made training         During           PO-RALG and
                 knowledge of              courses specifically to address      Program          PPRA
                 procurement planning,     weakness identified in areas of      implementation
                 preparation of request    procurement and technical staff at
                 for proposal              districts.
                 documents, and
                 contract management.
 Records         Weak records              Establish records                    Within 6         PO-
 keeping         management system         keeping/management system.           months of        RALG/districts
                                                                                Program
                                                                                implementation
 Processes       Delays in completion      Adherence to the standard            Throughout       PO-
 and             of procurement            processing times throughout          Program          RALG/districts
 procedures      processes and lack of     project implementation. Prepare      implementation
                 internal control          internal procedures manual to be
                 manual                    used by all the districts.
 Controls and    Weak controls and         Carry out procurement and            Annual           PO-
 integrity       risk of F&C               performance (value-for-money)                         RALG/PPRA
                                           audits annually.
 Contract        Inadequate knowledge      Conduct tailored training specific   During           MoWI and
 management      and skills in contract    to address weakness in these areas   Program          PO-RALG
                 managements               to procurement and user              implementation
                                           department staff—the MoWI and
                                           PO-RALG should approach the
                                           PPRA to facilitate.

Implementation Support Plan

55.     An annual FSA will be conducted for the Program supported by mainly the Internal Audit
Department and the PPRA. Adequate budget will need to be allocated for this assessment. This assessment
will be supplemented by on-site visits done by the World Bank’s fiduciary staff at least twice a year.
Reliance will also be placed on the annual audit reports produced by the CAG. In addition, desk reviews
will be done for interim financial reports and procurement reports received during the financial year. In-
depth reviews may also be commissioned by the World Bank whenever deemed necessary. Implementation
support will also involve provision of capacity strengthening in procurement, financial management and
governance, and anti-corruption as deemed necessary.




                                                        67
                  Annex 6. Summary Environmental and Social Systems Assessment

1.       The ESSA found that, overall, the national regulatory framework and technical guidelines for
environmental and social due diligence with respect to the Program are adequate and the existence of
environmental practices and procedures under existing World Bank-funded water, health/sanitation
programs, and the Tanzania Productive Social Safety Net Project may help close any existing gaps. A
number of policies, instruments, and laws support environment and social management and the
environmental and social impact assessment processes in Tanzania. These are supplemented by a number
of sectoral policies that consider environmental and social impact assessment as one of the planning tools
for facilitating and promoting sustainable development. Such systems are principally well aligned with the
core principles and key planning elements defined in the World Bank PforR Policy. The Program will,
furthermore, benefit by following the measures defined in the existing RPF and ESMF prepared for the
World Bank-funded First and Second Water Sector Support Projects, respectively. In addition, guidelines
have been produced by the MoWI (Guidelines of Good Environmental and Social Practices for the Water
and Sewerage Sector) to assure the implementation of environmental and social measures in the design,
construction, and operation of the water and sewerage projects. PO-RALG, with technical guidance from
the World Bank, has also developed a Technical Manual for Environmental and Social Management for the
Urban LGAs Program to guide the environmental and social impact assessment process of investments
under the urban local government strengthening program.

2.       However, there are certain inadequacies and gaps from the perspective of actual implementation of
such system identified through the ESSA. The assessed weaknesses are related to lack of enforcement and
compliance with existing laws, regulations, and guidelines governing environmental and social
management. In addition, inadequate attention to environmental, health, and safety concerns; weak land
acquisition management and resettlement practices; lack of systematic environmental and social
management data collection and reporting; and weak coordination among agencies are other factors
affecting the system. Awareness of the ESSA prepared for the ongoing programs among the IAs is low;
thus, some recommended actions are proposed to address these shortcomings and are included in DLRs and
the PAP for the Program.

3.       The anticipated negative environmental and social effects of the Program are not expected to be
significant. While the Program focuses on functionality and rehabilitation of existing facilities and services,
it also aims to expand services and does finance limited civil works for rural water supply and sanitation
and health activities. Small construction activities include (a) construction and rehabilitation of rural
schemes—drilling boreholes, shallow wells, and gravity and hand-pumped schemes; (b) construction of
new water points and rehabilitation of nonfunctional water points; (c) installation of water distribution
systems; (d) construction and upgrading sanitation and hygiene facilities in public schools and clinics; and
(e) installation of sanitation products including plastic pans and user-friendly handwashing stations. The
physical interventions are expected to have limited footprints in terms of impact on the ecology, loss of
land or asset, and land acquisition. The expected impacts are predictable and easily manageable with the
application of known mitigation measures.

4.      The social implications of the interventions that the Program is expected to address include, among
others, poverty and inequity (economic and health vulnerability); beliefs and traditions; gender
responsiveness; community consultation, participation, and representation; community capacity building to
sustainably operate, manage, and maintain rural water supply facilities; existence, functionality, and
effectiveness of mechanisms to promote accountability and transparency including consultations, feedback,
and grievance redress at village and district levels.

5.       A rural water supply and sanitation sector gender assessment was also undertaken to identify
critical institutional and operational actions necessary to furthering gender equality in WASH service


                                                      68
delivery. It found that, even though the NAWAPO and the WSP were in place, there is still little
consultation of both men and women in selecting and managing rural water supply schemes nor is there
equal participation of women in water committees and in leadership positions. Women are rarely involved
in decisions relating to water policies and strategies, WRM, or tariff setting and technology choices. They
are missing in key areas of water-related decision making.

6.       The ESSA analysis presented here identifies strengths, gaps, and opportunities in Tanzania’s
environmental and social management system with respect to addressing the environmental and social risks
associated with the Program. The analysis identified the following main areas for action to ensure that the
Program interventions are aligned with the Core Principles 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 of OP/BP 9.00 applicable to the
Program: (a) national environmental and social management system improvement; (b) provision of
technical guidance and enhancing implementation capacity; (c) addressing capacity constraints; (d)
adoption of measures to ensure inclusion and protection of disadvantaged and vulnerable persons; (e)
measures to guide voluntary land donation; (f) land acquisition/allocation for the Program; (f) gender
inclusion; and (g) improved systems for information disclosure and stakeholder consultation. The gaps
identified through the ESSA and subsequent actions to fill those gaps are expected to directly contribute to
the Program’s anticipated results for enhancing improved access to water, improved access to safely
managed sanitation, and strengthened institutional capacities for water and sanitation delivery.

7.       The following key measures will mitigate some of the abovementioned gaps: (a) A capacity
building plan, including provision for strengthening safeguards screening and monitoring arrangements,
will be developed early in year 1 of Program implementation, as part of the ‘Foundational Activities’ (DLI
1), and included in the Operations Manual. Central to this will be the mainstreaming of environmental and
social capacity strengthening under the multiple-activity IPF Technical Support Component; (b) Through
the IPF-funded SPSC consultancy and its 17 field-based consultants, the Program will support the capacity
building at the local and national levels. In addition, the Program will incentivize compliance through the
DLIs and the PAP; (c) Progress made on capacity building will be provided by the verification of DLI 7;
and (d) the program’s capacity building plan will include measures for good practices on inclusion of
Vulnerable and Disadvantaged Communities in culturally appropriate consultations in their local language
of understanding; this action is also included in the verification for DLIs 1 and 2.

Gender Issues

8.       Issues of quality, affordability, and design of sanitation and hygiene facilities for inclusive services
to adolescent girls, pregnant women, newly married women, and persons with disability need to be
addressed for the full realization of health benefits. The Program aims to strengthen the monitoring system
to ensure inclusiveness and adherence to standards in health and sanitation services. Capacity building of
COWSOs is key in addressing inequity (financial, time, and emotional distress) due to non-functionality of
water supply services. Strong and sustained sense of responsibility and active participation of communities
in the financing is an important aspect of sustainability. Strengthening accountability and transparency of
COWSOs toward communities is also important for continued community engagement and responsibility.
A well-structured community consultation and regular communication and feedback mechanisms
contribute to inclusiveness, acceptability, and improved quality of service. Capacity building of COWSOs
in critical areas of operation and management can effectively address issues of equity (gender and poverty)
and inclusion.

9.       As women are the primary users and managers of rural household water, they have a major stake
in rural water matters and must be involved in decisions about water issues. To narrow the gender gap at
all levels of the rural water sector, and to ensure water security for all, there needs to be more equity, and
women need to have greater involvement in decision making. Gender parity in COWSOs is yet to be
achieved although growing number of women are elected into COWSOs.


                                                       69
10.      National policies and legislation such as the NAWAPO acknowledge the key roles and practical
interest of women in rural water provision. A quota system was adopted to ensure women’s representation
in the formal water management structures at the village level, particularly in the Village Council and Water
Committees or COWSOs. The policy further requires a merit-based gender-sensitive recruitment policy
within all water sector institutions.

11.     An inclusive consultation ensures that the needs and preferences of women, men, girls, and boys
are considered in decision-making processes at different levels. Important decisions such as tariff setting
and modes of payment as well as physical location of water facilities have significant ramifications for
accessing services by women and other vulnerable groups. Physical location of facilities should consider
distance from villages as well as safety and security issues. Lessons drawn from water facilities globally
also show that sexual harassment at water facilities is a common occurrence that needs to be monitored and
addressed. Issues of quality, affordability, and design of sanitation and hygiene facilities for inclusive
services to adolescent girls, pregnant women, newly married women, and persons with disability need to
be addressed for the full realization of health benefits.

12.      A rural water supply and sanitation sector gender assessment has been undertaken to pick critical
institutional and operational actions necessary to furthering gender equality in WASH service delivery.

13.     The assessment recommends some high-level actions that are relevant to the Program. To
strengthen gender mainstreaming, an action plan will aim at, but not be limited to, institutionalizing gender
and creating and enabling environment for gender in management and in operations under the Program.
These initiatives will include development and adoption of a rural water gender mainstreaming strategy,
implementation of current quota system to include leadership positions, exploring of ways of promoting
female water technicians and engineers, training of both men and boys on sanitation and hygiene to promote
their active participation, continuous sensitization of all sectors on social and cultural discriminatory
practices and norms underpinning gender inequalities and discrimination against women with the aim of
correcting them. To promote the participation of women in governance and COWSOs, the Program will
adopt a dedicated gender action plan to be implemented at PO-RALG, district, and COWSOs and build
women’s capacity to lead and manage COWSOs.

Recommended Measures to Strengthen Systems Performance

14.      The Program ESSA analysis identifies strengths, gaps, and opportunities in Tanzania’s
environmental and social management system with respect to effectively addressing the environmental and
social risks associated with the Program. The ESSA converted these gaps and opportunities into a viable
strategy to strengthen environmental and social management capacity and performance at the national and
local levels.

15.     The analysis identified the main areas for action to ensure that the Program interventions are aligned
with the Core Principles 1–6. Table 6.1 summarizes the key measures to be taken to strengthen system
performance for environmental and social management in the Program.




                                                     70
                               Table 6.1. Environment and Social Program Action Plan

       Objective             DLI/PAP          Due Date                                   Measures
Strengthening             DLI 1:            Ongoing           • The Program will not finance subprojects that pose
environmental and         Number of                             significant environmental risk, and any physical or
social management         people with                           economic displacement is expected to be minor. Given
systems                   access to an                          the experience of the previous Water Sector Support
                          improved                              Project,45 there is a good opportunity to improve
                          water supply                          systemic implementation of environmental and social
                                                                practices related to the functioning and operations of
                          DLI 7:                                water and sanitation service provision.
                          Number of                           • The Program will adopt the measures and procedures
                          participating                         defined in the Environmental Impact Assessment and
                          districts                             Audit Regulations (2005), which underscores the
                          submitting                            obligation to screen projects and thereafter undertake
                          accurate and                          Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) before
                          complete                              commencement or financing of a moderate risk project
                          sector M&E                            or undertaking. The beneficial experience from WSSP-I
                          data                                  regarding improved screening of subprojects and
                                                                supervision at the field level will be formalized under
                          DLI 8: Agency                         the Program. Sub-projects representing significant
                          established and                       environmental or social risk are excluded from PforR
                          operationalized                       financing.
                                                              • The EIA regulation and procedure has been assessed and
                          PAP/IPF                               found to be compliant with PforR principles at the top
                                                                level, but needs greater attention on implementation
                                                                procedures, resources, and improved institutional
                                                                mechanisms at the local government/project site level.
                                                              • The current process for grievance redress and complaint
                                                                handling, inclusive and participatory community
                                                                consultations, social accountability, transparency and
                                                                information sharing and gender equality (including
                                                                vulnerable groups) also needs significant improvement.
                                                              • The Program will strengthen environmental management
                                                                functions of core implementing agencies to require
                                                                further coordination among various ministries, agencies,
                                                                and donor partners (including as relevant at the regional
                                                                and district/district levels) on environmental and social
                                                                aspects to further support field implementation.
                                                                Improvements in this regard will be assessed through
                                                                more regularized compliance monitoring, enforcement,
                                                                and reporting. These environmental and social measures
                                                                will be part of overall Program reporting and a central
                                                                environment management system. For improved
                                                                implementation, enforcement, and monitoring,
                                                                procedures defined in the EMA, EIA regulation,
                                                                management tools for the environmental and social
                                                                management in the ministry, the Sustainability Strategy,
                                                                the Trainers Manual for COWSOs and the District

45 The previous WSSP was supported through traditional World Bank lending rather than a PforR and was rated as Category A

for Environmental Assessment given the inclusion of a large well field, though the majority of subprojects were rated Category C
for low to minimal risk. The remaining were rated as Category B given their more modest but still manageable risk. The new
Program will only finance subprojects that pose these low to moderate risks, and exclusionary criteria will be specified in project
documents and the Financing Agreement.


                                                                71
     Objective         DLI/PAP          Due Date                               Measures
                                                            Water and Sanitation Teams capacity building will be
                                                            fully implemented.
                                                       •    Support COWSOs environmental and social
                                                            management functionality.
                                                       •    Monitor inclusion of disadvantaged and vulnerable
                                                            communities in services delivery.
Addressing capacity DLI 1:             Foundation      •    The capacity building plan (including provision for
constraints         Number of          activities -         strengthening safeguards screening and monitoring
                    people with        year 1               arrangements) will be developed early in year 1 of
                    access to an                            Program implementation, as part of the ‘Foundational
                    improved                                Activities’ (DLI 1), and included in the Operations
                    water supply                            Manual. Central to this will be the mainstreaming of
                                                            environmental and social capacity strengthening under
                     DLI 2:                                 the multiple-activity IPF Technical Support Component.
                     Number of                         •    Progress made on capacity building will be provided by
                     sustainably                            the verification of DLI 7.
                     functioning
                     water points

                     DLI 8: Agency
                     established and
                     operationalized

                     PAP/IPF
Improved systems     PAP               Foundation      • Accountability and transparency of institutions are
for information                        activities -      essential to ensure that the benefits of the Program reach
disclosure and                         year 1            all beneficiary groups (service users and providers). The
stakeholder                                              ESSA suggests the following actions: (a) establish
consultation                                             coordination mechanisms from national agencies and
                                                         DPs jointly led by the MoWI and PO-RALG and (b)
                                                         undertake orientation and awareness creation for
                                                         Program implementation to lower-level stakeholder
                                                         groups on environmental and social management
                                                         through publicly available mechanisms. The measures to
                                                         improve information disclosure and stakeholder
                                                         consultations will be included in the OM.
                                                       • During supervision, the World Bank will monitor
                                                         information available in the public domain on
                                                         community engagement activities and their contribution
                                                         to improved water and sanitation service provision.
Disadvantaged and    PAP               Before          • The Program will develop and adopt measures to ensure
vulnerable persons                     effectiveness     inclusive consultations and grievance redress with the
                                       of the            vulnerable and unreached/disadvantaged people to
                                       Program           safeguard them from exclusion from the Programs
                                                         benefits.
                                                       • The Program will adopt measures to ensure that benefits
                                                         and compensation accorded to disadvantaged persons
                                                         are culturally appropriate. The Program will also adopt
                                                         the GoT-prepared Vulnerable Groups Plan prepared for
                                                         the Tanzania Social Action Fund under the Tanzania
                                                         Productive Social Safety Net (P124045).
                                                       • These will be included in the OM before effectiveness of
                                                         the Program.



                                                           72
      Objective         DLI/PAP        Due Date                              Measures
Land                   DLI 1:         Before          • The Program will develop procedures for voluntary land
acquisition/allocation Number of      effectiveness     donations and formats of agreements (between the
for the Program        people with    of the            Program and land donors).
                       access to an   Program         • The Program will adopt the Water Sector Support
                       improved                         Project (P087154) - RPF to guide land acquisition and
                       water supply                     resettlement for the Program.
                                                      • These will be included in the OM before effectiveness of
                                                        the Program.
                      PAP
Gender inclusion      DLI 1:          Foundation      • A Gender Action Plan will be developed under the
                      Number of       activities -      ‘Foundation Activities’ of the Program during year 1.
                      people with     year 1          • To promote the participation of women in governance
                      access to an                      and COWSOs, the Program will adopt the dedicated
                      improved                          gender action plan to be implemented at PO-RALG,
                      water supply                      district, and COWSOs and build women’s capacity to
                                                        lead and manage COWSOs.
                      PAP                             • These initiatives will include development and adoption
                                                        of a rural water gender mainstreaming strategy,
                                                        extension of current quota system to include leadership
                                                        positions, exploring of ways of promoting female water
                                                        technicians and engineers, training of both men and boys
                                                        on sanitation and hygiene to promote their active
                                                        participation, continuous sensitization of all sectors on
                                                        social and cultural discriminatory practices and norms
                                                        underpinning gender inequalities and discrimination
                                                        against women with the aim of correcting them.
                                                      • It should also provide guidance on how sexual
                                                        exploitation and abuse will be safeguarded in the
                                                        Program.

The Grievance/Complaint Redress Mechanism

16.      National level. At the national level, there is a government portal for registering complaints. In
addition, the water sector will also have a portal that can be used for registering complaints. The existence
of this mechanism needs to be widely disseminated in the format and language understood by the citizens
using all media channels accessible to them. In addition, the implementers of both the portals need to have
a person identified for integrating the complaints into the community score card for discussion with the
service providers and monitored for redress.

17.     Local level. The following systems are in place at the local level:

        •     districts have a complaint box to receive complaints and depending on the issues raised, either
              provide resolutions or include in the community score card for mutual discussions and
              addressing.

        •     COWSOs also have a similar mechanism for handling complaint. They respond to the
              complainant or forward to the next higher level for redress of issues that are beyond their
              jurisdiction.

        •     District Councils are responsible for receiving and resolving complaints.




                                                       73
18.      The OM will need to review the existing system and provide timelines and a monitoring mechanism
for the GRM. The GRM will also need to be widely disseminated to all stakeholders.

19.      Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected as a result of a Bank
supported PforR operation, as defined by the applicable policy and procedures, may submit complaints to
the existing program grievance redress mechanism or the WB’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The
GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to address pertinent concerns.
Affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the WB’s independent Inspection
Panel which determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, as a result of WB non-compliance with its
policies and procedures. Complaints may be submitted at any time after concerns have been brought directly
to the World Bank's attention, and Bank Management has been given an opportunity to respond. For
information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank’s corporate Grievance Redress Service (GRS),
please visit http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For information on how to submit complaints to the World
Bank Inspection Panel, please visit: www.inspectionpanel.org.




                                                   74
                                   Annex 7. Systematic Operations Risk Rating

                   TANZANIA: Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Program

                                                     Stage: Board

Systematic Operations Risk-Rating Tool (SORT)
Risk Category                                                                   Rating (H, S, M, L)
   1.     Political and Governance                                                      M
   2.     Macroeconomic                                                                 L
   3.     Sector Strategies and Policies                                                M
   4.     Technical Design of Project or Program                                        S
   5.     Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability                  S
   6.     Fiduciary                                                                     S
   7.     Environment and Social                                                        M
   8.     Stakeholders                                                                  M
   9.     Other                                                                        n.a.
Overall                                                                                 S




                                                           75
                                   Annex 8. Program Action Plan

                                                                     Responsible        Completion
No.           Action Description                Due Date
                                                                        Party          Measurement
 1.   Timely transfer of Program funds      Within 2 months        MoWI,           Signed letters from
      to IAs including the districts and    after fund receipt     MoHCDGEC,       the MoWI,
      the RSs                               in the Project         and MoEST       MoHCDGEC, and
                                            Holding Pooled                         MoEST confirming
                                            Account                                budget allocation and
                                                                                   funds transfer
Implementation Capacity
 2.  The MoHCDGEC and the MoWI to           Within 6 months        MoWI and        Verification of DLI 7
     establish and operationalize           of Program             MoHCDGEC        and CDMTs staffed
     CDMTs for the NSC and rural            implementation                         with a minimum of
     water supply, respectively                                                    three (3) people
 3.  (a) Procurement of the SPSC            (a) Within 3           MoWI            (a) Signed contract
                                            months of                              provided to the World
      (b) Implementation of the SPSC        effectiveness                          Bank
                                            (b) Ongoing, for                       (b) Progress reports
                                            the first 3 years of                   submitted to the
                                            the Program                            World Bank
                                            period
Safeguards
 4.   Implement all the recommendations     Before Program         MoWI (Agency)   (a), (b), (c), (d), (e)
      of the ESSA and adopt the ESSA        effectiveness and                      and (f) procedures for
      Environmental and Social PAP          during                                 implementation
      covering the following:               implementation                         adopted in the
                                                                                   Operations Manual
      (a) Strengthening environmental                                              (before effectiveness)
      and social management systems                                                and as otherwise
      (b) Addressing capacity constraints                                          specified in ESSA
      (c) Improved systems for                                                     Action Plan
      information disclosure and                                                   (a), (b), (c), (d), (e)
      stakeholder consultation                                                     and (f) capacity
      (d) Disadvantaged and vulnerable                                             strengthening,
      persons                                                                      systems for
      (e) Land acquisition/allocation for                                          environmental and
      the Program                                                                  social management,
      (f) procedures for voluntary land                                            and information
      donations and formats of                                                     disclosure and
      agreements prepared and submitted                                            stakeholder
      to the World Bank                                                            consultation fully
                                                                                   operational (during
                                                                                   implementation),
                                                                                   and through
                                                                                   verification of DLI 1
                                                                                   and DLI 7
 5.   Grievance and complaint-handling      Complaint-             MoWI and PO-    Grievance and
      mechanisms established and            handling report        RALG            complaint-handling
      operational                           submitted by June                      mechanisms fully
                                            1 of every year                        operational and
                                            starting from                          annual complaint-
                                            2019                                   handling reports
                                                                                   submitted to the
                                                                                   World Bank



                                                    76
                                                                Responsible         Completion
No.           Action Description                Due Date
                                                                   Party           Measurement
 6.   Develop and implement a Gender         By June 2020      MoWI             Gender Action Plan
      Action Plan.                                                              submitted to the
                                                                                World Bank
Fiduciary
 7.   (a) Activate the asset management      By June 2021      MoWI,            Supervision mission
      module of the system to record all                       PO-RALG,         Aide Memoire
      district assets.                                         MoHCDGEC,
      (b) Train all accounting staff at                        and MoFP
      both central and local government
      on the use of IPSAS.
      (c) Include subdonor code in Epicor
      to earmark funding from each
      instrument and provide training to
      staff to be familiar with accounting
      for the funds under both
      instruments (PforR) and IPF.
 8.   Set aside Program resources for        Throughout        MoFP, MoWI,      Supervision mission
      monitoring and supervision at all      Program           MoHCDGEC,        Aide Memoire
      levels of implementation.              implementation    PO-RALG, and
                                                               districts
Procurement Capacity
 9.  Conduct tailor-made training            By June 2020      PO-RALG and      Training report
     courses specifically to address                           PPRA             submitted to the
     weakness identified in areas of                                            World Bank
     procurement and contract
     management for technical staff at
     districts.
10. Establish records                        Within 6 months   PO-              Supervision mission
     keeping/management system               of Program        RALG/districts   Aide Memoire
                                             implementation
11.   Adherence to the standard              Throughout        PO-              Internal procedures
      processing times throughout            Program           RALG/districts   manual submitted to
      Program implementation. Prepare        implementation                     the World Bank
      internal procedures manual to be
      used by all districts
12.   Carry out procurement and              Annual            PO-              Audit reports
      performance (value for money)                            RALG/PPRA/A      submitted to the
      audits annually.                                         gency            World Bank
13.   Conduct tailored training to           By June 2020      MoWI and PO-     Training report
      procurement and user department                          RALG             submitted to the
      staff to address weakness in these                                        World Bank
      areas—MOWI and PO-RALG
      should approach the PPRA to
      facilitate.




                                                      77
                                       Annex 9. Implementation Support Plan

1.        The implementation support plan is based on the implementation support guidelines for the PforR
operations, adapted to the design and risk profile of the Program. The Borrower is responsible for the
Program’s overall implementation, including its technical aspects. The PforR operation in Tanzania will
require considerable focused support from the World Bank team particularly during the early stages of
implementation. At the regional and district levels, civil servants will need to make a rapid shift in the focus
of their planning to ensure that available funding can be absorbed and results delivered in time and within
budget envelops. The team recognizes that the PforR mode of operation, which transfers performance risk
to the implementing districts, lays down a challenge to change numerous existing operational practices and
norms, particularly at the local level. The IPF-financed strategic consultant is intended to address these
initial capacity and information gaps. The basic mandate for the World Bank implementation support under
PforR is to:

            •    Review implementation progress and achievement of Program results and DLIs;

            •    Provide support for resolving emerging Program implementation challenges;

            •    Provide technical support for the implementation of the PAP, the achievement of DLIs and
                 other results, and institutional development and capacity building;

            •    Monitor systems’ performance to ensure their continuing adequacy through Program
                 monitoring reports, audit reports, and field visits; and

            •    Monitor changes in risks to PforR and compliance with Legal Agreements and, as needed, the
                 Program’s action plan.

2.       Key to effective implementation support will be the coordination of its timing with critical points
in the timelines of planning and verification of results for payments request to the World Bank. The first
implementation support mission will take place as soon as possible after effectiveness to provide direct
feedback and implementation support with critical inputs and involvement of environmental, social, and
fiduciary teams.

3.          Tables 9.1, 9.2, and 9.3 summarize the implementation support arrangements for the Program.

                                           Table 9.1. Implementation Support

     Time                             Focus                                Skills Needed          Resource Estimate

 First 12       Design of water supply schemes and long-term         Legal, governance,           2 implementation
 months         sustainability activities, supervision of the IPF-   procurement, financial       missions plus 2
                funded technical assistance support, revision of     management, social and       technical missions
                guidelines and manuals, establishment of             environment, water and
                arrangements for independent verification,           sanitation specialist, M&E
                strengthening of the M&E systems
 12–48          Review of implementation progress, field             Legal, governance,           2 implementation
 months         verification of verification reports from the        procurement, financial       missions plus
                IVA, supervision of the IPF-funded technical         management, social and       technical missions
                assistance support                                   environment, water and       as needed
                                                                     sanitation specialist, M&E
 Other          Independent audit/assessment of verification of      Independent technical        2 people for 4 weeks
                results                                              expertise                    Total 8 weeks



                                                              78
              Table 9.2. Task Team Skills Mix Requirements for Implementation Support
                            Number of Staff Weeks
     Skills Needed                                        Number of Trips               Comments
                                 (Annual)
Legal                                 1                         None             Headquarters based
Procurement                           8                          2               Country office based
Financial management                  8                          2               Country office based
Governance                            2                          2               Country office based
Social/gender                         5                          2               Country office based
Environment                           4                          2               Country office based
M&E/verification                      6                          2               Headquarters based
Technical (WASH)                     12                         2–3              Country office based


                        Table 9.3. Role of Partners in Program Implementation
 Name             Institution/Country                                      Role
DFID      Tanzania/United Kingdom              BCC Campaign of the NSC
                                               Verification of outputs achieved for rural water supply
USAID     Tanzania/United States of America    NSMIS




                                                 79
                                  Annex 10. Regional Targeting Selection Process

Water and Sanitation Disparities in Rural Tanzania

1.       In rural areas of Tanzania, improved water coverage currently stands at 48 percent46. This coverage
differs greatly with some regions such as Songwe and Tabora with coverage at around 30 percent while
Arusha and Kilimanjaro regions have coverage around 70 percent, as indicated in Figure 10.1.

                                Figure 10.1. Population by Region with Improved Water
                                                                                                                   97%
 100%
  90%
  80%                                                                                             73%
                                                                                              68%
  70%                                                                                     62%
                                                                                      58%
  60%                                                       51%51% 52% 53% 54% 56%57%
                                                    49% 49%
  50%                                    44% 47%47%
                      36% 37% 39% 40%41%
  40%         34% 35%
      27% 30%
  30%
  20%
  10%
   0%




     Source: Geospatial estimates from DHS 2016.

2.       For sanitation, most improvements have been confined to populations in urban areas, with high
rates of unimproved sanitation dominating the rural areas. At the end of 2015, only 11 percent of rural
Tanzanians had access to improved sanitation (DHS 2016). While the rates of unimproved sanitation are
more universally low across the country, there is still a need to focus on the lowest subset which includes
Geita, Simiyu, and Manyara, among others, as indicated in Figure 10.2.
                                Figure 10.2. Population by Region with Basic Sanitation
     90%                                                                                                           83%
     80%
     70%
     60%
     50%                                                                                                     38%
     40%
                                                                                         23% 24%24%24% 25%
     30%                                                                   19% 21% 22%
     20%                                           14%14% 16% 16%16% 17%
                                    8% 8% 8% 10%
     10%   4% 4% 5% 6% 6% 7%
      0%




     Source: Geospatial estimates from DHS 2016




46
  MoHCDGEC, National Bureau of Statistics, and ICF. 2016. Tanzania Demographic and Health Survey and Malaria Indicator
Survey 2015-2016. Available at http://dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/FR321/FR321.pdf.




                                                          80
Data Sources
3.      To select the regions most in need of water and sanitation interventions, the World Bank analyzed
available data sources47 on water and sanitation coverage as part of the selection process which were
included in the Tanzania WASH Poverty Diagnostic (2017). For all available data sets, the estimates of the
Joint Monitoring Program-defined SDG standards for improved water48 and improved sanitation49 coverage
were used. The analysis used DHS data on stunting rates in children under five years from 2016 as the key
indicator for chronic undernutrition and the latest estimates from the World Bank’s poverty rates in
Tanzania.50

Methodology for Regional Selection
4.       The methodology involved taking results from the Tanzania WASH Poverty Diagnostic in 2017 on
improved water and sanitation at the regional level and ranking the regions with the lowest coverage at 1
(that is, highest priority). It was decided to draw upon multiple data sets for the analysis to ensure the
greatest corroboration of coverage data on regions for selection. After ranking all regions from 1 to 26,51
based on their improved water and improved sanitation coverage, the first 13 regions for lowest improved
water coverage and the first 13 regions for lowest improved sanitation coverage were selected. The 13
regions were then selected as priority regions that appeared disadvantaged across all available data sources
analyzed and were subsequently included for definitive selection. Regions that appear as highly ranked for
low WSS coverage in a majority, but not all, of the data sources were also selected. Then out of these, the
selection was refined to those which also had high poverty and stunting rates.

Results
5.      The following are the results of the selection criteria applied as displayed in table and map form.
The ‘priority regions’ were selected given their low ranking in WSS across all available data sets analyzed.
The ‘second criteria’ selected regions with the highest poverty and stunting rates out of those regions with
low WSS coverage across the majority of available data analyzed.

                                     Table 10.1. Regions Targeted by the Program
                                                   No.         Priority Regions
                                                    1.     Tabora
                                                    2.     Katavi
                                                    3.     Rukwa
                                                    4.     Lindi
                                                    5.     Geita
                                                    6.     Shinyanga
                                                    7.     Singida
                                                    8.     Kagera
                                                    9.     Mwanza
                                                   10.     Manyara
                                                   11.     Mtwara
                                                   12.     Simiyu
                                                   13.     Iringa
                                                           Secondary criteria
                                                   14.     Mara
                                                   15.     Ruvuma
                                                   16.     Kigoma
                                                   17.     Songwe




47 RWS 2014, DHS 2016, and geospatial data.
48 Improved water coverage as defined by the Joint Monitoring Program. https://washdata.org/.
49 Improved sanitation as defined by the Joint Monitoring Program. https://washdata.org/.
50 Rascón-Ramírez, and Audy. 2016. “Poverty Mapping in Tanzania.” World Bank, Washington, DC.
51 The regions are in mainland Tanzania.




                                                               81
    Figure 10.3. Regions Targeted by the Program




Source: World Bank.




                        82
83
