Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                     FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

                                                                                                                Report No: PAD4892

                                                         INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                         PROGRAM PAPER
                                                                                ON A
                                                                 PROPOSED ADDITIONAL CREDIT

                                                             IN THE AMOUNT OF EUR 233.8 MILLION
                                                                (US$250.0 MILLION EQUIVALENT)
                                                                  FROM IDA SCALE-UP FACILITY

                                                                              TO THE




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                        REPUBLIC OF BENIN

                                                                              FOR THE
                                              RURAL WATER SUPPLY UNIVERSAL ACCESS PROGRAM-FOR-RESULTS



                                                                            June 7, 2022




Public Disclosure Authorized
                               Water Global Practice
                               Western and Central Africa Region




                               This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of
                               their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.
                                  CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

                          (Exchange Rate Effective May 31, 2022)

                                Currency Unit = West African CFA Franc (XOF)
                                         US$1 = 615.529 XOF
                                         US$1 = Euro 0.935

                                        FISCAL YEAR
                                  January 1 – December 31

                             ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

ABE        Beninese Environment Agency (Agence Beninoise pour l’Environnement)
ACEP       Water Users’ Association (Association des Consommateurs d’Eau Potable)
AF         Additional Financing
ANAEPMR    National Agency for Drinking Water Supply in Rural Areas (Agence Nationale
           d’Approvisionnement en Eau Potable en Milieu Rural)
ANDF       National Agency for Domain and Land (Agence Nationale du Domaine et du Foncier)
ARMP       Public Procurement Regulatory Authority (Personne Responsable des Marchés Publics)
AQUA-VIE   Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program
BAI        Presidency’s Office for Analysis and Investigation (Bureau d’Analyses et d’Investigation)
CAA        Autonomous Amortization Fund (Caisse Autonome d’Amortisssement)
CCMP       Procurement Control Unit (Cellule Contrôle des Marchés Publics)
COVID-19   Coronavirus Disease
CPF        Country Partnership Framework
DA         Direct Account
DAF        Administrative and Financial Department (Direction Administrative et Financière)
DLI        Disbursement-Linked Indicator
DLR        Disbursement-Linked Result
DNCMP      National Directorate for Public Procurement Control (Direction Nationale de Contrôle
           des Marchés Publics)
DNSP       National Public Health Directorate (Direction Nationale de la Santé Publique)
EIRR       Economic Internal Rate of Return
ESIA       Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
ESMP       Environmental and Social Management Plan
ESSA       Environmental and Social Systems Assessment
F&C        Fraud and Corruption
FPA        Framework Partnership Agreement
FSA        Fiduciary Systems Assessment
GDP        Gross Domestic Product
GHG        Greenhouse Gas
GoB        Government of Benin
GRGES      Reference Guide for Environmental and Social Management (Guide Référentiel pour la
           Gestion Environnementale et Sociale)
GRM        Grievance Redress Mechanism
GRS        Grievance Redress Service
GRSEM      Guidelines for Social and Environmental Management
GWSP       Global Water Security and Sanitation Partnership
HSE        Health, Safety, and Environmental management
IGF        Inspectorate General of Finance (Inspection Générale des Finances)
IGM        Inspectorate General of the Ministry (Inspection Générale du Ministère)
INStaD     National Institute for Statistics and Demographic Analysis (Institut National de la
           Statistique et de la Démographie)
IPF        Investment Project Financing
ISR        Implementation Status and Results Report
IVA        Independent Verification Agent
JV         Joint Venture
M&E        Monitoring and Evaluation
MCVDD      Ministry of the Living Environment and Sustainable Development (Ministère du Cadre
           de Vie et du Développement Durable)
MEF        Ministry of Economy and Finance (Ministère de l’Economie et des Finances)
MEM        Ministry of Water and Mines (Ministère de l’Eau et des Mines)
MoH        Ministry of Health (Ministère de la Santé)
MoU        Memorandum of Understanding
NPV        Net Present Value
NRW        Nonrevenue Water
NRWSP      National Rural Water Supply Program
OHS        Occupational Health and Safety
PAD        Program Appraisal Document
PAG        Government Action Program (Programme d’Actions du Gouvernement)
PAP        Program Action Plan
PDAEP      Master Plan for Rural Drinking Water Supply (Plan Directeur de Développement du
           sous-secteur de l’Approvisionnement en Eau Potable en Milieu Rural)
PDDAEPMR   National Master Plan for the Development of the Rural Water Supply Sector (Plan
           Directeur de Développement du sous-secteur de l’Approvisionnement en Eau Potable en
           Milieu Rural)
PDO        Program Development Objective
PEPRAU     Small Town Water Supply and Urban Septage Management Project (Approvisionnement
           en Eau Potable en milieu Rural et D’Assainissement des eaux usées Urbaines)
PFM        Public Financial Management
PforR      Program-for-Results
PGSSE      Drinking Water Safety Management Plan (Plan de Gestion de la Sécurité Sanitaire de
           l'Eau)
PPP        Public-private Partnership
SAEP-mV    Multi-village Water Supply System (Système d’Approvisionnement en Eau Potable-
           multiVillages)
SAI        Supreme Audit Institution
    SDG      Sustainable Development Goal
    SEA/SH   Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual Harassment
    SONEB    Benin’s National Water Company (Société Nationale des Eaux du Bénin)
    SUF      Scale-up Facility
    TA       Technical Assistance
    UNICEF   United Nations Children’s Fund
    WA       Withdrawal Application
    WSS      Water Supply and Sanitation


.




                     Regional Vice President: Ousmane Diagana
                            Country Director: Coralie Gevers
                            Regional Director: Simeon Kacou Ehui
                           Practice Manager: Yogita Mumssen
                          Task Team Leaders: Georges Comair, Yeli Mariam Dakoure Sou
                                                             Republic of Benin

                      Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing

                                                          TABLE OF CONTENTS
DATASHEET........................................................................................................................................ 1
I.         BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE FOR ADDITIONAL FINANCING ................................................ 7
           A.    Country Context......................................................................................................... 7
           B.    Sector Context ........................................................................................................... 8
           C.    Government program and Original PforR Program .................................................... 11
           D.    Rationale for the AF ................................................................................................. 14
           E.    Higher Level Objectives to Which the Program Contributes ....................................... 15
II.        INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................... 15
III.       PROPOSED CHANGES ........................................................................................................... 16
           A.    Program Boundaries ................................................................................................ 16
           B.    Program Financing ................................................................................................... 25
IV.        APPRAISAL SUMMARY ......................................................................................................... 28
           A.    Technical ................................................................................................................. 28
           B.    Fiduciary .................................................................................................................. 30
           C.    Environmental and Social ......................................................................................... 31
           D.    Implementation Arrangements ................................................................................ 37
V.         KEY RISKS ............................................................................................................................ 38
VI.        WORLD BANK GRIEVANCE REDRESS ..................................................................................... 38
VII.       SUMMARY TABLE OF CHANGES ............................................................................................ 40
VIII.      DETAILED CHANGE(S) ........................................................................................................... 40
IX.        RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING ........................................................................... 42
ANNEX 1: INTEGRATED RISK ASSESSMENT ........................................................................................ 75
ANNEX 2: TECHNICAL FULL ASSESSMENT - ADDENDUM .................................................................... 76
ANNEX 3: FIDUCIARY SYSTEMS FULL ASSESSMENT - ADDENDUM ...................................................... 89
ANNEX 4: SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENT AND SOCIAL SYSTEMS ASSESSMENT - ADDENDUM ............. 97
ANNEX 5: MODIFIED PROGRAM ACTION PLAN................................................................................ 106
      The World Bank
      Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



 DATASHEET



BASIC INFORMATION – PARENT (Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program - P164186)


 Country                      Product Line             Team Leader(s)
 Benin                        IBRD/IDA                 Georges Comair

                                                       Does this operation have an IPF
 Project ID                   Financing Instrument     component?                      Practice Area (Lead)

 P164186                      Program-for-Results      No                              Water
                              Financing

Implementing
 ADD_FIN_TBL1Agency: Agence Nationale d'Approvisionnement en Eau Potable en Milieu Rural (ANAEPMR)

 Is this a regionally tagged project?                  Bank/IFC Collaboration

 No                                                    No


 Original Approval Date                                Effectiveness Date             Closing Date
 15-May-2018                                           28-Sep-2018                    30-Jun-2024


Program Development Objective(s)

The PDO is to increase access to water supply service and to strengthen service delivery arrangements in selected
rural areas.



Ratings (from Parent ISR)
RATING_DRAFT_
     NO

                                                     Implementation                                    Latest ISR




                                                                                                              Page 1 of 108
     The World Bank
     Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



                    26-Aug-2019      17-Feb-2020      28-Jul-2020   26-Jan-2021      27-Jul-2021      25-Jan-2022

Progress towards
achievement of           S                  S              S              S                S               S
PDO
Overall
Implementation           S                  S              S              S                S               S
Progress (IP)
Overall Risk             H                  S             M              M                 M              M

Technical                S                  S              S              S                S               S

Fiduciary
Systems                  S                  S              S              S                S               S

E&S Systems              MS                 MS            MS             MS              MS               MS

Disbursement
Linked Indicators        S                  S              S              S                S               S
(DLI)
Monitoring and
Evaluation               S                  S              S              S                S               S




BASIC INFORMATION – ADDITIONAL FINANCING (Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional
Financing - P176941)
ADDFIN_TABLE
Project ID                   Project Name                Additional Financing Type
                             Benin Rural Water Supply
P176941                      Universal Access Program    Changes to Expenditure Parameters
                             Additional Financing
                                                                                      Will there be additional
                                                                                      financing for the IPF
Financing instrument         Product line                Approval Date
                                                                                      component?

Program-for-Results
                             IBRD/IDA                    30-Jun-2022                  No
Financing
Projected Date of Full
                             Bank/IFC Collaboration
Disbursement
30-Jun-2027                  No



                                                                                                           Page 2 of 108
                  The World Bank
                  Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



          Is this a regionally tagged project?
          No

     Disbursement Summary (from Parent ISR)

                                                 Net
            Source of Funds                               Total Disbursed     Remaining Balance         Disbursed
                                         Commitments

            IBRD                                                                                          %
            IDA                                  220.00               74.27              131.92           36 %
            Grants                                                                                        %


          PROGRAM FINANCING DATA – ADDITIONAL FINANCING (Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program
          Additional Financing - P176941)

    FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)
PROJECT




    FIN_SUMM_WITH_IPF
    SUMMARY (Total Financing)
     -NewFi n1




                                                                              Proposed Additional       Total Proposed
                                                  Current Financing
                                                                                   Financing              Financing
          Government program Cost                             1600.00                               0               1600.00

          Total Operation Cost                                  506.00                        252.00                 758.00
                      Total Program Cost                        506.00                        252.00                 758.00

          Total Financing                                       506.00                        252.00                 758.00

          Financing Gap                                                0                            0                       0


          DETAILS – Additional Financing

                  Counterpart Funding                                                                                    2.00

                    Borrower/Recipient                                                                                   2.00

                  International Development Association (IDA)                                                        250.00

                    IDA Credit                                                                                       250.00




                                                                                                                    Page 3 of 108
        The World Bank
        Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



IDA Resources (in US$, Millions)

                                                     Credit Amount           Grant Amount              Total Amount

Benin                                                         250.00                    0.00                   250.00
   Scale-up Facility (SUF)                                    250.00                    0.00                   250.00
Total                                                         250.00                    0.00                   250.00


 COMPLIANCE
 Policy

 Has the parent Program been under implementation for at least 12 months?

 Yes
 Have the DO and IP ratings for the parent Program been rated moderately satisfactory or better for at least the last
 12 months?

 Yes

 Does the program depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects?

 No

 Does the Program require any waivers from Bank policies?

 No


 INSTITUTIONAL DATA

 Practice Area (Lead)
 Water

 Contributing Practice Areas
 Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy
 Gender
 Social Sustainability and Inclusion




                                                                                                              Page 4 of 108
     The World Bank
     Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



Climate Change and Disaster Screening
This operation has been screened for short and long-term climate change and disaster risks




TASK TEAM

Bank Staff
Name                         Role                              Specialization                Unit
                             Team Leader (ADM
Georges Comair                                                 Water Resources Engineering   SAWW1
                             Responsible)
Yeli Mariam Dakoure Sou      Team Leader                       Water Supply & Sanitation     SAWW1
                             Procurement Specialist (ADM
Harouna Djibrilla Djimba                                       Procurement                   EAWRU
                             Responsible)
                             Financial Management
Yeo Yenemanyan                                                 Financial Management          EAWG1
                             Specialist (ADM Responsible)
Gertrude Marie Mathilda      Social Specialist (ADM
                                                               Social Management             SAWS4
Coulibaly Zombre             Responsible)
                             Environmental Specialist (ADM
Modestine Victoire Bessan                                      Environmental Specialist      SAWE1
                             Responsible)
Abdoul Ganyi Bachabi
                             Environmental Specialist          Environmental Management      SAWE1
Alidou
Alphonse Emadak              Environmental Specialist          Environmental Management      SAWE1
Cedric Cubahiro              Team Member                       Disbursement                  WFACS
Colombe Blandine Yabo
                             Procurement Team                  Team Support                  AWMBJ
Allabi
Faly Diallo                  Team Member                       Fiduciary                     WFACS
Jean Vincent Koua            Team Member                       Team Support                  SAWW1
Late Felix Lawson            Team Member                       Fiduciary                     WFACS
Massanvi Benita Mahinou      Team Member                       Team support                  AWMBJ
Moussibaou Tassou            Environmental Specialist          Environmental Management      SAWE1
Mynah Nassila                Team Member                       Operations Analyst            AWMBJ
Pepita Hortense C.
                             Team Member                       Team Support                  AWMBJ
Olympio
Tahirou Kalam                Team Member                       Financial Management          EAWG1
Victoria Ewura Ekua Wood     Counsel                           Legal                         LEGAM



                                                                                                     Page 5 of 108
    The World Bank
    Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)




Extended Team
Name                       Title                            Organization               Location




                                                                                                  Page 6 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



  I.        BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE FOR ADDITIONAL FINANCING

  A.        Country Context

 1.      Benin, a country with a small open economy, has experienced robust growth over the past
 decade, albeit volatile and with limited income per capita gains. Sustaining the economic performance
 and stabilizing the growth volatility remain key challenges due to limited economic diversity, high levels
 of informality, including in trade with Nigeria1. Labor productivity growth only marginally increased and –
 coupled with high population growth – has resulted in limited income per capita gains over the same
 period. Laying the foundation for a solid step up along the middle-income economy ladder is Benin’s next
 great challenge.

 2.       Benin's high poverty rate is partly explained by low human capital, particularly low educational
 attainment. The educational attainment of the household head is strongly correlated with the
 household’s poverty status: almost half of the population residing in a household where the head has no
 education is poor. Additionally, there are significant regional and urban-rural disparities in access to
 electricity, water, and sanitation, with urban and southern areas commonly performing better than their
 rural and northern counterparts. Lack of access to water in rural areas has outsized impacts on women
 and girls. In nine out of ten households in rural Benin, women and girls are responsible for fetching water,
 often over long distances.

 3.       The Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) pandemic has contributed to increased poverty and
 widening inequalities, to the detriment of inclusiveness. It was estimated that average household
 income decreased in 2020, in part due to large expected gross job losses (between 360,000 and 620,000),
 with the trade, transport, and tourism sectors being particularly affected. Despite the COVID-19 pandemic
 emerging as a severe economic shock to the country in early 2020, the gross national income per capita
 of US$1,250 as of July 1, 2020, moved Benin from low-income to lower-middle-income country status.2
 However, the poverty headcount rate of the country remains high, with 38.5 percent in 2019, representing
 about 4.5 million people, living in absolute poverty, among which 64 percent are in rural areas.3 Inequality
 in the distribution of per capita consumption was moderately high, with a Gini index of 47.8 in 2015.

 4.      The Government of Benin (GoB) outlined its objectives for inclusive growth and poverty
 reduction in its Government Action Program 2016-2021 (Programme d’Actions du Gouvernement, or
 PAG). The Government has shown strong commitment to economic reforms and developed a new and
 more inclusive growth model. The PAG outlines a three-pronged approach: (i) consolidation of democracy,
 the rule of law, and good governance; (ii) structural transformation of the economy; and (iii) improved
 social well-being. The Government launched several new investment initiatives to boost growth.4 These

 1 Nigeria is Benin’s main trading partner, although majority of the trade is unrecorded. Benin imports – for re-exporting to Nigeria

 through its land border – a large quantity of consumer goods subject to import protection (such as second-hand cars, cloth, rice,
 and frozen poultry) in this country. On the other hand, Benin illegally imports a large proportion of fuel from Nigeria, where
 consumer prices have historically been highly subsidized.
 2 New World Bank country classifications by income level: 2020–2021. https://blogs.worldbank.org/opendata/new-world-bank-

 country-classifications-income-level-2020-2021.
 3 World Bank. 2021. “Summary Note on Poverty Profile in Benin.”
 4 Economist Intelligence Unit, Benin Country Report, 2017.




                                                                                                                                 Page 7 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



 aim to improve human capital, increase the efficiency of public investment and state-owned enterprises,
 improve production capacity in the agriculture sector, develop the tourism sector, and ensure access to
 water and electricity.

 5.       Benin is highly vulnerable to multiple recurrent hazards exacerbated by the effect of climate
 change. In the last 50 years, Benin was hit by at least 50 reported adverse climate events, which affected
 over 50 percent of the population, with floods and droughts being the most devastating.5 Projections
 predict an increased occurrence and intensity of torrential rains and floods in the south, rising sea level
 and increased coastal erosion expected to lead to intensified coastal flooding and storm waves, and an
 accelerated desertification in the north due to rainfall decrease. Historical data show that since 1960, the
 mean average temperature has increased by 1.1°C, and the annual amplitude of rains reduced by 180 mm
 per hour. In the medium term, the country could suffer annual losses of about 0.23 percent of gross
 domestic product (GDP) (relative to 2019 GDP) due to natural disasters.6 Climate change can increase the
 likelihoods of these natural disasters, not to mention affect existing water systems—mainly those
 dependent on groundwater from bedrock formation—which could fail to deliver water in the future due
 to a lowering of the groundwater tables caused by over pumping, saline intrusion near the coastal areas,
 and unsustainable use of the aquifers.

 6.       Through this proposed additional financing (AF), the World Bank seeks to continue addressing
 some of Benin’s climate challenges by notably factoring climate-proofing into the Program design as
 started in the parent Program. The proposed Program AF is designed to (a) directly contribute to both
 climate change mitigation and adaptation and (b) contribute to building resilience against climate change
 risks affecting its area of intervention (especially northern regions prone to droughts).

  B.        Sector Context

 7.      The Government has confirmed its ambitious objective to provide universal access to rural
 water supply services by 2030. The flagship projects of the PAG 2016–2021 and the new PAG 2022-2026
 continue to be implemented under the second term of President Patrice Talon. The objective of achieving
 universal access of rural water supply services remains the highest priority for the Government (Actions
 43 and 44).

 8.      Service delivery arrangements in rural areas and ongoing reforms. Past service delivery
 arrangements for water services in rural areas had not brought the full expected benefits in terms of
 fostering professionalization and sustainability of service delivery as municipalities provided water
 services themselves or delegated this responsibility to a different entity, including a private operator or a
 community-based organization. To address identified shortcomings, the GoB has aimed since 2016, at
 financing and executing an ambitious plan to provide universal access to water supply in both urban and
 rural areas by allocating public sector financing and leveraging public-private partnerships (PPPs) where
 possible. Initially created as an executing agency reporting to the Presidency, the aim for The National
 Agency for Drinking Water Supply in Rural Areas (Agence Nationale d’Approvisionnement en Eau Potable
 en Milieu Rural, ANAEPMR) is to become a national asset-holding company for the rural water supply


 5 EM-DAT: The Emergency Events Database - Université Catholique de Louvain - CRED, D. Guha-Sapir, Belgium. www.emdat.be.
 6 The estimate is based on a probabilistic evaluation of disaster risks in Benin led by the World Bank, in 2019.




                                                                                                                      Page 8 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



 sector. The ANAEPMR is in charge of investments (to construct new infrastructure and rehabilitate existing
 ones), contracting of private operators, and monitoring of service delivery.7

 9.      The World Bank-financed Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program for Results (PforR)8
 Program (AQUA-VIE Program, P164186) has been the main contributor to the rural water supply
 national program in Benin. Since 2018, the Program has made contributions to strengthen service
 delivery arrangements through comprehensive reforms of the rural water supply sector, based on the
 delegation of service delivery to private operators through regional performance-based affermage
 contracts with the aim of improving the quality and sustainability of the expanded water supply systems.

 10.     The parent Program PforR, has contributed to strengthening service delivery through
 performance-based affermage contracts. The contracts introduce strong incentives for the regional
 operators to deliver on expanding access and improving service quality and sustainability. The AF will
 scale-up the parent AQUA-VIE Program to extend World Bank’s support to the rural water supply national
 program, while making contributions to social inclusion and poverty reduction. The parent Program and
 AF have a focus on the rural sector, which will benefit a substantial portion of Benin’s population
 (estimated at 70 percent of Benin’s population today), which also tends to be the poorest with limited
 economic development opportunities.

 11.     Access to water supply services in rural areas has improved from 42 percent in 2017 to 73
 percent in 2022. Benin has a population of 12 million inhabitants, of which 48 percent are urban and 52
 percent are rural.9 Access to improved water sources in rural areas is provided through rural piped water
 supply systems, hand pumps, or autonomous water points.10 The GoB monitors service coverage in rural
 areas based on an average number of people per water point and per household connection.11 As of 2022,
 average service coverage in rural areas stood at 73 percent countrywide, with high disparities across
 departments—departmental averages range between 52 percent to 96 percent.

 12.      Access to improved sanitation facilities did not significantly progress to reach the Sustainable
 Development Goal (SDG) targets. One area that needs particular attention is the need for greater
 coordination between rural water supply investments and investments in related interventions in hygiene
 promotion, sanitation, and nutrition to maximize health impacts. However, the primary reason for not
 including sanitation under the Program is that it is not part of the national program of expenditures
 underpinning the AQUA-VIE Program (sanitation is also not part of the mission and institutional mandate
 of the ANAEPMR). The GoB had clearly requested the World Bank to focus the PforR on the universal
 water access AQUA-VIE. The interest for and the environment around the sanitation sector has
 significantly evolved since the original technical assessment in 2018. There is a noticeable willingness from
 the GoB to explore (through a different ministry) to expand access to sanitation and hygiene. The World
 Bank is continuing the dialogue in that respect to support this important initiative, complementing the

 7 Decree No. 2017-039 of January 25, 2017.
 8 PforR = Program-for-Results.
 9 https://data.worldbank.org/.
 10 Approximately 620 piped rural water supply systems currently exist in Benin. They are generally made of boreholes pumping

 to an elevated storage tank connected to a network distribution system supplying household connections and standpipes. There
 are approximately 12,200 hand pumps. National Master Plan for the Development of the Rural Water Supply Sector (Plan
 Directeur de Développement du sous-secteur de l’Approvisionnement en Eau Potable en Milieu Rural - PDDAEPMR 2017).
 11 The coverage rate is estimated by the GoB based on 250 people per water point and 24 people per household connection.




                                                                                                                         Page 9 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



 national program for rural water supply. The assessment recommended continued coordination through
 information sharing to identify potential ‘hot spots’ and consider these aspects when prioritizing rural
 water supply investments. It is worth noting that the World Bank under the PEPRAU project has financed
 the construction of a fecal sludge treatment plant in Sèmè-Kpodji which was completed in April 2022.

 13.     While the parent Program and the AF are not supporting sanitation, there are other initiatives
 underway to support sanitation. Support for sanitation and hygiene services in rural areas has been
 provided to the Ministry of Health (Ministère de la Santé, MoH) by United Nations Children’s Fund
 (UNICEF), the Global Sanitation Fund program (Programme d'Amélioration de l'Accès à l'Assainissement
 et des Pratiques d'Hygiène en milieu Rural, PAPHyR), The German cooperation (KfW) is financing the
 construction of a second fecal sludge treatment plant at Abomey-Calavi. In addition, the German
 Corporation for International Cooperation (GiZ) is funding the preparation of a National Strategy for
 Promotion of Hygiene and Basic Sanitation (2018-2030), building on the previous strategy which ran until
 2015.

 14.     Affordability of water supply services needs to be improved. Tariffs for rural water services vary
 from one locality to the next. Tariffs for water sold in rural areas are ranging between CFAF 600 to CFAF
 1,000 (US$0.98 to US$1.63) per m3. Water sold through standpipes includes the margin charged by
 standpipe operators and is considerably more expensive at CFAF 800 (US$1.4) per m3. This is equivalent
 to a monthly cost of CFAF 2,880 (US$5) per household, based on an average consumption of 20 L per
 person per day and a household of six people.12 This represents 2 percent of the monthly monetary
 poverty threshold of CFAF 140,800 (US$250) and is below the maximum percentage considered affordable
 but could affect the poorest households more (no information is available on water service levels by
 income quintiles). Water in rural areas is also presently more expensive than in urban areas: it is four
 times higher than the social tariff applied by the Benin’s National Water Company (Société Nationale des
 Eaux du Bénin, SONEB) to households which consume below 5 m3 per month, which is CFAF 198 per m3
 (US$0.37).

 15.     Water resources management is improving in Benin. Even though surface water sources are
 abundant in Benin, groundwater resources traditionally constitute most of the drinking water sources.
 The main reasons for the limited use of surface water sources are the high initial capital costs (that is,
 construction of large infrastructure such as dams, canals, and so on) and potentially higher water
 treatment costs. Currently, Benin lacks good knowledge of its water resources. While there has been an
 improvement in water resources management through the parent Program, and significant progress has
 been made, there are still gaps. In particular, the Directorate of Water Resources Management within the
 Ministry of Water and Mines (Ministère de l’Eau et des Mines, MEM) requires further enhancements in
 human, technical, and financial resources management capacity, to efficiently carry out water resources
 monitoring activities. Presently, the World Bank with the Global Water Security and Sanitation Partnership
 (GWSP) support, is conducting an assessment of the efficiency (results and impacts, in light of the means
 deployed) of the piezometric network and monitoring of groundwater pollution systems and making
 recommendations for the rehabilitation and extension of these networks.




 12 PDDAEPMR (2017). Information based on a sample of 12 municipalities across the country.




                                                                                                      Page 10 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



  C.          Government program and Original PforR Program

 16.      Efforts to achieve universal access to rural water supply services continue to be channeled
 through the Government’s program called the National Rural Water Supply Program (NRWSP, 2016-
 2030) implemented by the ANAEPMR. The objectives of the NRWSP are to provide universal access to
 water supply services and to professionalize service delivery in the rural areas of the country. It is
 structured around two results areas: (a) Expanding access to rural water supply services through a
 nationwide program of construction, rehabilitation, and expansion of multi-village rural water supply
 systems and (b) Strengthening the quality, sustainability, and affordability of service delivery through a
 comprehensive reform of the rural water supply sector, which consists of delegating service delivery to
 private operators through regional performance-based affermage contracts, applying an adequate tariff
 policy, and training new generations of rural water supply professionals. The NRWSP has an estimated
 cost of CFAF 880 billion (US$1.6 billion) and remains the framework for all projects supporting the rural
 water supply sector. The NRWSP has benefited so far from funding from the National Budget, Dutch
 Development Aid, Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), Bank for Investment and
 Development, and the World Bank.

 17.     The parent Program Program Development Objective (PDO) is to increase access to water supply
 service and to strengthen service delivery arrangements in selected rural areas. It is executed by the
 ANAEPMR and structured around two results areas consistent with the NRWSP:

    (a)      Results Area 1: Increase access to water supply services. Under this results area, the Program is
             financing the construction of 126 multi-village rural water supply systems and the rehabilitation
             of 360 other water supply systems to expand access to rural water supply services.
    (b)      Results Area 2: Strengthen service delivery arrangements. Under this results area, the Program
             is supporting the initial milestones of the reform of the rural water supply sector to strengthen
             service delivery arrangements: (i) the design, bidding process, and award of three performance-
             based contracts with regional operators to improve the quality and sustainability of the rural
             water supply services; (ii) the development and application of a tariff policy for sustainable and
             affordable rural water supply services; and (iii) the training of the first cohorts of rural water
             supply professionals.
 18.     Progress toward the achievement of PDO and Implementation Progress have been rated
 Satisfactory since the approval of the Program, despite the impact of the COVID-19 crisis. The main
 achievements of the AQUA-VIE Program so far include the following:

       (a)    Under Results Area 1:
             (i)    The construction of 10 multi-village rural water supply systems is fully completed. In
                    addition, the construction of 12 additional multi-village rural water supply systems is under
                    way with eight out of the 12 expected to be completed by end June 2022. The
                    aforementioned systems are funded by the Government financial contribution within the
                    boundary of the AQUA-VIE PforR.
             (ii)   The contracts for the construction of 95 other multi-village rural water supply systems are
                    awarded (4 lots), and the start of the construction works is expected in August 2022 (the



                                                                                                            Page 11 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



               contracts have a value of US$193 million). The rehabilitation of 360 systems will be carried
               out by regional operators. The construction and rehabilitation of the rural water supply
               systems supported by the parent PforR are expected to be fully completed by the current
               closing date of June 30, 2024. It should be emphasized that the works in question require
               large tenders that are now being awarded to the selected contractors. That can be
               considered already done with innovative 95 multi-village systems organized in four lots. It
               took some time, but the client has learned from this first experience to accelerate the
               launch of the second batch related to an additional 80 multi-village systems.
    (b) Under Results Area 2:
         (i)   The recruitment process of the private operators under regional performance-based
               affermage contracts is completed. Negotiations with the two joint ventures (JV) to which
               the affermage contracts have been awarded have been completed. The affermage
               contracts were signed on April 11, 2022. The two JVs were awarded the three regional
               affermage lots with one JVs winning 2 out of the 3 lots. Contracts are currently in the
               process of final vetting by the Council of Ministers. The service orders of the affermage
               contracts are expected to be issued by June 2022. This will trigger the disbursement of the
               largest Disbursement-Linked Indicator (DLI) of the Program, amounting to close to US$50
               million for DLI 4 - Performance-based contracts between the ANAEPMR and selected
               regional operators signed and with service order for each contract issued, which is expected
               to disburse in July 2022. This milestone of recruiting the private operators is key for the
               sector reform and a game changer for the Program, as it will trigger the rehabilitation works
               and the verification of the public standpipes and private connections. The rural areas of the
               country were clustered in three zones to award the performance-based affermage
               contracts as seen in Figure 1.
                                Figure 1. The Three Affermages Zones in Benin




                          Source: ANAEPMR



                                                                                                       Page 12 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



                        The three affermage lots are constituted as follows:
                        •    Lot 1: Infrastructure/asset upgrading works of 193 water supply systems including
                             63 water supply systems out of service and selected to be repaired as a priority,
                        •     Lot 2: Infrastructure/asset upgrading works of 200 water supply systems including
                              57 water supply systems out of service and selected to be repaired as a priority,
                        •     Lot 3: Infrastructure/asset upgrading works of 256 water supply systems including
                              71 water supply systems out of service and selected to be repaired as a priority.
           (ii)   A tariff policy for sustainable and affordable rural water supply services has been
                  developed by the GoB. This policy consists of a unique nationwide tariff of about CFAF 600
                  (US$0.98) per m3 to be applied to the service delivered by the multi-village rural water
                  supply systems. This tariff has been defined based on financial modelling to cover the
                  operator’s remuneration in charge of service delivery, as well as the asset renewal under
                  the responsibility of the GoB and the operating costs of the sector’s future asset-holding
                  company. A draft decree to apply this tariff was prepared in November 2021 and will be
                  signed before the regional affermages begin implementation.13
           (iii) The training initiative for the capacity building of rural water supply professionals is
                 currently being prepared to welcome the first cohort of trainees. The offer for the selected
                 technical assistant in charge of delivering the curriculum and training modules is being
                 negotiated. The first cohorts are expected to be trained by late 2022 as the contracts of the
                 regional operators ramp up.

 19.     In conclusion, the mobilization of the private operators is coinciding with the completion of the
 first multi-village rural water supply systems, noting that they are all under execution at an advanced
 bidding stage, meaning that all the resources of the parent Program are committed. In this context, the
 AF is providing resources and incentives on time to scale up the construction of new multi-village rural
 water supply systems and at the same time providing incentives to strengthen the implementation of the
 affermage contracts.

 20.     Technical assistance (TA). The Program had so far benefitted from TA support from the GWSP
 which helped in the development of bidding documents for the innovative 10-year private affermage
 contract with the regional water operators to rehabilitate and manage water systems. This support
 allowed for a much more tailored approach to private sector participation and better response to the
 needs of rural Benin while ensuring that local authorities were engaged throughout the process. To
 mitigate the risk of any potential negative environmental or social impact, the GWSP funded the
 preparation of guidelines to define the operators’ required processes for environmental and social
 management (see ESSA section).




 13 The Government is also updating the tariff structure in urban areas and decided to delay the announcement of the new rural

 water tariff under affermage, so that they announce both rural and urban tariffs at the same time. This is expected by the end of
 July 2022.



                                                                                                                            Page 13 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



 21.     Progress on the Program Action Plan (PAP) has been satisfactory. The PAP is in place and all
 actions have been implemented. The technical, fiduciary, environmental, and social assessments have
 contributed to build the capacity of the Program’s institutions and strengthen the Program systems.

 22.     Program restructuring. A restructuring of the Program was completed in February 2021. This
 restructuring was triggered by the decision of the GoB to:
    (a)   Cluster the rural areas of the country in three zones—in lieu of the six zones envisaged at Program
          appraisal—defining the geographic scope of the regional performance-based affermage
          contracts. This change to the Program’s design allowed achieving economies of scale to the
          benefit of users’ tariff; and
    (b)   Promote the construction of multi-village rural water supply systems in lieu of piped rural water
          supply systems supplying only a set of localities of a single village as envisaged during the appraisal
          of the Program.
 23.   Because of those changes, one DLI and two indicators of the Program’s Results Framework were
 amended, and one intermediate results indicator was deleted. In addition, two actions of the PAP were
 amended as part the restructuring.

  D.       Rationale for the AF

 24.      The AF will build on the successes and relevance of the parent Program by scaling up the
 Program results to enhance development impact. The NRWSP has benefited from substantial support so
 far; however, a funding gap persists and the sector reform to strengthen service delivery needs to be
 completed. Since 2017, CFAF 324 billion (US$590 million) has been mobilized by the Government to
 implement the NRWSP from several funding sources (National Budget, World Bank PforR, Dutch
 Development Aid, and ECOWAS Bank for Investment and Development); yet there is a funding gap of close
 to US$1 billion to achieve universal access. The initial milestones of the reform of the rural water supply
 sector, which included strengthening service delivery arrangements, recruitment of the regional
 operators, development of a tariff policy, and training of rural water professionals, were met.
 Consequently, it is important to maintain those milestone achievements in view of the innovative nature
 of this reform, particularly under the new PPP law in Benin which is being implemented for the first time
 through the PforR (no other development sector in the country has done PPP yet).

 25.     The AF will scale up the parent AQUA-VIE Program to extend the World Bank’s support to the
 rural water supply national program. More specifically, the AF will:
         (a) Fill part of the funding gap for the investments foreseen under the rural water supply
              national program to enhance water delivery service and
          (b)   Strengthen the rural water supply sector reform to sustain service delivery arrangements.
 26.     The proposed AF and its impacts on the Program boundaries are described in the following
 sections.




                                                                                                            Page 14 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



  E.          Higher Level Objectives to Which the Program Contributes

 27.      The Program, including the AF, is aligned with the World Bank Group’s strategic goals of ending
 extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity in a sustainable manner by contributing to the
 reduction of poverty and fostering inclusion. This will be achieved through improvements in water
 delivery services in rural areas, strengthening institutions and fostering transparency by improving citizen
 engagement in the rural water sector. The Program is well aligned with the new World Bank Group
 Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Benin FY19–FY23.14 The Program will directly contribute to the
 CPF’s Objective 2 “Improving the quality of infrastructure.” It aims to deliver water services to the poorer
 rural populations of Benin with multiple impacts on improved living conditions, health, school attendance,
 productivity, and income particularly for women and girls. The Program responds to a demand of the GoB
 to support the implementation of one of its priorities, as defined at the highest level by the President of
 Benin. The World Bank is well positioned to bring added value through its experience gained in the rural
 water supply sector in Sub-Saharan Africa and globally. The Program is also aligned with the latest Benin
 Performance and Learning Review15. By strengthening water information and monitoring, the Program
 will further allow for evidence-based decision-making and planning, contributing to the mitigation of the
 impacts of climate change. This is transformative Program targeting the whole country, especially the arid
 northern areas where water is not easily available due to droughts. The Program aims to increase the
 resilience of Benin’s infrastructure to rising climate change vulnerabilities such as droughts while also
 enhancing resilience of the beneficiaries to adapt and cope with these climate change risks.

  II.         INTRODUCTION

 28.      Additional financing. This Program Paper seeks the approval of the Executive Directors to provide
 an additional credit of US$250 million to the Benin AQUA-VIE Program, P164186, 6237-BJ / D3160-BJ. The
 original credit was US$170 million equivalent, complemented with a grant of US$50 million. It was
 approved on May 15, 2018 and became effective on September 28, 2018. Its current closing date is June
 30, 2024. The additional credit will have a closing date of June 30, 2027. The extension of the closing date
 will allow the execution of the new activities financed under the AF. The technical appraisal of the AF
 based on lessons learned from the implementation of the parent Program showed that the construction
 works would be completed by June 2027 if no unexcepted shocks happen.

 29.     Disbursement rate. Approximatively US$74 million, representing 36 percent of the total World
 Bank financing of US$220 million, have been disbursed to date, in line with disbursement forecasts. By
 the time the AF becomes effective, the Program is expected to disburse DLI 4 (US$50 million) which will
 bring the total disbursement to more than 50 percent. The overall risk of the Program is currently rated
 Moderate.

 30.     The proposed additional credit would help (a) scale up the AQUA-VIE Program investment results
 and (b) complete the reform of the rural water supply sector to enhance service delivery arrangements.



 14 Report No. 123031-BJ.
 15
      Report No. 170821-BJ.




                                                                                                        Page 15 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



 31.       The initial milestones in the parent Program for the reform of the rural water supply sector,
 including the recruitment of the regional operators, the development of a tariff policy, and the training of
 rural water professionals, need to be sustained and complemented to strengthen service delivery
 arrangements. Moreover, there is the need to work with the ANAEPMR, to strategically support the kick-
 off of the affermage contracts during the first years of implementation. The objective of the institutional
 reform under the AF is not only to put in place the private operators but also to create incentives so that
 these contracts go beyond simple service orders issued and translate into a tangible and measurable
 improvement in efficiency, replicating the performance indicators of the contracts with concrete results
 of efficiency, so that incentives are aligned throughout the result chain: the Government, the World Bank,
 and the operator.

 32.     Climate change. The Program incorporated climate change at the concept stage of the parent
 Program. This demonstrates the commitment toward achieving meaningful climate impact from the
 beginning and the determination of the AF to build on those commitments. As described in the section
 below, the AF activities will scale up climate-resilient solutions that will contribute to adaptation and
 mitigation. Enabling ‘climate proofing’ of infrastructure, considering the integration of renewable energy
 to the grid, will contribute directly to adaptation and mitigation. Activities related to improving access to
 and management of water supply services, monitoring groundwater, reducing nonrevenue water (NRW),
 improving the energy efficiency of the piped water supply systems with the latest-generation pumping
 systems, lowering energy use due to water loss reduction, and making efficiency enhancements (physical
 and commercial) will contribute to both adaptation and mitigation co-benefits.

  III.    PROPOSED CHANGES

  A.      Program Boundaries

 33.      Table 1 shows the Program boundaries. The overall national target is to provide drinking water to
 more than 3 million people to reach universal access coverage in rural areas. To do so, the GoB will not
 only construct new Multi-village Water Supply Systems (Système d’Approvisionnement en Eau Potable-
 multiVillages - SAEP-mVs) but also rehabilitate existing ones. Therefore, the ANAEPMR has first
 undertaken an in-depth diagnostic of the existing assets and their level of functionality. This diagnostic
 revealed that 649 rural water supply systems are currently available but 360 of them need to be
 rehabilitated. This rehabilitation program is included in the parent PforR as part of the approach to focus
 on rapidly increasing the water coverage rate while awaiting the new SAEP-mV under construction. The
 GoB strategy to construct the new SAEP-mV consists of two phases: (a) a short-term priority phase (2019–
 2024) for the construction of 239 SAEP-mVs in areas with low access to facilitate immediate access to
 populations who have no access to drinking water and those who have lost access due to the obsolescence
 or failure of existing systems and (b) a long-term phase (2024–2030) involving the construction of 372
 new SAEP-mVs to renew aging structures and extend the service to ensure full access to improved water
 service in all the rural areas.

 34.     The AF will build on the successful implementation of the parent Program to scale up the AQUA-
 VIE Program investment results and strengthen the ongoing reform of the rural water supply sector to
 enhance service delivery arrangements. It is estimated that the parent Program and the AF together will
 give access to piped water to approximatively 3,020,000 rural people through the construction of 206


                                                                                                         Page 16 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



 water supply systems (Figure 2) that will provide 6,000 new standpipes and 62,250 new household
 connections.

                                                Table 1. Program Boundaries
                            Government program
                                                                 Parent PforR (AQUA-VIE)                       AF
                                     (NRWSP)
       Time frame                  2016-2030                              2018-2024                       2022 - 2027
  Results Area 1:       Nationwide program to expand            Construction and                 Scaled-up construction of
  Increase access to    access to water services                rehabilitation of rural water    new multi-village rural
  water supply services through the construction,               supply systems in priority       water supply systems in
                        rehabilitation, and expansion           areas                            priority areas
                        of multi-village rural water
                        supply systems
  Results Area 2:          Reform of the rural water         Initial milestones of the           Next milestones of the
  Strengthen service       supply sector to strengthen the reform:                               reform:
  delivery                 quality, sustainability, and      Establishment of                   Conversion of the
  arrangements             affordability of service delivery performance-based                  ANAEPMR from an
                                                                contracts with regional         executing agency to an
                                                                operators, development and asset-holding company,
                                                                application of a tariff policy, successful implementation
                                                                and training of the first       of the regional
                                                                cohort of rural water supply performance-based
                                                                professionals                   contracts with private
                                                                                                operators,16 and Scaling-up
                                                                                                of the training of rural
                                                                                                water supply professionals
  Financing                US$1.6 billion                       US$220 million                   US$250 million
                                                                (World Bank contribution)

 35.     The relationship between the asset holding company and the operators is clearly defined in the
 affermage contract. The operator has the responsibility of operating and maintaining the system,
 implement the rehabilitation works under his responsibility (for example pipes with diameter less than
 100 mm), and collect revenues. His remuneration is a lease fee which was determined by a bidding process
 and will be indexed on the pre-determined performance indicators targets: NRW and bill collection ratio.

 36.     Figure 2 presents the expansion of the boundaries of the Program including the AF and its impact
 on the program of expenditures. The full implementation of the reforms supported by the Program and
 the AF will be achieved during the Program implementation. These reforms will lay a solid foundation for
 strengthening service delivery arrangements and, over the long term, improving the quality and
 sustainability of rural water supply services at the national level.




 16 The associated expenditures will cover the costs associated with the supervision and monitoring of those PPPs.




                                                                                                                          Page 17 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



          Figure 2. Boundaries of the Government program and the World Bank-Financed AQUA-VIE/AF




 37.    The AF is scaling up the construction of new multi-village rural water supply schemes to new areas
 of the country (as opposed to expanding the size of the multi-village rural water supply schemes
 constructed under the original financing). Thus, the nature and size of the multi-village rural water supply
 schemes (wells, storage, and distribution networks) under the AF will not differ from the parent Program.

 38.      PDO. The AF will not change the PDO of the parent Program: Increase access to water supply
 service and strengthen service delivery arrangements in selected rural areas.

 39.      Activities. The activities financed by the AF will remain structured according to the two same
 results areas of the parent Program:

    (a)   Results Area 1: Increase access to water supply services (US$227 million equivalent of which
          $225 million IDA credit, and US$2 million counterpart funds). Under this results area, the AF will
          scale up the investments initiated under the parent PforR for the construction and extension of
          the multi-village rural water supply systems in priority areas, including the provision of water
          supply for regions in Benin affected by climate change-induced drought. The construction of new
          water supply systems and rehabilitation of existing ones, as well as the increase in the number of
          household connections, will increase available water supply, thereby making the project
          beneficiaries less vulnerable to these climate change–exacerbated droughts and water shortages.
          Around 90 percent of the investment will target the mobilization of new water resources, through
          the construction of 160 boreholes (3.7 percent of the investment), the construction of 80 new
          SAEP-mVs (88 percent of the investment), and the extension of 21 SAEP-mVs (8.3 percent of the
          investment). This will be supported through the following:

          •     1.1: Construction of new water supply systems, including (i) the construction of
                production, pumping, treatment and storage infrastructure; distribution networks;
                standpipes; and household connections and (ii) the development of associated studies and
                works supervision. It is estimated that the Program AF will finance the construction of 80



                                                                                                        Page 18 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



                  new water supply systems. The production, pumping, treatment, and storage
                  infrastructure; distribution networks; and standpipes will be constructed by works
                  contractors. Responsibility for the operation of the new water supply systems will be
                  delegated to the regional operators after completion of the works. The regional operators
                  will be in charge of maintaining the networks as well as constructing new household
                  connections as part of their performance-based affermage contracts. Climate-resilient
                  design elements in the construction of new infrastructure will make facilities more reliable
                  (reduced risk of system failure) and less likely to be affected by climate-related shocks such
                  as floods, droughts, and sea level rise. This increased reliability of the water supply systems
                  themselves will further limit the number of service interruptions, thus further enhancing
                  water security, even when water demand spikes temporarily during a heat wave. The
                  Program will foster sustainable management of groundwater resources through
                  hydrogeological and geophysical investigations to be carried out by the contractors and
                  piezometric monitoring and modernization of the data transmission of piezometric levels in
                  coordination with the other institutions and financing partners.17
           •      1.2: Rehabilitation and expansion of existing water supply systems, including (i) the
                  rehabilitation and/or expansion of production, pumping, treatment, and storage
                  infrastructure; distribution networks; standpipes; and household connections and (ii) the
                  development of associated studies and works supervision. The expansion will target 21
                  water systems. The rehabilitation works will be executed directly by the private operators
                  whose recruitment is ongoing (though well advanced). As a contractual obligation under
                  the affermage contract, rehabilitation works are expected to start in CY2022 as soon as the
                  operators are in place. Regional operators will also be in charge of constructing the new
                  household connections and standpipes. The Program will subsidize the construction of new
                  household connections as water service users will pay the operators only a portion of the
                  cost of these connections. Water supply system rehabilitation will reduce NRW losses and
                  increase the resilience of beneficiaries and water infrastructure to climate change-
                  exacerbated droughts and water shortages in the northern regions of Benin.

 40.     Under Results Area 1, all construction and rehabilitation works will continue to be carried out
 using standardized design parameters and construction standards developed by the ANAEPMR in the
 parent Program in coordination with the MEM. To promote inclusiveness, the ANAEPMR will explore
 whether changes to design can be done to make it more accessible for persons with disabilities18. To make
 the project greener, construction standards will encourage a switch from diesel/fuel generator toward
 more efficient energy sources, including greater reliance on renewable energy source19 (solar) and
 connections to the grid and therefore contribute to climate change mitigation through a reduction of
 greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions per volume of water pumped. Due consideration will be given to climate
 change during the rehabilitation and construction of the water supply systems, the sustainable
 management of water resources, improved water treatment methods, and optimization of energy


 17 As mentioned earlier, activities on improving knowledge of groundwater are funded by the GWSP; see technical assessment

 for more information.
 18
    Benin signed the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in 2008 and ratified it in 2012.
 19 The distribution of energy sources in rural areas now includes a total of 684 pumping stations powered by (a) 431 generators;

 (b) 175 connections to the Société Béninoise d'Energie Electrique (SBEE) network, and (c) 112 solar fields.



                                                                                                                            Page 19 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



 consumption during the deployment of water supply infrastructure. The Program AF will also continue to
 directly support the improvement of water resource management through the enhanced study and
 monitoring of groundwater levels and abstractions. The Program AF will build on a decision support
 system to study the future behavior or potential of the aquifers, to adapt groundwater use in response to
 different climate change conditions. This will be achieved through (a) the systematic hydrogeological and
 geophysical studies and investigations to be performed as part of the design and construction of piped
 water supply systems and (b) the systematic installation of piezometers equipped with data transmission
 system. This will directly improve the monitoring of groundwater levels and abstractions.

    (a)    Results Area 2: Strengthen service delivery arrangements (US$25 million equivalent). Under this
           result area, the AF will support the achievement of the next milestones of the reform of the rural
           water supply sector, building on and extending the results achieved under the parent Program
           (see annex 2).
           •      2.1: Strengthen service delivery arrangements through comprehensive reforms of the
                  rural water supply sector via the following: (i) the conversion of the ANAEPMR from an
                  executing agency to an asset-holding company (see Box 1 for more information on the
                  rationale for an asset-holding company)20 to oversee the development and
                  holding/maintaining of the sector’s assets and to supervise regional operators; and (ii)
                  supporting the first years of implementation of the regional performance-based affermage
                  contracts to deliver water that corresponds to national water quality standards and to lay
                  the foundation for sustainable rural water supply service delivery. A reduction in water
                  losses will be a key objective of the regional operators’ performance-based contracts,
                  developed and implemented under Results Area 2. Those operators will be incentivized
                  through their remuneration formula to reduce NRW. This will reduce the amount of water
                  to be pumped, treated, and conveyed to deliver the service and thereby enabling expanded
                  services coverage to more population. In addition, lower NRW losses will reduce
                  groundwater abstractions, thus lower energy use (already to be lowered significantly under
                  Results Area 1) and put less stress on existing water sources. In addition, the reduction of
                  physical (leakage) and commercial (unbilled) losses will also yield energy efficiency gains,
                  thus contributing to climate change adaptation and mitigation as higher energy efficiency
                  will reduce GHG emissions (see footnote 17 for more details).
           •      2.2: Capacity building of the rural water supply professionals and the scaling-up of the
                  training program to increase the number of rural water supply professionals and then
                  strengthen capacity building in the water sector. The training of future water supply staff
                  will also ensure regular maintenance and more efficient operations of water supply
                  facilities. The capacity building will include (i) enhancement of the training facilities and (ii)
                  development of a specific curriculum to train local rural water supply professionals,
                  including local affermage operators who will be co-opted by the new regional operators to
                  expand their workforce so as to take over the management of a rapidly growing number of
                  water supply systems. Training activities will aim at promoting the participation of women
                  in the provision of rural water supply services. This will be achieved through the
                  dissemination of information about the training opportunities targeting specifically female

 20 As of today, the ANAEPMR has been constituted (by decree) as an executing agency (not an asset-holding company) and as the

 agency in charge of recruiting the private operators, signing the contracts, and supervising them on behalf of the municipalities.



                                                                                                                              Page 20 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



                  workers and possibly having female trainers. Modules will include areas such as decision
                  under climate change, NRW, and leakage control—leading to lower energy-related GHG
                  emissions—or asset management.
           •      2.3: Capacity building for sustainable management of existing and future assets, will
                  include (i) capacity building of the ANAEPMR to fully accomplish its mission as the asset-
                  holding company for rural water supply services, through the enhancement of its capacity
                  in investment planning and implementation for rural water supply, including the
                  development of adequate information systems based on a water information system
                  successfully developed and deployed under the AQUA-VIE Program21 and (ii) strengthening
                  the ANAEPMR’s monitoring capacities of service delivery (interface with regional operators
                  according to contractual provisions), including for the regional operators and other
                  providers of rural water services, as well as the publication of service monitoring reports.
                  Moreover, the development of adequate information systems based on a water
                  information system deployed under the AQUA-VIE Program will help monitor and track
                  climate relevant data and enhance decision-making and inform climate-informed policies
                  and strategies. The capacity-building activities will include climate change considerations
                  and contribute to enhanced resilience against increasing severe hydrological shocks such as
                  droughts.

 41.      Changes to DLIs. The DLI framework has been updated to reflect the scaling-up of the Program
 and the deepening of reforms. The proposed changes to DLIs are summarized in Table 2. Four new DLIs
 are added to create incentives to achieve future critical milestones of the reform. Annex 2 (Table 2.2)
 provides additional details on the DLIs under the parent Program and the AF, including the rationale,
 allocated amounts, baselines, yearly targets, and requirements of achievement. Proposed measures, such
 as cost recovery mechanisms, performance monitoring, tariff adjustments, improved asset operation and
 maintenance to promote water use (and energy) efficiency improvements, and reduction in NRW losses,
 will enhance service delivery management capacity and increase the available volume of water for
 targeted communities, which will help them better withstand climate-related shocks to water supply.

 42.     DLI 1 ‘The number of new household connections built under the Program’ and DLI 2 ‘The
 number of new standpipes built under the Program’ are scaled up. They are scalable, which means that
 disbursements will take place throughout the life of the Program as soon as water supply schemes are
 commissioned and effectively deliver water to end users. Such DLIs will provide strong incentives for the
 agency and for the regional operators to deliver results on the ground. The household connections DLI
 applies to the entire rural water affermage perimeter.

 43.     DLI 3(b) ‘service monitoring reports published’ (so far six reports have been published22) reflects
 the role of the ANAEPMR for water supply service monitoring in rural areas (and later on as asset-holding
 company) and will make it accountable for its responsibilities for service provision. The DLI will disburse




 21 The AQUA-VIE Program has supported the development and deployment of a comprehensive digital information system to

 inventory assets and track service delivery (called mWater). The system is operational.
 22 The reports are available here: https://www.gouv.bj/actualite/1758/.




                                                                                                                 Page 21 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



 for four additional reports until one year before closing date to ensure sustainability beyond project
 closing.

                                         Table 2. Proposed DLI Matrix under the AF
                                                                             End Target        Incremental
                                                               PDO                                                End Target
                                                                            under Parent       Target from
                            DLI                             Indicators                                           including AF
                                                                               PforR                AF
                                                              (Y/N)                                                (1) + (2)
                                                                                 (1)                (2)
  DLI 1      New household connections built                     N             34,500             28,250            62,750
             under the Program (Number)
  DLI 2      New standpipes built under the                      N              3,300              2,700             6,000
             Program (Number)
  DLI 3(a)   Framework Partnership Agreements                    N                Yes                —                Yes
             signed between the Recipient’s
             ministry of water and selected
             municipalities (achieved)
  DLI 3(b)   Service monitoring reports have been                Y                11                  4                15
             published on the Recipient’s website
             (Number)
  DLI 4      Performance Based Contracts between                 N                Yes                —                Yes
             the Program Implementing Entity and
             selected regional operators have been
             signed and a service order for each
             contract has been issued
  DLI 5      NEW - The Program Implementing                      N                —                 Yes               Yes
             Entity is constituted as an asset-
             holding company for the rural water
             supply sector (Y/N)
  DLI 6      NEW - When the Performance Based                    N                —                 Yes               Yes
             contracts become effective, an
             inventory at entry23 of assets is agreed
             between the Program Implementing
             Entity and the regional operators (Y/N)
  DLI 7      NEW - Reduction in Non-Revenue                      N                —                   0                15
             Water (NRW) of the three regional
             affermages (Percent)
  DLI 8      NEW– Increase in the Bill Collection                N                —                   0                12
             Rate of the three regional affermages
             (Percent)

 44.      The new DLI 5 is associated with the conversion of the ANAEPMR from an executing agency to
 an asset-holding company to oversee the development of the sector’s assets and to supervise regional
 operators. The national sector agency (ANAEPMR) in charge of executing assets and overseeing the
 activities of municipalities and small private operators operating those assets is however not in charge of

 23 In French, ‘inventaire contradictoire’. It is an inventory carried out jointly by the private operators and the ANAEPMR in the

 presence of the municipalities. The results of this inventory must be accepted by all parties to agree on the state of the assets
 that will be made available to the operator when the responsibility for the management of the water supply systems is
 transferred.



                                                                                                                             Page 22 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



 maintaining/holding the assets of the sector (role played by an asset-holding company). To achieve this,
 a presidential decree will have to be prepared and signed. This DLI is a crucial institutional step in the
 ongoing rural water sector reform and is creating incentives for a strong institutional reform as it is a key
 milestone of the theory of change and results chain toward achieving the PDO.

  Box 1. Transformation of the ANAEPMR from an Executing Agency to an Asset-Holding Company
  To complete the reform process and strengthen efficiency and sustainability, it is important to convert the
  national rural water agency (ANAEPMR) into an asset-holding company with full responsibility to manage the
  rural water service. The current institutional setup is not fully satisfactory as the agency is only responsible for
  executing investment programs and supervising local private operators but is not in charge of
  holding/maintaining the sector’s assets as would do an asset-holding company. DLI 5 intends to incentivize the
  initial intent of establishing the ANAEPMR as executing agency and extend its functions to include:
       (a) Planning activities of the sector, based on development objectives set by the Government and
           municipalities,
       (b) Mobilizing fundings and bearing the associated debt service through the water tariffs,
       (c) Implementing development investment programs and rehabilitation works as set in the affermage
           contracts, and
       (d) Conducting physical management and accounting of the sector’s assets (valuation and depreciation of
           fixed assets).
  In addition, the ANAEPMR will play an important role in monitoring the execution of the affermage contracts
  and monitoring compliance with the obligations and performance objectives assigned to the private operators.
  The delegation of the management of the rural water sector to the ANAEPMR as defined above will be executed
  through a 30-year concession contract signed between the Government and the agency, defining the roles and
  attributions of each of the two parties. As for the affermage, a performance contract setting out the obligations
  of the Government and the agency will be agreed and annexed to the concession contract.

 45.    The three other new DLIs aim at creating incentives for successful implementation of the regional
 performance-based contracts, as follows:

    (a)   DLI 6 is related to the assets inventory at entry of the rural water supply assets which is a
          necessary and critical step to define the contractual obligations of the regional operators and of
          the GoB for asset renewal. This bipartite inventory is a very important contractual milestone of
          the early days of the 10-year affermage contracts, which will inform the subsequent
          rehabilitation/renewal programs along with the execution of the affermage contracts, supported
          by the incentives under the DLI.
    (b)   DLI 7 and DLI 824 relate to the two key performance indicators included in the affermage contracts
          of the regional operators, that is, (i) Reduction of the Non-Revenue Water and (ii) Improvement
          of the collection rate. They are proposed in the AF as new DLIs to align the incentives between
          the AQUA-VIE Program and the performance-based affermages. Creating two DLIs tied to the two
          performance indicators of the affermage contracts, the PforR aligns the incentives between those
          of the private operators and those of the ANAEPMR. The purpose of DLIs 7 and 8 is to improve
          the technical and financial performance of the sector, which will increase the sector’s revenues


 24 For more explanation, see Table 2.1 of the technical annex.




                                                                                                                    Page 23 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



         and financing capacity to contribute to the PDO goal of universal access to water supply in rural
         Benin.

 46.      DLI 7 and DLI 8 will contribute to climate change mitigation and adaptation by making more
 efficient use of water resources and improving cost recovery of service delivery. This in turn can lead to
 reductions in energy-related GHG emissions. By focusing on the reduction in NRW, this activity will help
 improve energy efficiency, reduce energy consumption due to water losses and support climate change
 mitigation. It will also increase the volume of water saved from leakages and thus available for
 distribution, thereby enabling the expansion of services to a larger population, including those who are
 currently subject to contamination during flooding events. This increased water availability will also help
 address increases in water demand during the more frequent and intense heat waves in the northern
 regions of Benin.

 47.     Theory of change. The underlying theory of change underpinning the Program including its AF is
 that through strengthening service delivery arrangements (such as through tariff and service regulation,
 rural water professionals on board, and so on) and increasing the access to water services (through new
 and rehabilitated water supply services, and so on), the Program and its AF will lead to improved quality
 and sustainability of the expanded water supply systems in rural areas and resultantly improved living
 conditions. This is also represented in Figure 3. Under both the parent Program and the AF, the results
 areas remained unchanged, and the AF only aims to fill the investment gap foreseen under the rural water
 national program. The detailed theory of change is presented in the technical annex.

      Figure 3. Simplified Theory of Change - Delivering Quality and Sustainable Rural Water Supply Services




                                                                                                               Page 24 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



 48.      Delivering high-quality and sustainable rural water supply services is at the heart of the reforms
 initiated by the GoB in the rural water sector. The theory of change assumes that the strengthening of
 the service delivery arrangements through the Program will lead to improved quality and sustainability of
 the expanded water supply systems in rural areas.

 49.     Service delivery arrangements will be strengthened. The ANAEPMR will have greater capacity to
 design, contract, monitor the performance of works contractors and that of the private operators. In
 addition, as a future asset holding company they will be in charge of developing rural water supply assets
 as well as monitor service delivery. The risk of PPP contracts not being successful is very low since to
 mitigate this risk, the ANAEPMR will be responsible for Operation and Maintenance (O&M) while a new
 bidding process is put in place.

 50.      Sustainability will be improved. The main focus of the Program results framework is not only to
 increase access to water service delivery but also to put in place institutional reforms that will lay the
 foundations for the improvement of service quality and sustainability. Improving service quality and
 sustainability will be achieved through the 10-year performance based affermage contracts and the
 conversion of the executing agency into an asset holding company (see box 1). The remuneration of the
 private operators is indexed to pre-determined performance targets: NRW and bill collection rate; which
 are the main performance indicators guaranteeing financial and technical sustainability are DLIs 7 and 8.
 The AF implementation will constitute the second phase of the institutional reform by not only putting in
 place the private operators but also creating incentives so that these contracts go beyond simple service
 orders issued and translate into measurable improvement in efficiency, replicating the performance
 indicators of the contracts with concrete results, so that incentives are aligned throughout the result
 chain: the Government, the World Bank, and the operator. Actually, the money allocated in the new DLIs
 will be used to invest in the sector to increase access to water.

  B.        Program Financing

 51.      Program expenditure framework. The total program financing increased during the
 implementation of the parent AQUA-VIE Program, from US$240 million to US$506 million. This is mainly
 due to the Government contribution, which grew from expected US$20 million (parent Program) to
 US$270 million during implementation,25 complemented with other donors’ contributions (US$16
 million). Out of US$270 million of the Government contribution, US$28.6 million has been disbursed so
 far. The detailed program of expenditure is found in the technical assessment - annex 2 with all the budget
 lines for the Government program (US$1.6 billion) and AQUA-VIE Program contributions.




 25 Government financing increased more than 13 times the original amount, which shows the strong commitment despite the

 Government having additional budget spending due to unforeseen events which led to the reduction of the fiscal space, notably
 response plan to the inflationary pressures building since the end of 2021 and the additional impact of the war in Ukraine.



                                                                                                                         Page 25 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



                                          Table 3. Program Expenditure Framework
                                                                NRWSP:
                                                                                AQUA-VIE
                                                              Government                       AQUA-VIE           AQUA-VIE
                                                                                 (‘big P’)
                                                                program                            AF                Total
     Cost                Cost of the Operation                                    Parent
                                                               (‘small p’)                       (US$,          (Including AF)
                                                                                   (US$,
                                                                  (US$,                         millions)      (US$, millions)
                                                                                 millions)
                                                                billions)
               Construction of new water supply                                        410.0         210.0                    620.0
               systems
               Rehabilitation and expansion of                                          63.0          18.7                     81.7
               existing water supply systems
               Supporting the establishment of                            1.6            6.4            0.0                     6.4
               performance-based-contracts with
               regional operators
               Capacity building of the rural water                                      3.0            7.4                    10.4
               supply professionals
               Capacity building of the ANAEPMR                                         23.6          15.9                     39.5
               TOTAL                                                      1.6          506.0         252.0                    758.0
  Financing    Government counterpart                                                  270.0           2.0                    272.0
               Percentage of Program financing                                                                                 36%
               IDA                                                                     220.0         250.0                    470.0
               Percentage of Program financing                                                                                 62%
               Other donors                                                             16.0            0.0                    16.0

 52.      The amount of Government counterpart financing has been particularly high in the case of AQUA-
 VIE and is not so usual for a water PforR in Africa. This is a sign of strong commitment and ownership of
 the Government. After including the AF, the World Bank share of the Program financing will represent 62
 percent.26 The ANAEPMR plans, seeks to finance, and handles the AQUA-VIE as a whole (that is,
 irrespective of the parent versus AF). The contribution of the counterpart financing from the GoB to the
 Program exceeding US$270 million is a signal of ownership and support worth highlighting in a country
 the size of Benin that is facing many development challenges in other sectors (sanitation, education, and
 health).

 53.      Updated program financing. The updated financing arrangements are shown in Table 4. For the
 AF, IDA will provide from an IDA Scale-Up Facility (SUF) an additional US$250 million to support further
 infrastructure investments in the target areas.

                                         Table 4. Program Financing (US$, millions)
                                                                                                       AQUA-VIE Program
       Financing Source                   Parent PforR                          AF
                                                                                                         (Including AF)
  Borrower                                       270                               2                            272
  IDA                                            220                             250                            470


 26 Active PforR projects in the water portfolio indicate that, on an average, the World Bank share is 71 percent versus 29

 percent Government’s share (not including share from the People’s Republic of China).



                                                                                                                               Page 26 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



                                                                                          AQUA-VIE Program
      Financing Source              Parent PforR                     AF
                                                                                            (Including AF)
  Other/donor                              16                           0                           16
  Total                                   506                         252                          758

 54.     The DLI framework has been updated to reflect the scale-up of the investment program and to
 create more incentivizes to enhance the successful completion of the reform.

 55.      The Government has benefited from advance payments, and the parent Program is disbursing
 according to the expected disbursement curve; so far, there is no issue. In addition, there is a very high
 level of Government counterpart financing to the AQUA-VIE Program, both initial and AF combined, which
 helps in terms of treasury and cash availability.

 56.      As noted in the parent Program Appraisal Document (PAD), a designated account (DA) in XOF was
 opened at the Central Bank (Banque Centrale des États de l'Afrique de l'Ouest) to receive the amounts of
 the initial advance up to 20 percent of IDA-supported Program costs as well as the amounts corresponding
 to the DLIs achieved. Upon achieving DLI-related results, a withdrawal application (WA) will be submitted
 to the World Bank, using the World Bank’s standard disbursement forms through the e-disbursement
 functionality in the World Bank’s Client Connection. The WA prepared by the team of the ANAEPMR will
 be accompanied by certified and cleared evidence from the task team that the related results were
 achieved. The DA will be managed by the Autonomous Amortization Fund (Caisse Autonome
 d'Amortissement, CAA) in charge of the mobilization of donors’ funds and management of debt in Benin.

 57.       The AF allocated to the DLIs is summarized in Table 5. The unit costs of the DLI that existed in the
 initial program are the same. It is important to highlight that they do not represent ‘actual unit cost’ for
 the construction of household connections and public standpipes. The cost per Disbursement-Linked
 Result (DLR) mentioned reflects the funding allocated to the corresponding DLIs (so driven by incentives
 rather than by actual costs—unlike in an Investment Project Financing [IPF])—noting nevertheless that
 the Program finances the construction of complete multi-village schemes (including production, storage,
 and primary distribution infrastructure) and does not focus only on the last mile of the distribution
 networks.
                                Table 5. Funding Allocation to the DLIs of the AF
                                                                                             AF Allocated to the
                      DLIs                                       Formula                             DLI
                                                                                               (US$, millions)
  DLI 1: New household connections built under US$2,319 per new household connection                65.5
  the Program (Number)                         with a maximum of 28,250 connections
  DLI 2: New standpipes built under the        US$12,121 per new standpipe with a                  32.7
  Program (Number)                             maximum of 2,700 standpipes
  DLI 3(b): Service monitoring reports have    US$3,181,818 per publication of biannual            12.6
  been published on the Recipient’s website    service monitoring report
  (Number)
  DLI 5: NEW - The Program Implementing        US$31,400,000 at constitution of the                31.4
  Entity is constituted as an asset-holding    ANAEPMR as an asset-holding company
  company for the rural water supply sector
  (Y/N)



                                                                                                             Page 27 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



                                                                                                AF Allocated to the
                       DLIs                                        Formula                              DLI
                                                                                                  (US$, millions)
  DLI 5: NEW - When the Performance Based        US$25,000,000 at completion of the initial            25.0
  contracts become effective, an inventory at    inventory of the rural water supply systems’
  entry of assets is agreed between the          assets
  Program Implementing Entity and the
  regional operators (Y/N)
  DLI 7: NEW - Reduction in Non-Revenue          US$2,711,000 per percent of decrease in              40.7
  Water (NRW) of the three regional              NRW with a maximum of 15 percent
  affermages (Percent)
  DLI 8: NEW - Increase in the Bill Collection   US$3,500,000 per percent of increased                42.0
  Rate of the three regional affermages          collection rate with a maximum of 12
  (Percent)                                      percent
  Total                                                                                              250.0

 58.      The verification protocols for the new DLIs are presented in the annexes. The NRW and collection
 rate DLIs are not supposed to be disbursed at the end of the Program only. They are highly scalable since
 disbursement can be made for each percent of NRW and collection rate improved. The disbursement
 profile will therefore be progressive and not a one-shot lump sum at the end.

  IV.      APPRAISAL SUMMARY

  A.       Technical

 59.    An addendum to the technical assessment of the Program has been prepared (annex 2),
 considering the implementation of the Program to date and any changes required as a result of the
 proposed AF. Overall, the main elements of the Program technical assessment remain valid.

 60.      Strategic relevance. The Program still has a particularly high strategic relevance for the GoB. It
 will fund a substantial portion of the GoB’s national program to deliver universal access to water services
 in rural areas, which is a key development objective for the country. It will support the establishment of
 institutional, contractual, and financial arrangements that will enable the GoB to achieve its strategic
 priorities of providing universal access to water services in rural areas, strengthening sector governance,
 and professionalizing rural water services. The Program will significantly contribute to delivering one of
 the 45 flagship projects identified in the PAG, which aims to deliver universal access to water services by
 2021. It will support the implementation of the National Strategy for Rural Water Supply 2017–2030
 adopted in May 2017 and the associated PDDAEPMR. The Program will contribute to improved water
 supply access to more than 3 million people (52 percent of the rural population) while also supporting
 overall reform of the rural water sector. The prioritization of the Program interventions will seek to
 redress substantial disparities in rural water service coverage across the country. It will support the core
 intervention included in the PDDAEPMR, which consists of extending existing and constructing new piped
 water supply systems in rural areas and providing greater access through household connections, in line
 with the SDGs. The Program’s focus on the rural sector will benefit a substantial portion of Benin’s
 population (estimated at 52 percent of Benin’s population), which also tends to be the poorest with



                                                                                                               Page 28 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



 limited economic development opportunities. Schools and health centers will directly benefit from the
 expanded water services delivered by the multi-village rural water supply systems.

 61.      Technical soundness. The Program remains technically sound. It will address a number of
 identified weaknesses in the rural water sector in Benin through an emphasis on greater service
 standardization, increasing the scale of service delivery and strengthening service quality monitoring. This
 in turn will provide a basis for greater professionalization of service delivery and generating economies of
 scope and some economies of scale when piped water supply systems serve multiple localities. The design
 of the proposed AF builds on the ongoing Program in the rural water supply sector and on Benin’s
 experience in private sector participation for service delivery and lessons learned from similar reforms in
 Sub-Saharan Africa.

 62.     The Program’s approach to delivering water through a mix of standpipes and household
 connections is in line with an ongoing shift in rural customers’ preferences toward household connections
 while recognizing the fact that standpipe supplies provide a good first step and will be needed for some
 time, particularly in the poorest areas. The AF will build on the existing Program which has rolled out
 standard norms for the development and operation of piped rural water systems, which in turn generated
 economies of scale in procurement and efficiency gains.

 63.     Institutional arrangements. The Program’s institutional arrangements have performed well, thus
 far, and continue to be well aligned with the GoB’s ongoing reforms of the rural water sector. The
 implementing agency, the ANAEPMR, benefits from high-level support from the GoB and has the financial
 resources to mobilize the TA required to prepare the technical, financial, environmental, and social studies
 underpinning the design of the proposed Program. Having the ANAEPMR as the main counterpart for the
 Program implementation will provide clarity of focus and leadership, as it is clearly aligned with their core
 mandate.

 64.     Program expenditure framework. The Program AF will be financed by the World Bank SUF. The
 DLIs have been designed in such a way as to ease cash flow constraints for the ANAEPMR. The Results
 Framework and associated DLIs have been designed to maintain incentives for efficient delivery
 throughout the length of the Program (through 2027). The budget of the Government national program,
 the NRWSP, increased during the implementation of the parent AQUA-VIE Program, from US$240 million
 to US$506 million. This is mainly due to the Government contribution, which grew from US$20 million to
 US$270 million, with other donors’ contributions (US$16 million). Investments in piped rural water supply
 systems will mostly be with public funds, as these are deemed to be basic social infrastructure. The
 average capital cost per person served for the construction of the fully piped rural water systems is CFAF
 125,000 (US$210), which is in line with comparable regional benchmarks average value of US$265 fully
 piped system.27 The Program and AF designed operators’ performance-based contracts in a way that will
 mobilize some private sector investments, in the form of direct investments in network rehabilitation and
 extensions as part of performance-based affermage contract obligations.

 65.    The overall conclusions of the Program economic evaluation remain unchanged for the AF. The
 estimated net present value (NPV) of Program and AF investments remains positive, that is, the present

 27 Misra, Smita, and Bill Kingdom. 2019. “Citywide Inclusive Water Supply: Adopting Off-Grid Solutions to Achieve the SDGs.”

 World Bank, Washington, DC. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/32046. Figure 2.3, page 22.



                                                                                                                        Page 29 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



 value of economic benefits exceeds the present value of economic costs. The analysis yielded a benefit-
 cost ratio of 1.4, which is in line with international estimates of similar investments in areas with limited
 access to water supply. Overall, the internal rate of return for the investment was estimated at 13.2
 percent. The NPV remained highly positive under all these scenarios presented in the technical
 assessment attached to this document, which implies that the Program will generate high positive returns
 for the economy. Moreover, the planned efficiency improvements (asset renewal, NRW, billing collection,
 and so on) have multiple benefits: liberation of resources, climate change mitigation, and reduced water
 extracted from the natural systems. Not only do they contribute to better financial sustainability for water
 operators, resources are also freed up for the proper maintenance of the new infrastructure and
 expansion of services.

  B.      Fiduciary

 66.     The integrated fiduciary assessment conducted for the Program in 2018 was updated, drawing on
 the experience gained to date to inform the design of the AF and the formulation of DLRs and indicators.
 An addendum has been prepared (annex 3) which cover the areas of financial management, procurement,
 and governance. The parent PforR operation has been under implementation for more than three years.
 The fiduciary assessment conducted according to the World Bank Policy/World Bank Directive, PforR
 Financing and PforR Financing Interim Guidance Notes to Staff, remains valid and is applicable to the AF.
 The updated assessment focused on identifying key Public Financial Management (PFM) strengths and
 weaknesses of the ANAEPMR responsible for the program implementation and measures to tackle fraud
 and corruption (F&C) in achieving the overall PDOs. No new entity is involved because of the proposed
 AF.

 67.      As an AF, the implementation will build on the fiduciary arrangements used for the parent
 Program. The Program expenditure framework (Table 3) mainly includes the following categories: 90
 percent of civil work (construction of 80 SAEP-mVs and Extension of 21 SAEP-mVs) and 10 percent of other
 related operating costs (salaries, furniture, supplies, and so on). Based on the data collected on the
 existing parent Program, the delay in the procurement process and the contract management appeared
 as the major issues with the ANAEPMR. However, the recent signatures of 95 water systems contracts
 awarded in four lots (US$193 million construction contract) will significantly increase the implementation
 pace to reach almost the parent PforR amount.

 68.     The assessment entailed a review of the capacity of the ANAEPMR’s ability (a) to plan, record,
 control, and manage all Program resources and produce timely, understandable, relevant, and reliable
 information for the stakeholders; (b) to follow and monitor procurement rules and procedures, capacity,
 and performance focusing on procurement performance indicators and the risks associated with the
 Program; and (c) to ensure that implementation arrangements are adequate and risks are reasonably
 mitigated by the existing framework.

 69.    Data collection and methodology. Fiduciary risk is determined based on (a) the data available at
 the ANAEPMR, the National Directorate for Public Procurement Control (Direction Nationale de Contrôle
 des Marchés Publics - DNCMP), and Public Procurement Regulatory Authority - Autorité de Régulation des
 Marchés Publics (ARMP); (b) the analyses of quantitative and qualitative fiduciary data on the parent
 Program; and (c) the Inspectorate General of Finance (Inspection Générale des Finances - IGF) and



                                                                                                         Page 30 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



 Inspectorate General of the Ministry (Inspection Générale du Ministère - IGM) internal and statutory
 auditor’s reports. These data include lead time in the submission of the Procurement Plan, percentage of
 contracts awarded within the service standards, percentage of contracts awarded on a competitive basis,
 percentage of contracts awarded on a single-source basis, the average number of bids, lead time in the
 procurement process, budget execution report, and the production of the financial statements.

 70.     The review concludes that (a) the fiduciary risk is Moderate and (b) the procurement and
 financial management arrangements are compliant with the World Bank Policy/World Bank Directive,
 Program-for-Results Financing. It is noted that the fiduciary risk will not prevent the achievement of the
 PDO. There are no high-value contracts with values exceeding the Operational Procurement Review
 Committee threshold in the Program Procurement Plan. Implementation of the fiduciary-related PAP
 actions is ongoing. Support from the World Bank team to the GoB on overall implementation and
 underperforming areas in the PAP will continue during the AF implementation as planned.

  C.      Environmental and Social

 71.    The review of the environmental and social management systems applicable to the Program
 was undertaken with a view to assessing their compliance with the provisions of World Bank Policy and
 World Bank Directive, for PforR Financing. An addendum to the Environmental and Social Systems
 Assessment (ESSA) was prepared to ensure that the environmental and social risks associated with the AF
 AQUA-VIE Program for universal access to drinking water in rural areas will be well managed and aligned
 with the principles of sustainable development. Annex 4 provides a more detailed summary of the
 Program AF ESSA.

 72.      The environmental and social risks of the additional funding are expected to be positive overall,
 and the negative risks identified could be minimized/mitigated through the existing national system. The
 positive social impacts of the Program will include job creation through the recruitment of local labor,
 which would increase household income, increased economic activity through the development of private
 sector waterworks management and maintenance activities, improved living conditions in schools and
 other public places through permanent access to safe water, increased household income through
 reduced water-related expenses, and reduced water-related illnesses associated with the consumption of
 poor quality water. In addition, drinking water services will be accessible to women and vulnerable groups
 (elderly, poor, disabled, etc.) and will contribute to reducing women's workloads, especially girls. In
 addition, the program will contribute to the development of the project's catchment area. The AF
 investments are not expected to have significant adverse impacts that are appreciable, diverse, or
 unprecedented on the environment and/or affected people. These negative impacts are summarized as
 air pollution due to the emission of dust particles and exhaust gases from the work equipment and
 machinery, alteration/degradation of landscape quality by construction waste, destruction of vegetation
 cover and disturbance of natural habitats, land losses, risks of spreading STI/HIV/AIDS and COVID-19, risks
 of frustration if local labor is not used, hindrance to road traffic and people's activities during trench
 opening, and risks of overexploitation of the water table. To mitigate these negative risks, measures will
 be taken through the preparation of Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs), the site
 Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) and their annexes and their effective
 implementation on the construction sites.




                                                                                                       Page 31 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



 73.      During the implementation phase of the parent Program (the construction of 160 boreholes, 80
 new SAEPmV and the extension of 21 SAEPmV), the environmental and social activities carried out made
 it possible to reduce the environmental and social risks on the work sites. The effectiveness of these
 measures is reflected in the absence of major incidents, serious accidents with work stoppages or
 fatalities. At each of the parent Program sites, a health, safety, and environmental management (HSE)
 coordinator is hired to implement mitigation measures. All sites have recruited local personnel with the
 same skills. The number of people mobilized per site varies between 20 and 40. The complaints
 management mechanism has been well publicized and a mechanism has been put in place for the effective
 recording and processing of complaints

 74.      Legislative and procedural changes. The ESSA is still applicable both in terms of laws, regulations,
 standards, and institutions and in terms of procedures and implementation of these laws and standards.
 Benin’s current environmental management system (regulatory, legal, and institutional) remains the same
 as that of the parent Program and thus remains in line with the fundamental principles of the World Bank’s
 PforR policy. The main institutions involved in the implementation of the AF are the same as for the
 parent Program. The only institutional reform noted at the level of the AF is the transformation of the
 ANAEPMR, an executive agency, into an asset-holding company responsible for supervising the
 development of the sector’s assets and supervising regional operators. The addendum to the initial ESSA
 reanalyzed the strengths, gaps, risks, and opportunities of this reform in relation to the fundamental
 principles of the World Bank’s PforR operations and noted that there was no contradiction.

 75.      Environmental and social risks and impacts. The AF will not introduce significant changes in the
 scope and areas of intervention of the parent Program. It does not introduce new activities that would
 alter the environmental and social risks associated with the parent Program. The AF activities are not likely
 to have high and substantial impacts on protected areas or to significantly transform natural habitats or
 significantly alter areas of biodiversity and/or potentially important cultural resources. The activities and
 impacts of the AF are expected to be generally positive in the long term. The activities will improve the
 rate of access to drinking water, which will promote a better health and hygiene of populations, reduce
 waterborne diseases, and improve living conditions.

 76.     Land acquisition - lessons learned. The collaboration with the ANAEPMR and National Agency for
 Domain and Land (Agence Nationale du Domaine et du Foncier - ANDF) continues to be successful. The
 construction and operation of the water supply systems are now following the Guidelines for Social and
 Environmental Management (GRSEM) and are certified as environmentally compliant by the Beninese
 Environment Agency (Agence Béninoise pour l'Environnement - ABE). Also, all construction sites (water
 tower, pumping station) are secured by acts established by the ANDF. As part of the implementation of
 the partnership agreement between ANAEPMR and the ANDF, the ANDF has started the process of
 securing the sites of the systems and their assignments in the land domain of the state (ANAEPMR). To
 this end, a joint ANAEPMR-ANDF mission was organized from December 6 to December 12, 2020, on 32
 sites (water towers and pumping stations) of 13 SAEP-mVs under construction in 11 municipalities
 benefiting from ANAEPMR projects and programs. This mission allowed the ANDF to take geodetic and
 socioeconomic data on each site concerned. After this stage, municipal decrees on the Declaration of
 Public Utility (Déclaration d'Utilité Public) were drawn up and signed by the mayors concerned. These
 signed communal decrees will allow the ANDF to continue the process of securing the 32 sites, whose
 owners will be compensated according to the provisions of the ANDF. All investment sites were identified



                                                                                                         Page 32 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



 and validated in a participatory manner, with the agreement of landowners and beneficiaries.
 Investments were made in public and private domains. The ANDF led the process of securing all the sites.
 For private sites, the compensations were settled in accordance with the national texts without difficulty.
 These achievements will be capitalized with the AF.

 77.     Status of implementation of the parent Program’s Environmental Management Action Plan. The
 review of the parent Program’s Environmental Management Action Plan has revealed that the four actions
 recommended/planned in the parent PAP have been completed and the various related measures are
 also continuing. Thus, the implementation of the various environmental and social measures relating to
 these four different actions recommended in the PAP of the initial Program continues without difficulty
 which is an asset for the AF.

 78.     Environmental and social screenings and environmental and social studies are carried out in
 accordance with the texts in force. To this end, it should be noted, for example, that the 95 SAEPmV in
 the mother program being awarded have been the subject of ESIAs, 51 of which have been submitted to
 the ABE for validation. Of the 51 ESIAs submitted to the EBA, 47 have been validated and 37 Environmental
 and Social Compliance Certificates have been obtained out of the 47 expected. The remaining 44 ESIA
 reports are being reviewed before being sent to the ABE for validation. Adequate supervision of ESIA and
 good quality of the expected reports were recommended by the World Bank safeguards team, as well as
 an acceleration of the process of implementation and validation with the obtaining of environmental and
 social compliance certificates of the remaining ESIAs. In addition to the ESIA reports prepared in
 accordance with Benin's laws and regulations and the Reference Guide, documents such as a COVID-19
 Action Plan and a Code of Conduct have been developed, along with the implementation of a Complaint
 Management Mechanism. In order to mitigate the risks of the Program during the construction phase of
 the works, the following documents have been developed: (i) ESMP for the construction site (PGES-C); (ii)
 the Specific Waste Management and Disposal Plan (PPGED); and (iii) the Specific Health and Safety Plan
 (PPSPS).

 79.   National capacity building. Institutions that manage environmental and social risks at the central
 and municipal levels are considered strong enough to manage potential changes associated with the AF.

 80.     The preparation of the Reference Guide for Environmental and Social Management (Guide
 Référentiel pour la Gestion Environnementale et Sociale - GRGES) was followed by a dissemination/training
 program for the application of the GRGES for the various stakeholders involved in the implementation of
 the Program, including the staff of the ANAEPMR, the ABE, the ANDF, the departmental directorates, the
 MCVDD, communes, Water Users’ Association (Association des Consommateurs d’Eau Potable - ACEP),
 works contractors, works supervision firms, and drinking water operators.

 81.     Environmental and social risks management. The ESSA reviews the environmental and social
 management systems applicable to the Program to assess compliance with the provisions of the World
 Bank's Policy and Guidance on Environmental Financing, as well as subsequent amendments with which
 the Program must comply as part of the AF. The methodology used follows the World Bank's best practices
 and guidelines on ESSA. The preparation of the addendum involved a series of interviews and
 consultations with stakeholders related to the parent Program. Thus, the addendum reflects a review of
 several documents, including the initial ESSA and subsequent reports of the World Bank's implementation
 support missions (the aides-mémoires), as well as monthly and quarterly environmental and social


                                                                                                       Page 33 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



 monitoring reports. Interviews were conducted with key stakeholders at the central level, including
 ANAEPMR, the Ministry of the Living Environment and Sustainable Development (Ministère du Cadre de
 Vie et du Développement Durable, MCVDD), the ABE, and the National Land and Domain Agency. Field
 surveys were conducted in some of the town halls/beneficiary municipalities of the AQUA-VIE program,
 notably in the municipalities of Akpo Misserete and Ifangni, where various technical and local actors were
 consulted. Implementing companies and representatives of beneficiary communities were also consulted.
 The issue of COVID-19 was assessed by verifying in the field the effective implementation of the measures
 foreseen by the parent Program to deal with COVID-19, notably screening for COVID-19; proper
 ventilation of indoor spaces and wearing of masks; respect and maintenance of social distancing; use of
 Personal Protective Equipment (PPE); systematic hand washing by workers and users of the sites;
 vaccination against COVID-19.

 82.      The negative environmental and social impacts of the Program’s AF will be avoided, minimized,
 and mitigated through adequate and effective measures recommended in the ESSA. The risks associated
 with the current COVID-19 crisis will be mitigated by compliance with health and safety measures related
 to COVID-19. The performance of the parent Program on environmental and social management systems
 is reassessed in the context of this AF and has been rated Satisfactory. To mitigate the risk of any potential
 negative environmental or social impact, the GWSP also supported the funding guidelines to define the
 operators’ required processes for environmental and social management. The parent Program’s
 environmental and social management systems will be maintained to manage risk and expanded to cover
 increased geographic reach and additional activities such as the AF.

 83.     A grievance redress mechanism (GRM) is operational and collects, processes, and resolves
 complaints and the response to complaints. This GRM of the initial Program will be expanded for the AF.
 Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected as a result of a World Bank-
 supported PforR operation, as defined by the applicable policy and procedures, may submit complaints
 to the existing Program GRM or the World Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS).

 Gender

 84.      Benin is ranked 148 out of 162 countries in the 2019 Gender Inequality Index (with a score of
 0.612) and is positioned above the average for Sub-Saharan African countries (0.570).28 In 2003, women
 represented only 3.67 percent of municipal councilors; 4.37 in 2008, 4.66 in 2015, and 3.86 in 2020.29
 There is a large opportunity to address gender issues through this Program. To achieve its objectives and
 contribute to addressing gender gaps in the country, the Program will need to alleviate constraints for
 women and girls to accessing services and boosting their opportunities so that they can be productively
 engaged in the water sector. An assessment of the gender and social inclusion dimensions of the Program
 was carried out during preparation with the GWSP support. The assessment explored gender gaps in two
 distinct areas: (a) in terms of gender-based difference in access to rural water services and water-related
 hygienic practices (including handwashing at critical times, food preparation, bathing and washing, and
 menstrual hygiene management) and (b) in terms of women’s participation and levels of empowerment

 28 United Nations Development Program, Gender Inequality Index (GII) 2019. http://hdr.undp.org/en/content/gender-inequality-

 index-gii.
 29 World Bank. 2021. Benin Gender Assessment. Women Participation in Economic Opportunities and Decision Making.

 Washington DC: World Bank.



                                                                                                                        Page 34 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



 in institutions participating in the governance, delivery, and supervision of water services and water-
 related hygienic practices in rural areas, including at the central level in the MEM/General Directorate for
 Water (Direction Générale de l’Eau), MoH/National Agency of Primary Health Care (Agence National de
 Soins de Santé Primaire), and the ANAEPMR and at the local level, including for local governance and
 service provision, within municipalities, private sector operators, community-based organizations, and
 the ACEPs.

 85.      The design of the AF will continue addressing gender gaps through increasing access to water
 services and enhancing employment and training opportunities for women. The AF will continue to
 improve access to water supply services, thus affecting the living conditions, health, school attendance,
 productivity, and income of women. In 90 percent of rural households, women and girls are responsible
 for fetching water: they will therefore benefit particularly from the impacts of the initial PforR and of its
 AF, both of which promote water access through household connections. In addition, the gender
 assessment in the rural water sector prepared in 2018 is currently being updated with the GWSP support.
 A first draft of the assessment is available (March 2022), and its main conclusion emphasized that women
 are not represented enough in the executive committee of the ACEPs. Initial results were as follows: (a)
 there are few women in the water administration, reflecting the national situation, where on average,
 barely 30 percent of the public administration workforce are women; (b) very few or no women find
 themselves in strategic decision-making positions at both central and decentralized levels, and most
 women find themselves in non-technical positions including secretarial, financial, and accounting; (c)
 women’s participation in professional water management remains low, and efforts need to be
 strengthened; and (d) women participate strongly in citizen control through the ACEP, although in most
 cases, they are given secondary roles at the level of decision-making bodies. Currently all committees have
 at least one woman. However, among decision making positions in the committees, only 10 percent of
 ACEPs have at least two females represented. In this regard, the Program introduced actions, targets and
 a new indicator to increase the number of women in decision making positions (in executive committees).

 86.     The AF will extend women’s participation in the municipal committees of the ACEP. The World
 Bank, together with the GWSP, created a toolbox on the organization, functioning, and financing of the
 ACEP which showed a 20–30 percent participation of women in ACEP committees. To increase women’s
 involvement in the water sector, the Program aims to (a) increase the voice of women in consumer
 committees (ACEPs) and their participation in decision-making processes and (b) support them in
 accessing training opportunities with a particular focus on empowering women to be more involved in
 the delivery of water services, water sector technical professions and in leadership positions in ACEPs. To
 encourage female participation, the training sessions will include female trainers as role models.
 Additionally, new targets for women in executive committees of ACEPs were introduced. The following
 indicators will be used to monitor progress: (a) Percentage of women being members of the committees
 in ACEPs, which was already achieved in the parent Program; (b) Percentage of ACEPs that have at least
 two females in their executive bureau; and (c) Share of persons benefitting from training activities for
 rural water supply professionals under the Program who are female (percentage).

 Citizen engagement

 87.      Under the AF, establishing strong participatory processes, mechanisms to collect and respond to
 citizen feedback, and access to open data will be key elements that will be promoted. This is also reflected



                                                                                                         Page 35 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



 in the Results Framework and in some sense in the DLI related to the Publication by the ANAEPMR of
 biannual service monitoring reports (Number).

 88.     Participatory approaches will be adopted for training materials for ACEPs. For all projects
 managed by the ANAEPMR, a central GRM exists, a system that collects all of this information at the
 national level, reports it, and feeds into management’s decision and is embedded into the country system
 (beyond the Program). The GRM is embedded into the Program’s GRSEM. The GRM is accessible and is
 disseminated through the participation of municipalities, the ACEP, and citizens throughout the
 consultation process during the planning, design, and supervision phases of the works. The private
 operators in charge of managing the rural water supply schemes shall also collect, register, and address
 grievances though the GRM that is part of their contractual obligations.

 89.     The AQUA-VIE Program is already relying on a citizen engagement mechanism through these
 ACEPs. The ACEPs are present in all the municipalities of Benin. They are in charge of representing users’
 interests through a committee at the municipal level and representing bodies at the locality level, leading
 to a well-developed network throughout the country. The AF will extend capacity building to help the
 ACEPs gain autonomy and sustainability. They will also receive training material (with the support of the
 GWSP) to enhance their participation in key decisions at the local level and as part of the grievance
 mechanism during the planning, design, and supervision phases of the works.

 90.     The AF will also support the implementation of an existing call center embedded into the
 Program’s GRM. The regional operators will be responsible for managing a call center to register,
 dispatch, and handle the grievances received from users in relation to service quality and that will be fully
 embedded into the Program’s grievance mechanism. This call center is a first initiative of its kind in the
 rural water sector in Benin. The operationalization of this call center makes it possible to manage all
 complaints, suggestions, and requests from citizens in rural water systems. During the first half of 2021,
 36,479 calls were received (against 15,111 calls in the last half of 2020), of which 26,903 were met (against
 11,564 concerns in 2020), or 74.74 percent. The requests dealt with mainly concern 16 grounds of appeal
 (poor water quality, disputed balances, disputed bills, water pricing, water cut-off, reading not carried
 out, broken pipe, request for information, meter requests, defective meters, recovery, quality of service,
 low flow, meter changes, mobile payments, and water leaks).

 Climate Change
 91.      Climate co-benefits and disaster risk screening. The proposed activities of the AF have been
 screened for short- and long-term climate change. Climate change considerations are included in the
 activities of the different results areas of the Program. The Program design considered the climate risks
 and vulnerabilities identified in the Sectoral Context section into its design and how the planned
 components help reduce vulnerability. In terms of mitigation potential impact, significant reductions in
 GHG emissions are expected to result from the reduction of physical losses in the water supply system.
 Those would offset to some extent the potential increase of GHG emissions from groundwater pumping
 at boreholes, although the Program intends to utilize latest generation pumping systems to offset
 emissions. Climate adaptation aspects will be built into infrastructure designs, aiming for example to
 reduce the vulnerability of key water supply assets to flash floods and to improve the protection of
 groundwater resources to pollution intrusion during flooding events.




                                                                                                         Page 36 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



 92.     Overall, the predicted climate change and variability will present important short-term and
 long-term challenges to the development efforts in Benin. According to the World Bank climate
 screening unit, rainfall projections in Benin show better consistency at the seasonal level than at the
 annual level. Projections suggest decreases in rainfall during January–March and April–June and increases
 during July–September and October–December. Mean annual temperatures are projected to rise by 1.0–
 3.0°C by the 2060s, with the northern regions of Benin experiencing the most rapid increase. Recurrent
 droughts will continue to affect Benin. Impacts will be felt within the agriculture and water resources
 sectors as variability in the seasonal climatic regime and lack of early warning systems will exacerbate
 these sectors’ vulnerabilities, threatening food security and the populations’ main livelihood.
 93.     To effectively address the increasing climate change-related challenges that Benin faces, this AF
 will support the activities contributing to reduction of the severe effects from climate change, which
 are strongly aligned with the Government priorities.
 94.      The parent operation has been performing well in relation to climate change mitigation and
 adaptation. The AF will continue supporting the same activities of the parent operation and continue
 contributing to building resilience against climate change risks affecting its area of intervention. More
 specifically, this will be through the following:
    •    Systematic hydrogeological and geophysical analysis and installation of piezometers equipped
         with data transmission system as part as the construction, rehabilitation, and expansion works
         under Results Areas 1.1 and 1.2 will directly improve monitoring of groundwater levels and
         abstractions. Thus, the Program will create a decision support system to study the future behavior
         or potential of the aquifers, to adapt groundwater use in response to different climate change
         conditions.
    •    The installation of properly designed pumps as part of the construction, rehabilitation, and
         expansion works under Results Areas 1.1 and 1.2 will improve the energy efficiency of the piped
         water supply systems and will contribute to climate change mitigation through a likely reduction
         in GHG emissions per volume of water pumped. Likewise, the standardized design parameters
         and construction standards developed by the ANAEPMR and applied for all works will encourage
         a switch from diesel/fuel generator toward more efficient energy sources, including greater
         reliance on renewable energy sources and connections to the grid.
    •    A reduction in water losses will be a key objective of the regional operators’ performance-based
         contracts developed and implemented under Results Area 2.1. Those operators will be
         incentivized through their remuneration formula to reduce water losses. This will reduce the
         amount of water to be pumped, treated, and conveyed to deliver the service. This in turn will
         contribute to climate change adaptation, by reducing groundwater abstractions, thus putting less
         stress on existing water sources. The reduction of leakages under Results Area 2.1 is also yielding
         energy efficiency gains, thus contributing to climate change mitigation.

  D.      Implementation Arrangements

 95.    The ANAEPMR will remain in charge of implementing the Program, including the execution of all
 Program activities, the management of the environmental and social effects, monitoring and evaluation
 (M&E), handling of result-based disbursements requests, and consolidation of the Program financial



                                                                                                       Page 37 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



 reports. To perform its functions, the ANAEPMR will count on its internal structure and on a substantial
 deployment of TA. The ANAEPMR already led the preparation of contractual arrangements signed with
 regional private operators.

  V.          KEY RISKS


 96.    As shown in the Systematic Operations Risk-rating Tool in annex 1, all risk ratings have remained
 unchanged except the Macroeconomic risk which was increased to Substantial. The overall risk rating
 remains Moderate. A detailed PAP has been designed to address the risks, and all actions are now
 completed.

 97.      Macroeconomic (residual risk is Substantial). Before the pandemic, Benin experienced robust
 real GDP growth averaging 6.4 percent in 2017–2019, owing to a relatively favorable external
 environment and commitment to macroeconomic stability. As a result of the COVID-19 crisis, increasing
 electricity and transport prices, as well as trade disruptions following the war in Ukraine, and concerns
 about insecurity at the northern border, the fiscal deficit (including grants) increased to 5.5 percent of the
 GDP in 2022, considerably reducing fiscal space. The Government may be challenged to allocate the
 expected resources towards the achievement of the Program targets. Mitigation measures are that the
 World Bank has a strong and longstanding economic dialogue with Benin, in close coordination with the
 IMF30. Therefore, the macroeconomic risk is substantial.

 98.       Other risk (COVID-19 risk rating Moderate). A local outbreak of COVID-19 could have social
 impacts in Benin and would require the diversion of administrative capacity to contain the virus. Lockdown
 measures would directly interrupt the implementation of Program activities and result in delays in the
 results timelines. However, the overall impacts have been limited until now. The significant support
 received by the Benin’s health sector received from the World Bank and from other partners mitigates
 this risk.
  VI.         WORLD BANK GRIEVANCE REDRESS

 99.     Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a World Bank (WB)
 supported project may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance redress mechanisms or the
 WB’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed
 in order to address project-related concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may submit
 their complaint to the WB’s independent Inspection Panel which determines whether harm occurred, or
 could occur, as a result of WB non-compliance with its policies and procedures. Complaints may be
 submitted at any time after concerns have been brought directly to the World Bank's attention, and Bank
 Management has been given an opportunity to respond. For information on how to submit complaints to
 the     World     Bank’s     corporate    Grievance      Redress    Service   (GRS),     please     visit
 http://www.worldbank.org/en/projects-operations/products-and-services/grievance-redress-service.


 30
      A new 42-month Extended Credit Facility (ECF) program with the IMF reached a staff level agreement on April 22, 2022.




                                                                                                                              Page 38 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



 For information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank Inspection Panel, please visit
 www.inspectionpanel.org.




                                                                                         Page 39 of 108
    The World Bank
    Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)




VII. SUMMARY TABLE OF CHANGES

                                                                    Changed              Not Changed
Change in Program Scope                                                ✔
Change in Results Framework                                            ✔
Change in Loan Closing Date(s)                                         ✔
Change in Disbursements Arrangements                                   ✔
Change in Implementing Agency                                                                 ✔
Change in Project's Development Objectives                                                    ✔
Cancellations Proposed                                                                        ✔
Reallocation between Disbursement Categories                                                  ✔
Change in Program Action Plan                                                                 ✔
Change in Safeguard Policies Triggered                                                        ✔
Change in Legal Covenants                                                                     ✔
Change in Institutional Arrangements                                                          ✔
Change in Technical Method                                                                    ✔
Change in Fiduciary                                                                           ✔
Change in Environmental and Social Aspects                                                    ✔
Other Change(s)                                                                               ✔



VIII. DETAILED CHANGE(S)

LOAN CLOSING DATE(S)


Ln/Cr/Tf          Status            Original Closing   Current             Proposed      Proposed Deadline
                                                       Closing(s)          Closing       for Withdrawal
                                                                                         Applications
IDA-62370         Effective         30-Jun-2024        30-Jun-2024         30-Jun-2027   30-Dec-2027




                                                                                                   Page 40 of 108
    The World Bank
    Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



IDA-D3160        Effective         30-Jun-2024       30-Jun-2024       30-Jun-2027      30-Dec-2027


DISBURSEMENT ARRANGEMENTS


Change in Disbursement Arrangements
Yes


Expected Disbursements (in US$)

DISBURSTBL
Fiscal Year                              Annual                       Cumulative

2018                                     0.00                          0.00
2019                                     18,298,388.00                 18,298,388.00

2020                                     6,363,636.00                  24,662,024.00

2021                                     6,363,636.00                  31,025,660.00

2022                                     6,363,636.00                  37,389,296.00
2023                                     91,446,148.00                 128,835,444.00
2024                                     93,452,834.00                 222,288,278.00
2025                                     136,339,880.00                358,628,158.00
2026                                     97,431,479.00                 456,059,637.00

2027                                     13,940,363.00                 470,000,000.00




                                                                                                  Page 41 of 108
                         The World Bank
                         Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



                                                                       IX.      RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING




                                                                                   Results Framework
                                                                                    COUNTRY: Benin
                                                          Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing



Program Development Objective(s)
The PDO is to increase access to water supply service and to strengthen service delivery arrangements in selected rural areas.

Project Development Objective Indicators by Objectives/ Outcomes
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_ PD O




                                       Indicator Name                   DLI   Baseline                                                   End Target


Increase access to water supply services

People provided with access to improved water sources
                                                                              0.00                                                      3,020,000.00
(Number)

Action: This indicator has been Revised

                   including female (Number)                                  0.00                                                      1,510,000.00

                                                                      Rationale:
                                                                      This sub-indicator was part of the Parent Program but is not showing in the AF due to portal issues.
                   Action: This indicator is New
                                                                      Therefore, we are adding it now.


Strengthen service delivery arrangements

Piped rural water supply systems managed by regional
                                                                              0.00                                                      100.00
operators (Percentage)



                                                                                                                                                                             Page 42 of 108
                                                     The World Bank
                                                     Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)


RESULT_FRAME_TBL_ PD O




                                                                  Indicator Name                    DLI    Baseline                                                    End Target


                                                                                                  Rationale:
                                                                                                  The portal is not showing the M&E details from the Parent Program for this indicator. Thus, this indicator is listed as revised
Action: This indicator has been Revised
                                                                                                  only to complete the monitoring and Evaluation Plan section. No actual changes have been made.


The Program Implementing Entity is constituted as an asset-
                                                                                                  null 5   No                                                         Yes
holding company for the rural water supply sector (Yes/No)

                                                                                                  Rationale:
                                                                                                  To complete the reform process and strengthen efficiency and sustainability, it is important to convert the national rural
                                                                                                  water agency (ANAEPMR) into an asset-holding company with full responsibility to manage the rural water service. The
Action: This indicator is New                                                                     current institutional setup is not fully satisfactory as the agency is only responsible for executing investment programs and
                                                                                                  supervising local private operators but is not in charge of holding/maintaining the sector’s assets as would do an asset-
                                                                                                  holding company.


Service monitoring reports have been published on the                                             null
                                                                                                           0.00                                                       15.00
Recipient’s website (Number)                                                                      3.1

Action: This indicator has been Revised

   PDO Table SPACE
Intermediate Re sults I ndi cator s by Compone nts




Intermediate Results Indicators by Results Areas
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_ IO




                                                                  Indicator Name                    DLI    Baseline                                                    End Target


Increase access to water supply services

New household connections built under the Program (Number)                                                 0.00                                                       62,750.00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Page 43 of 108
                       The World Bank
                       Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)


RESULT_FRAME_TBL_ IO




                                    Indicator Name                    DLI    Baseline                                                   End Target


Action: This indicator has been Revised

New standpipes built under the Program (Number)                              0.00                                                      6,000.00

Action: This indicator has been Revised

New piped rural water supply systems built under the Program
                                                                             0.00                                                      206.00
functioning (Number)

Action: This indicator has been Revised

Existing piped rural water supply systems in rural areas
rehabilitated or expanded under the Program functioning                      0.00                                                      360.00
(Number)
                                                                    Rationale:
Action: This indicator has been Revised                             The portal data sheet is not importing the M&E details from the Parent Program for this indicator. Thus, this indicator is
                                                                    listed as “revised” only to complete the M&E plan section. The target remains the same.


Strengthen service delivery arrangements

Framework Partnership Agreements signed between the
Recipient’s ministry of water and Selected Municipalities           null 3   0.00                                                      50.00
(Number)
                                                                    Rationale:
Action: This indicator has been Revised                             This indicator was achieved.


Tariff policy for rural water supply services approved (Yes/No)              No                                                        Yes

                                                                    Rationale:
Action: This indicator has been Revised
                                                                    The portal data sheet is not importing the M&E details from the Parent Program for this indicator. Thus, this indicator is




                                                                                                                                                                                       Page 44 of 108
                       The World Bank
                       Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)


RESULT_FRAME_TBL_ IO




                                    Indicator Name                    DLI   Baseline                                                    End Target


                                                                    listed as “revised” only to complete the M&E plan section. The target remains the same.


Performance Based Contracts between the Program
Implementing Entity and selected regional operators have been
                                                                            0.00                                                       3.00
signed and a service order for each contract has been issued
(Number)
                                                                    Rationale:
                                                                    The portal data sheet is not importing the M&E details from the Parent Program for this indicator. Thus, this indicator is
Action: This indicator has been Revised
                                                                    listed as “revised” only to complete the M&E plan section. The target remains the same.


Piped rural water supply systems included into information
system to control and monitor rural water supply assets and                 0.00                                                       100.00
regional operators (Percentage)
                                                                    Rationale:
Action: This indicator has been Revised                             This indicator was achieved.


Piped rural water supply systems providing improved water
                                                                            0.00                                                       90.00
quality (Percentage)
                                                                    Rationale:
                                                                    The portal data sheet is not importing the M&E details from the Parent Program for this indicator. Thus, this indicator is
Action: This indicator has been Revised
                                                                    listed as “revised” only to complete the M&E plan section. The target remains the same.


People benefiting from training activities on rural water supply
                                                                            0.00                                                       660.00
under the Program (Number)
                                                                    Rationale:
                                                                    The portal data sheet is not importing the M&E details from the Parent Program for this indicator. Thus, this indicator is
Action: This indicator has been Revised
                                                                    listed as “revised” only to complete the M&E plan section. The target remains the same.




                                                                                                                                                                                       Page 45 of 108
                       The World Bank
                       Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)


RESULT_FRAME_TBL_ IO




                                    Indicator Name                    DLI    Baseline                                                    End Target


Share of persons benefitting from training activities for rural
water supply professionals under the Program who are female                  0.00                                                       15.00
(Percentage)

Action: This indicator is New

Women being members of the committees of ACEPs
                                                                             10.00                                                      25.00
(Percentage)
                                                                    Rationale:
Action: This indicator has been Revised                             This indicator was achieved.


Percentage of ACEPs that have at least two females in their
                                                                             10.00                                                      30.00
executive bureau (Percentage)

Action: This indicator is New

Grievances registered related to delivery of Program benefits
                                                                             0.00                                                       80.00
that are addressed (Percentage)
                                                                    Rationale:
Action: This indicator has been Revised                             The portal data sheet is not importing the M&E details from the Parent Program for this indicator. Thus, this indicator is
                                                                    listed as “revised” only to complete the M&E plan section. The target remains the same.


Percentage of regional operators responding to consumer
                                                                             0.00                                                       95.00
complaints (Percentage) (Percentage)

Action: This indicator is New

When the Performance Based contracts become effective, an
inventory at entry of assets is agreed between the Program          null 6   No                                                         Yes
Implementing Entity and the regional operators (Yes/No)
                                                                    Rationale:
Action: This indicator is New
                                                                    This initial inventory is to be made shortly after the issuance of the Orders of Service of the three affermage contracts and




                                                                                                                                                                                        Page 46 of 108
                       The World Bank
                       Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)


RESULT_FRAME_TBL_ IO




                                    Indicator Name                    DLI    Baseline                                                    End Target


                                                                    refers to an inventory at entry to be made jointly by the private operators and the ANAEPMR. This bipartite inventory is a
                                                                    very important contractual milestone of the early days of the 10-year affermage contracts, that will inform the subsequent
                                                                    rehabilitation/renewal programs along with the execution of the affermage contracts.


Reduction in Non-Revenue Water (NRW) of the three regional
                                                                    null 7   0.00                                                        15.00
affermages (Percentage)
                                                                    Rationale:
                                                                    Whatever the baseline, the indicator is measuring an improvement in NRW reduction in percent
Action: This indicator is New
                                                                    The DLI targets a reduction of 15% in NRW at the completion of the PforR


Increase in the Bill Collection Rate of the three regional
                                                                    null 8   0.00                                                        12.00
affermages (Percentage)
                                                                    Rationale:
Action: This indicator is New                                       Whatever the baseline, the indicator is measuring an improvement (increase) in billing collection rate in percent.


  IO Table SPACE


                                                                        Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: PDO Indicators            Mapped




                                                                                                                                   Methodology for Data           Responsibility for Data
Indicator Name                                             Definition/Description          Frequency        Datasource
                                                                                                                                   Collection                     Collection
                                                           Sum of (i) number of new
                                                           household connections
                                                                                                                                   Indicator
                                                           built under the Program *
                                                                                                            Intermediate i         calculated based
People provided with access to improved                    number of                       Bi-annual                                                        ANAEPMR
                                                                                                            ndicators              on intermediate indicato
water sources                                              people served per
                                                                                                                                   rs
                                                           household connection in
                                                           rural areas as set by
                                                           ANAEPMR, i.e. 3


                                                                                                                                                                                         Page 47 of 108
     The World Bank
     Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



                                          households of 8 persons or
                                          24 persons and (ii) number
                                          of new standpipes built
                                          under
                                          the Program * number of
                                          people served per
                                          standpipe in rural areas as
                                          set by ANAEPMR,
                                          i.e. 250 people (including
                                          female).
                                          50% of the number of
                                                                                                   Indicator calculated on
                                          additional people
                                                                      Bi-annual   PDO indicator    the basis of PDO           ANAEPMR
   including female                       benefiting from access to
                                                                                                   Indicator
                                          drinking water services in
                                          rural areas
                                                                                                   Number of piped rural
                                                                                                   water supply systems in
                                                                                                   rural areas
                                          Percentage of total number              Activity
                                                                                                   whose management is
                                          of rural piped water supply             reports of
Piped rural water supply systems                                      Bi-annual                    delegated to regional      ANAEPMR
                                          systems in the country                  regional opera
managed by regional operators                                                                      operators, divided by
                                          managed by                              tors
                                                                                                   the total number of
                                          regional operators
                                                                                                   piped rural water supply
                                                                                                   systems in the country

                                          The ANAEPMR is a public                 Creation of
                                          institution to which the                the asset
The Program Implementing Entity is
                                          Government delegates,       Once        holding          Signed decree              ANAEPMR
constituted as an asset-holding company
                                          through a concession                    company by
for the rural water supply sector
                                          contract, the technical and             signed decree
                                          financial management of



                                                                                                                                        Page 48 of 108
     The World Bank
     Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



                                         the sector. In particular, it
                                         will be in charge of: (i)
                                         planning, financing and
                                         implementing investments,
                                         and (ii) monitoring
                                         operations.
                                         The delegation of the
                                         management of the rural
                                         water sector to the
                                         ANAEPMR as defined
                                         above will be executed
                                         through a 30-year
                                         concession contract signed
                                         between the Government
                                         and the agency, defining
                                         the roles and attributions
                                         of each of the two parties.
                                         Publication by the
                                         ANAEPMR of bi-annual
                                         service monitoring reports
                                         including the
                                         updated inventory of
                                         assets and key
                                                                                   Service monit
                                         performance indicators for                                Compilation of service
Service monitoring reports have been                                   Bi-annual   oring reports                            ANAEPMR
                                         all piped rural water                                     monitoring reports
published on the Recipient’s website                                               published
                                         supply systems of the
                                         municipalities having
                                         signed the FPA. The reports
                                         will cover the
                                         semesters from July-
                                         December 2018 through
                                         June 2026.


                                                                                                                                      Page 49 of 108
     The World Bank
     Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



ME PDO Table SPACE


                                             Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: Intermediate Results Indicators   Mapped




                                                                                                   Methodology for Data     Responsibility for Data
Indicator Name                           Definition/Description       Frequency   Datasource
                                                                                                   Collection               Collection
                                                                                                   (i) Compilation
                                                                                                   and submission
                                         New household
                                                                                                   of implementation repor
                                         connections under the
                                                                                  Reports          ts by regional operators
                                         Program connected to a
                                                                                  from regional    (ii) Certification of&nb
                                         functioning piped rural
New household connections built under                                 Bi-annual   operators vali   sp;the reports by        ANAEPMR
                                         water supply system.
the Program                                                                       dated            the Engineering Consulta
                                         A rural water supply
                                                                                  by ANAEPMR       nt
                                         system is considered
                                                                                                   (iii) Validation of the
                                         functioning if not out-of-
                                                                                                   reports by ANAEPMR
                                         service.


                                                                                                   (i) Compilation and
                                                                                                   submission of
                                                                                  Reports          implementation reports
                                         New standpipes under the
                                                                                  from regional    by regional operators
                                         Program connected to a
                                                                      Bi-annual   operators vali   (ii) Certification of the   ANAEPMR
New standpipes built under the Program   functioning piped rural
                                                                                  dated            reports by the
                                         water supply
                                                                                  by ANAEPMR       Engineering Consultant
                                         system
                                                                                                   (iii) Validation of the
                                                                                                   reports by ANAEPMR

                                                                                  Minutes of       Counting of minutes of
                                         New piped rural water
New piped rural water supply systems                                  Bi-annual   works commis     works commissioning ac      ANAEPMR
                                         supply systems built under
built under the Program functioning                                               sioning accept   ceptance
                                         the Program functioning
                                                                                  ance and the     and monitoring


                                                                                                                                            Page 50 of 108
     The World Bank
     Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



                                                                                    georeferenced reports of the
                                                                                     information s georeferenced informati
                                                                                    ystem          on system

                                            Existing piped rural water
                                                                                    Minutes of        Counting of minutes of
                                            supply systems in rural
                                                                                    works commis      works commissioning ac
                                            areas rehabilitated or
                                                                                    sioning accept    ceptance
Existing piped rural water supply systems   expanded under the
                                                                        Bi-annual   ance and the      and monitoring reports    ANAEPMR
in rural areas rehabilitated or expanded    Program functioning.
                                                                                    georeferenced     of the
under the Program functioning               A rural water supply
                                                                                     information s    georeferenced informati
                                            system is considered
                                                                                    ystem             on system
                                            functioning if not out-of-
                                            service
                                            FPAs defining the
                                            conditions and modalities
                                            of partnership between the
                                            ANAEPMR and
Framework Partnership Agreements            municipalities for the
                                                                        Once        FPAs signed       FPAs signed               ANAEPMR
signed between the Recipient’s ministry     planning, financing,
of water and Selected Municipalities        execution and delegation
                                            of service provision of
                                            rural water supply systems,
                                            signed by at least 50
                                            municipalities
                                            Approval by regulatory text
                                                                        Developed
                                            of the appropriate tariff
                                                                        once        Tariff
                                            policy(s) covering at least
Tariff policy for rural water supply                                    and renew   policy(s) actua   Tariff policy applied     ANAEMPR
                                            the Operator
services approved                                                       ed          lly applied
                                            Remuneration applicable in
                                                                        as needed
                                            the perimeters of the
                                            regional operators



                                                                                                                                          Page 51 of 108
     The World Bank
     Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



                                          Number of contracts
Performance Based Contracts between       setting the terms and
                                                                        Once
the Program Implementing Entity and       conditions for the                          Service
                                                                        per contrac                     Service order issued       ANAEPMR
selected regional operators have been     delegation of the                           order issued
                                                                        t
signed and a service order for each       production and distribution
contract has been issued                  of water supply in regional
                                          rural
                                          Percentage of piped rural
                                          water supply systems
                                          included into a
                                          georeferenced information
                                          system providing the                        Geo-              Monitoring reports of
Piped rural water supply systems included
                                          ANAEPMR with: (i) The                       referenced inf    the
into information system to control and                                  Bi-annual                                                  ANAEPMR
                                          updated inventory of                        ormation syst     georeferenced informati
monitor rural water supply assets and
                                          assets in the perimeters of                 em                on system
regional operators
                                          the regional operators. (ii)
                                          The key performance
                                          indicators as set in the
                                          contracts of regional
                                          operators.
                                          Percentage of piped water                   i)
                                          supply systems whose                        Georeference      i) Monitoring reports of
                                          management has been                         d information     the
                                          transferred to a regional                   system. (ii)      georeferenced informati
                                          operator since at                           Reports           on system. (ii) Reports
Piped rural water supply systems                                        Bi-annual                                                  ANAEPMR
                                          least one year and meeting                  from the MoH      from the MoH /
providing improved water quality
                                          the following conditions: (i)               / DNSP of the     DNSP are tra nsmitted
                                          The piped water supply                      monitoring of     to the ANAEMPR
                                          systems are functioning. (ii)               op                and consolidated.
                                          The piped water supply                      erationalizatio
                                          systems have a PGSSE                        n of the



                                                                                                                                             Page 52 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



                                    approved by the                          PGSSE.
                                    MoH\DNSP and the
                                    regional operators comply
                                    with its requirements.
                                    The PGSSE is a document
                                    to be prepared by the
                                    regional operators as part
                                    of its contractual
                                    obligations and that
                                    includes all preventive and
                                    corrective measures
                                    needed to reduce the risks
                                    of water quality
                                    deterioration between the
                                    catchment area and the
                                    point of distribution of
                                    water to the consumer.
                                    The PGSSE shall also
                                    identify preventative
                                    measures to reduce the
                                    number of unplanned
                                    supply interruptions, as
                                    these are a frequent cause
                                    of water contamination in
                                    Benin. Producers and
                                    distributors of water are
                                    also expected to conduct
                                    regular sanitary inspections
                                    of water supply systems
                                    and to control regularly the
                                    quality of drinking water
                                    supplied to populations.


                                                                                      Page 53 of 108
     The World Bank
     Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



                                           Number of water supply
                                           professionals
                                                                                  Activity
                                           benefiting from training
                                                                                  reports from     Consolidation of activity
                                           activities under the
                                                                                  the              reports from the
                                           Program. Rural water
People benefiting from training activities                            Bi-annual   training cente   training center             ANAEMPR
                                           supply professionals are
on rural water supply under the Program                                           r                supported by the
                                           defined as professionals
                                                                                  supported by     Program
                                           involved in the
                                                                                  the Program
                                           management of rural water
                                           supply systems
                                           (including female).
                                           Percentage of female
                                           among the number of
                                                                                  Activity
                                           water supply professionals
                                                                                  reports from     Consolidation of activity
                                           benefiting from training
Share of persons benefitting from training                                        the              reports from the
                                           activities
activities for rural water supply                                     Bi-annual   training cente   training center             ANAEMPR
                                           under the Program. Rural
professionals under the Program who are                                           r                supported by the
                                           water supply professionals
female                                                                            supported by     Program
                                           are defined as
                                                                                  the Program
                                           professionals involved in
                                           the management of
                                           rural water supply systems
                                                                                  Minutes of
                                         Percentage of women                                       Consolidation of the
                                                                                  the General A
                                         being members of the                                      minutes of the General
Women being members of the                                           Bi-annual    ssemblies con                                ANAEMPR
                                         municipal ACEPs                                           Assemblies constituting
committees of ACEPs                                                               stituting
                                         established for water                                     the ACEPs
                                                                                  the ACEPs
                                         supply services
                                         Percentage of ACEP                       Minutes of       Consolidation of the
Percentage of ACEPs that have at least                                Bi-annual                                                ANAEMPR
                                         established for water                    the General A    minutes of the General
two females in their executive bureau
                                         supply services that have at             ssemblies the    Assemblies constituting



                                                                                                                                         Page 54 of 108
     The World Bank
     Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



                                            least 2 females in their                 ACEPs establi     the ACEPs executive
                                            executive bureau. For                    shing of the      bureau
                                            executive bureau having                  executive
                                            four members or less, the                bureau
                                            target is reduced at 1
                                            female in the executive
                                            bureau.


                                                                                     Grievance
                                                                                     redress report
                                                                                                       Monitoring of grievance
                                            Percentage of grievances                 s issued by the
                                                                                                       redress reports issued
Grievances registered related to delivery   from Program’s               Bi-annual   works contrac                              ANAEPMR
                                                                                                       by the works contractors
of Program benefits that are addressed      beneficiaries registered                 tors
                                                                                                       and regional operators
                                            and addressed by works                   and regional o
                                                                                     perators

                                                                                     Complaints
                                            Percentage of program
                                                                                     registration re   Monitoring
                                            beneficiaries' complaints
Percentage of regional operators                                                     ports issued      of complaints reports
                                            registered and resolved by   Bi-annual
responding to consumer complaints                                                    by the            issued by the regional
                                            regional operators in
(Percentage)                                                                         regional          oprators
                                            accordance with their
                                                                                     operators and
                                            contractual obligations
                                           The Program Implementing
                                                                                     Signed
When the Performance Based contracts       Entity and regional
                                                                                     minutes of     Signed minutes of site
become effective, an inventory at entry of operators have signed the
                                                                       once          site handovers handovers by                ANAEPMR
assets is agreed between the Program       minutes of sites handover
                                                                                     by             municipality
Implementing Entity and the regional       for each municipality which
                                                                                     municipality
operators                                  includes an Inventory-at-
                                           Entry of Assets. In



                                                                                                                                          Page 55 of 108
     The World Bank
     Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



                                              particular, the inventory
                                              could include the following
                                              data for each asset:
                                              designation, geographical
                                              location, date of
                                              acquisition, acquisition
                                              cost, technical condition,
                                              net book value,
                                              replacement value.
                                              NRW is the volume of
                                              produced water minus
                                              volume of billed water
                                              divided by the volume of
                                                                                     Digital
                                              produced water                                      Monitoring reports of
                                                                                     management
Reduction in Non-Revenue Water (NRW)                                        Yearly                the digital management     ANAEPMR
                                                                                     services
of the three regional affermages              An arithmetic mean will be                          services platform
                                                                                     platform
                                              made on the 3 lots because
                                              the lots are homogeneous
                                              in terms of technical,
                                              economic, and population
                                              served
                                              Increase in the recovery
                                              rate between the
                                              measurement period and
                                                                                     Digital
                                              the previous maximum.                               Monitoring report of the
                                                                                     management
Increase in the Bill Collection Rate of the   The recovery rate is         Yearly                 digital management         ANAEPMR
                                                                                     services
three regional affermages                     defined as the ratio of: (i)                        services platform
                                                                                     platform
                                              Amounts collected by
                                              regional operators on all
                                              drinking water supply
                                              systems in rural areas



                                                                                                                                       Page 56 of 108
                            The World Bank
                            Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



                                                                   (FCFA) over (ii) Amounts
                                                                   invoiced by regional
                                                                   operators on the all
                                                                   drinking water supply
                                                                   An arithmetic mean will be
                                                                   made on the 3 lots because
                                                                   the lots are homogeneous
                                                                   in terms of technical,
                                                                   economic, and population
                                                                   served
      ME IO Table SPACE


                                                                                   Disbursement Linked Indicators Matrix
DLI I N0112 5767 A CTI ON




 DLI 1                                               The number of new household connections built under the Program

 Type of DLI                                         Scalability                    Unit of Measure     Total Allocated Amount (USD)       As % of Total Financing Amount

 Output                                              Yes                            Number                                 80,000,000.00 0.32

 Period                                              Value                                                     Allocated Amount (USD) Formula
 Baseline                                            0.00

 FY18                                                                                                                               0.00

 FY19                                                                                                                               0.00

 FY20                                                                                                                       8,000,000.00

 FY21                                                                                                                      20,000,000.00




                                                                                                                                                                      Page 57 of 108
                            The World Bank
                            Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



 FY22                                                                                                                   24,000,000.00

 FY23                                                                                                                   20,000,000.00

 FY24                                                                                                                    8,000,000.00

 FY25                                                                                                                            0.00

 FY26                                                                                                                            0.00

 Action: This DLI has been Revised. See below.
DLI I N0112 6856 A CTI ON




 DLI 1                                               The number of new household connections built under the Program

 Type of DLI                                         Scalability                  Unit of Measure     Total Allocated Amount (USD)      As % of Total Financing Amount

 Output                                              Yes                          Number                               145,500,000.00 0.00

 Period                                              Value                                                     Allocated Amount (USD) Formula
 Baseline                                            0.00

 FY18                                                                                                                            0.00

 FY19                                                                                                                            0.00

 FY20                                                                                                                    8,000,000.00

 FY21                                                                                                                   20,000,000.00

 FY22                                                                                                                   24,000,000.00

 FY23                                                                                                                   20,000,000.00



                                                                                                                                                                   Page 58 of 108
                            The World Bank
                            Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



 FY24                                                                                                                    8,000,000.00

 FY25                                                                                                                  30,000,000.00

 FY26                                                62,750.00                                                         35,500,000.00
DLI I N0112 5770 A CTI ON




 DLI 2                                               The number of new standpipes built under the Program

 Type of DLI                                         Scalability                  Unit of Measure     Total Allocated Amount (USD)      As % of Total Financing Amount

 Output                                              Yes                          Number                               40,000,000.00 0.16

 Period                                              Value                                                     Allocated Amount (USD) Formula
 Baseline                                            0.00

 FY18                                                                                                                           0.00

 FY19                                                                                                                           0.00

 FY20                                                                                                                    3,757,576.00

 FY21                                                                                                                  10,060,606.00

 FY22                                                                                                                  12,121,212.00

 FY23                                                                                                                  10,060,606.00

 FY24                                                                                                                    4,000,000.00

 FY25                                                                                                                           0.00

 FY26                                                                                                                           0.00



                                                                                                                                                                   Page 59 of 108
                            The World Bank
                            Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



 Action: This DLI has been Revised. See below.
DLI I N0112 6861 A CTI ON




 DLI 2                                               The number of new standpipes built under the Program

 Type of DLI                                         Scalability                  Unit of Measure     Total Allocated Amount (USD)     As % of Total Financing Amount

 Output                                              Yes                          Number                               72,700,000.00 0.00

 Period                                              Value                                                     Allocated Amount (USD) Formula
 Baseline                                            0.00

 FY18                                                                                                                           0.00

 FY19                                                                                                                           0.00

 FY20                                                                                                                   3,757,576.00

 FY21                                                                                                                  10,060,606.00

 FY22                                                                                                                  12,121,212.00

 FY23                                                                                                                  10,060,606.00

 FY24                                                                                                                   4,000,000.00

 FY25                                                                                                                  15,000,000.00

 FY26                                                6,000.00                                                          17,700,000.00




                                                                                                                                                                  Page 60 of 108
                            The World Bank
                            Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)


DLI I N0112 5773 A CTI ON




 DLI 3                                               (a) FPAs signed between the Government’s MEM and selected municipalities; and (b) service monitoring reports published

 Type of DLI                                         Scalability                  Unit of Measure     Total Allocated Amount (USD)      As % of Total Financing Amount

 Outcome                                             Yes                          Number                               49,999,998.00 0.20

 Period                                              Value                                                     Allocated Amount (USD) Formula
 Baseline                                            0.00

 FY18                                                                                                                            0.00

 FY19                                                                                                                  21,363,636.00

 FY20                                                                                                                    6,363,636.00

 FY21                                                                                                                    6,363,636.00

 FY22                                                                                                                    6,363,636.00

 FY23                                                                                                                    6,363,636.00

 FY24                                                                                                                    3,181,818.00

 FY25                                                                                                                            0.00

 FY26                                                                                                                            0.00

 Action: This DLI has been Revised. See below.




                                                                                                                                                                    Page 61 of 108
                            The World Bank
                            Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)


DLI I N0112 6862 A CTI ON




 DLI 3                                               (a) Framework Partnership Agreements signed between the Recipient’s ministry of water and selected municipalities

 Type of DLI                                         Scalability                  Unit of Measure      Total Allocated Amount (USD)      As % of Total Financing Amount

 Intermediate Outcome                                Yes                          Number                                15,000,000.00 100.00

 Period                                              Value                                                     Allocated Amount (USD) Formula
 Baseline                                            0.00

 FY18                                                                                                                             0.00

 FY19                                                74.00                                                              15,000,000.00

 FY20                                                                                                                             0.00

 FY21                                                                                                                             0.00

 FY22                                                                                                                             0.00

 FY23                                                                                                                             0.00

 FY24                                                                                                                             0.00

 FY25                                                                                                                             0.00

 FY26                                                                                                                             0.00
 Rationale:
 This sub-indicator was achieved during the Parent Program implementation.




                                                                                                                                                                     Page 62 of 108
                            The World Bank
                            Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)


DLI I N0112 7325 A CTI ON




 DLI 3.1                                             Service monitoring reports have been published on the Recipient’s website

 Type of DLI                                         Scalability                   Unit of Measure       Total Allocated Amount (USD)    As % of Total Financing Amount

 Output                                              Yes                           Number                                47,727,270.00 0.00

 Period                                              Value                                                      Allocated Amount (USD) Formula
 Baseline                                            0.00

 FY18                                                                                                                             0.00

 FY19                                                                                                                     6,363,636.00

 FY20                                                                                                                     6,363,636.00

 FY21                                                                                                                     6,363,636.00

 FY22                                                                                                                     6,363,636.00

 FY23                                                                                                                     6,363,636.00

 FY24                                                                                                                     6,363,636.00

 FY25                                                                                                                     6,363,636.00

 FY26                                                                                                                     3,181,818.00
                                                     Rationale:
 Action: This DLI is New                             So far this sub-indicator has disbursed for 6 published reports.




                                                                                                                                                                    Page 63 of 108
                            The World Bank
                            Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)


DLI I N0112 5776 A CTI ON




                                                     Performance-based contracts between the ANAEPMR and selected regional operators signed and with service order for
 DLI 4
                                                     each contract issued

 Type of DLI                                         Scalability                  Unit of Measure     Total Allocated Amount (USD)     As % of Total Financing Amount

 Intermediate Outcome                                Yes                          Number                               50,000,000.00 0.20

 Period                                              Value                                                     Allocated Amount (USD) Formula
 Baseline                                            0.00

 FY18                                                                                                                           0.00

 FY19                                                                                                                           0.00

 FY20                                                                                                                  25,000,000.00

 FY21                                                                                                                  25,000,000.00

 FY22                                                                                                                           0.00

 FY23                                                                                                                           0.00

 FY24                                                                                                                           0.00

 FY25                                                                                                                           0.00

 FY26                                                                                                                           0.00

 Action: This DLI has been Revised. See below.




                                                                                                                                                                  Page 64 of 108
                            The World Bank
                            Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)


DLI I N0112 6863 A CTI ON




                                                     Performance-based contracts between the ANAEPMR and selected regional operators signed and with service order for
 DLI 4
                                                     each contract issued

 Type of DLI                                         Scalability                  Unit of Measure     Total Allocated Amount (USD)     As % of Total Financing Amount

 Intermediate Outcome                                Yes                          Number                               50,000,000.00 0.00

 Period                                              Value                                                     Allocated Amount (USD) Formula
 Baseline                                            0.00

 FY18                                                                                                                           0.00

 FY19                                                                                                                           0.00

 FY20                                                                                                                  25,000,000.00

 FY21                                                                                                                  25,000,000.00

 FY22                                                                                                                           0.00

 FY23                                                                                                                           0.00

 FY24                                                                                                                           0.00

 FY25                                                                                                                           0.00

 FY26                                                3.00                                                                       0.00




                                                                                                                                                                   Page 65 of 108
                            The World Bank
                            Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)


DLI I N0112 6832 A CTI ON




 DLI 5                                               The Program Implementing Entity is constituted as an asset-holding company for the rural water supply sector

 Type of DLI                                         Scalability                  Unit of Measure      Total Allocated Amount (USD)      As % of Total Financing Amount

 Outcome                                             No                           Yes/No                                31,400,000.00 0.00

 Period                                              Value                                                     Allocated Amount (USD) Formula
 Baseline                                            No

 FY18                                                                                                                             0.00

 FY19                                                                                                                             0.00

 FY20                                                                                                                             0.00

 FY21                                                                                                                             0.00

 FY22                                                                                                                             0.00

 FY23                                                                                                                   31,400,000.00

 FY24                                                                                                                             0.00

 FY25                                                                                                                             0.00

 FY26                                                                                                                             0.00

 Action: This DLI is New




                                                                                                                                                                    Page 66 of 108
                            The World Bank
                            Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)


DLI I N0112 6828 A CTI ON




                                                     When the Performance Based contracts become effective, an inventory at entry of assets is agreed between the Program
 DLI 6
                                                     Implementing Entity and the regional operators

 Type of DLI                                         Scalability                  Unit of Measure     Total Allocated Amount (USD)     As % of Total Financing Amount

 Output                                              No                           Yes/No                               25,000,000.00 0.00

 Period                                              Value                                                     Allocated Amount (USD) Formula
 Baseline                                            No

 FY18                                                                                                                           0.00

 FY19                                                                                                                           0.00

 FY20                                                                                                                           0.00

 FY21                                                                                                                           0.00

 FY22                                                                                                                  25,000,000.00

 FY23                                                                                                                           0.00

 FY24                                                                                                                           0.00

 FY25                                                                                                                           0.00

 FY26                                                                                                                           0.00

 Action: This DLI is New




                                                                                                                                                                   Page 67 of 108
                            The World Bank
                            Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)


DLI I N0112 6829 A CTI ON




 DLI 7                                               Reduction in Non-Revenue Water (NRW) of the three regional affermages

 Type of DLI                                         Scalability                  Unit of Measure     Total Allocated Amount (USD)     As % of Total Financing Amount

 Output                                              Yes                          Percentage                           40,700,000.00 0.00

 Period                                              Value                                                     Allocated Amount (USD) Formula
 Baseline                                            0.00

 FY18                                                                                                                           0.00

 FY19                                                                                                                           0.00

 FY20                                                                                                                           0.00

 FY21                                                                                                                           0.00

 FY22                                                                                                                           0.00

 FY23                                                                                                                           0.00

 FY24                                                                                                                           0.00

 FY25                                                                                                                           0.00

 FY26                                                                                                                  40,700,000.00
                                                     Rationale:
 Action: This DLI is New                             Whatever the baseline, the indicator is measuring an improvement in NRW reduction in percent




                                                                                                                                                                  Page 68 of 108
                            The World Bank
                            Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)


DLI I N0112 6830 A CTI ON




 DLI 8                                               Increase in the Bill Collection Rate of the three regional affermages

 Type of DLI                                         Scalability                   Unit of Measure       Total Allocated Amount (USD)        As % of Total Financing Amount

 Output                                              Yes                           Percentage                                42,000,000.00 0.00

 Period                                              Value                                                       Allocated Amount (USD) Formula
 Baseline                                            0.00

 FY18                                                                                                                                 0.00

 FY19                                                                                                                                 0.00

 FY20                                                                                                                                 0.00

 FY21                                                                                                                                 0.00

 FY22                                                                                                                                 0.00

 FY23                                                                                                                                 0.00

 FY24                                                                                                                                 0.00

 FY25                                                                                                                                 0.00

 FY26                                                                                                                        42,000,000.00
                                                     Rationale:
 Action: This DLI is New                             Whatever the baseline, the indicator is measuring an improvement (increase) in billing collection rate in percent.




                                                                                                                                                                          Page 69 of 108
                       The World Bank
                       Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)




                                                                  Verification Protocol Table: Disbursement Linked Indicators
DLI_TBL_VERIFICATION




DLI 1                                           The number of new household connections built under the Program
Description

Data source/ Agency

Verification Entity

Procedure
DLI_TBL_VERIFICATION




DLI 1                                           The number of new household connections built under the Program
                                                New household connections under the Program connected to a functioning piped rural water supply system
Description
                                                Intermediate indicators
Data source/ Agency
                                                IVA
Verification Entity
                                                The IVA verifies the number of new household connections in operation connected to piped rural water supply systems that
Procedure                                       have been built, rehabilitated or expanded under the Program and whose execution has been validated by ANAEPMR
DLI_TBL_VERIFICATION




DLI 2                                           The number of new standpipes built under the Program

Description

Data source/ Agency

Verification Entity
Procedure




                                                                                                                                                                Page 70 of 108
                       The World Bank
                       Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)


DLI_TBL_VERIFICATION




DLI 2                                           The number of new standpipes built under the Program
                                                New standpipes under the Program connected to a functioning piped rural water supply system
Description
                                                Intermediate indicators
Data source/ Agency
                                                IVA
Verification Entity
                                                The IVA verifies the number of new standpipes in operation connected to piped rural water supply systems that have been
Procedure                                       built, rehabilitated or expanded under the Program and whose execution has been validated by ANAEPMR.
DLI_TBL_VERIFICATION




                                                (a) FPAs signed between the Government’s MEM and selected municipalities; and (b) service monitoring reports
DLI 3
                                                published
Description

Data source/ Agency

Verification Entity
Procedure
DLI_TBL_VERIFICATION




DLI 3                                           (a) Framework Partnership Agreements signed between the Recipient’s ministry of water and selected municipalities
                                                (a) FPAs defining the conditions and modalities of partnership between the ANAEPMR and Government’s MEM and
Description                                     selected municipalities, signed by at least 50 municipalities;

                                                a) FPAs signed
Data source/ Agency
                                                IVA
Verification Entity
                                                The IVA verifies that the Framework Agreements have been signed by all stakeholders
Procedure




                                                                                                                                                                 Page 71 of 108
                       The World Bank
                       Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)


DLI_TBL_VERIFICATION




DLI 3.1                                         Service monitoring reports have been published on the Recipient’s website
                                                Publication by the ANAEPMR of bi-annual service monitoring reports including the updated inventory of assets and key
Description                                     performance indicators for all piped rural water supply systems of the municipalities having signed the FPA. The reports will
                                                cover the semesters from July-December 2018 through June 2026.
                                                ANAEPMR
Data source/ Agency
                                                IVA
Verification Entity
                                                The IVA verifies that the bi-annual service monitoring reports have been published by the ANAEPMR.
Procedure
DLI_TBL_VERIFICATION




                                                Performance-based contracts between the ANAEPMR and selected regional operators signed and with service order for
DLI 4
                                                each contract issued
Description

Data source/ Agency

Verification Entity
Procedure
DLI_TBL_VERIFICATION




                                                 Performance-based contracts between the ANAEPMR and selected regional operators signed and with service order for
DLI 4
                                                 each contract issued
                                                Number of contracts setting the terms and conditions for the delegation of the production and distribution of water supply
Description                                     in regional rural perimeters, with service order issued by ANAEPMR and applying the approved tariff policy(s)

                                                Service Orders issued by the ANAEPMR
Data source/ Agency
                                                IVA
Verification Entity
                                                The IVA verifies that the service orders related to the Contracts have been issued.
Procedure



                                                                                                                                                                     Page 72 of 108
                       The World Bank
                       Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)


DLI_TBL_VERIFICATION




DLI 5                                           The Program Implementing Entity is constituted as an asset-holding company for the rural water supply sector
                                                The ANAEPMR is a public institution to which the Government delegates, through a concession contract, the technical and
                                                financial management of the sector. In particular, it will be in charge of: (i) planning, financing and implementing
Description                                     investments, and (ii) monitoring operations. The delegation of the management of the rural water sector to the ANAEPMR
                                                as defined above will be executed through a 30-year concession contract signed between the Government and the agency,
                                                defining the roles and attributions of each of the two parties.
                                                ANAEPMR
Data source/ Agency
                                                IVA
Verification Entity
                                                The IVA verifies that the decree is published in the national gazette
Procedure
DLI_TBL_VERIFICATION




                                                 When the Performance Based contracts become effective, an inventory at entry of assets is agreed between the Program
DLI 6
                                                 Implementing Entity and the regional operators
                                                The Program Implementing Entity and regional operators have signed the minutes of sites handover for each municipality
                                                which includes an Inventory-at-Entry of Assets. In particular, the inventory could include the following data for each asset:
Description
                                                designation, geographical location, date of acquisition, acquisition cost, technical condition, net book value, replacement
                                                value.
                                                Minutes of site handover per municipality
Data source/ Agency
                                                IVA
Verification Entity
                                                The IVA verifies that the minutes are signed.
                                                The Program Implementing Entity and regional operators have signed the minutes of sites handover for each municipality
Procedure
                                                which includes an Inventory-at-Entry of Assets.
DLI_TBL_VERIFICATION




DLI 7                                           Reduction in Non-Revenue Water (NRW) of the three regional affermages
Description                                     NRW is the volume of produced water minus volume of billed water divided by the volume of produced water An arithmetic



                                                                                                                                                                      Page 73 of 108
                           The World Bank
                           Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



                                                    mean will be made on the 3 lots because the lots are homogeneous in terms of technical, economic, and population served
                                                    Digital platform
    Data source/ Agency
                                                    IVA
    Verification Entity
                                                    The IVA verifies that the NRW is reduced.
                                                    Basically we may say that we disburse for each marginal % point of (1-NRW) increase with respect with the max achieved of
    Procedure                                       (1-NRW) over any previous measurement periods. So, the disbursement at any measurement period (i) is equal to
                                                    MAX(0;(1-NRW)(i) - MAX[(1-NRW)(1;i-1)])*DLR amount.
    DLI_TBL_VERIFICATION




    DLI 8                                           Increase in the Bill Collection Rate of the three regional affermages
                                                    Increase in the recovery rate between the measurement period and the previous maximum. The recovery rate is defined as
                                                    the ratio of: (i) Amounts collected by regional operators on all drinking water supply systems in rural areas (FCFA) over (ii)
    Description
                                                    Amounts invoiced by regional operators on the all drinking water supply An arithmetic mean will be made on the 3 lots
                                                    because the lots are homogeneous in terms of technical, economic, and population served
                                                    Digital management services platform
    Data source/ Agency
                                                    IVA
    Verification Entity
                                                    The IVA verifies that the billing collection has increased.
                                                    Basically we may say that we disburse for each marginal % point of (bill collection rate) increase with respect with the max
                                                    achieved of (bill collection rate) over any previous measurement periods.
    Procedure
                                                    In orders words, the disbursement at any measurement period (i) is equal to MAX(0;(bill collection rate)(i) - MAX[(bill
                                                    collection rate)(1;i-1)])*DLR amount.

.




                                                                                                                                                                           Page 74 of 108
           The World Bank
           Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



                                            ANNEX 1: INTEGRATED RISK ASSESSMENT
.
        SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK-RATING TOOL (SORT)
        Risk Category                                     Latest ISR Rating        Current Rating

        Political and Governance                             ⚫ Low                 ⚫ Low
        Macroeconomic                                        ⚫ Moderate            ⚫ Substantial
        Sector Strategies and Policies                       ⚫ Low                 ⚫ Low
        Technical Design of Project or Program               ⚫ Low                 ⚫ Low
        Institutional Capacity for Implementation and        ⚫ Moderate            ⚫ Moderate
        Sustainability
        Fiduciary                                            ⚫ Moderate            ⚫ Moderate
        Environment and Social                               ⚫ Moderate            ⚫ Moderate
        Stakeholders                                         ⚫ Moderate            ⚫ Moderate
        Other                                                ⚫ Moderate            ⚫ Moderate
        Overall                                              ⚫ Moderate            ⚫ Moderate


    .




                                                                                                    Page 75 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



                          ANNEX 2: TECHNICAL FULL ASSESSMENT - ADDENDUM

 1.       The present technical assessment is an update of the stand-alone technical assessment produced
 for the parent PforR Program (P164186) in 2018. It aims to confirm that the GoB program still has a strong
 strategic rationale, is technically sound, has an appropriate expenditure framework, and has suitable M&E
 capacity.

 2.      Strategic relevance. The AF PforR Program (P176941) remains strategically relevant. It is a scale-
 up of the parent Program which is itself the backbone of the NRWSP, aiming to deliver universal access to
 water services in rural areas. The Program is still aligned with the GoB’s strategic priorities. The NRWSP,
 which is included in the PAG (2016–2021) as the 43-flagship project, continues to be implemented under
 the second term of President Patrice Talon. In addition, the GoB ensures to keep universal access to water
 service among the priorities of the second PAG2 under preparation.

 3.     Technical soundness. The Program remains technically sound. The parent Program has laid the
 foundation to ensure sustainable water service delivery in all the Beninese rural areas.

    (a)   Management of water source. So far, the drinking water supply comes entirely from
          groundwater. Therefore, as recommended in the initial technical assessment, a study has been
          launched (financed by the GWSP) to support a mechanism for groundwater resources monitoring.
          The GWSP activities are improving knowledge of groundwater resources contributing to more
          sustainable management of water resources and, in the long run, ensuring drinking water
          security, especially in areas where groundwater sources are not reliable or might be affected by
          climate change. The design of this monitoring program is in progress, and its implementation is
          scheduled with the World Bank TA during the parent PforR period.
    (b)   Service level. The Program, which previously focused on the construction of piped water supply
          systems (that is, at the village scale) evolved during the parent Program toward a multi-village
          scale system. The rationale behind this change is to reduce the number of water supply systems
          and maximize the water resource infrastructure that can be shared among several municipalities.
          This change requires the construction of larger water reservoirs, with greater capacities and
          longer water networks with a higher spatial distribution to meet increased water demands from
          several municipalities. This will also allow for higher household connection capacity and is in line
          with the Government’s former strategy.
    (c)   Approach to prioritizing investment
          The overall national target is to provide drinking water for more than 3 million people to reach
          universal access coverage in rural areas. To do so, the GoB will not only construct new Rural Water
          Supply Systems multi-village (SAEP-mV) but also rehabilitate existing ones. Therefore, the
          ANAEPMR has first undertaken an in-depth diagnostic of the existing assets and their level of
          functionality. This diagnostic revealed that 649 rural water supply systems are currently available
          but 360 of them need to be rehabilitated. This rehabilitation program is included in the parent
          PforR as part of the prioritizing approach to rapidly increase the water coverage rate while
          awaiting the new SAEP-mV under construction.




                                                                                                         Page 76 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



 4.      The ANAEPMR’s National Strategy for the Supply of Drinking Water in Rural Areas results in a
 Master Plan for Rural Drinking Water Supply - Plan Directeur de Développement du sous-secteur de
 l’Approvisionnement en Eau Potable en Milieu Rural (PDAEP) which encompasses the construction of 611
 new SAEP-mVs. The PDAEP has defined a strategy in two phases, as follows:

               •    A short-term emergency phase (2019–2024) for the construction of 239 SAEP-mVs. The
                    objective of this emergency phase is to facilitate the immediate access to populations
                    who have no access to drinking water at all and those who have lost access due to the
                    obsolescence or failure of existing systems. As presented in Figure 2.1, among the
                    phase investment, the parent PforR is financing 126 SAEP-mVs, of which 7 are fully
                    completed, 15 are under construction, and 95 are part of a bidding process for which
                    construction is expected to start by the end of FY22. The AF of the PforR (AF PforR) will
                    cover 80 additional SAEP-mVs, leading to a total of 206 SAEP-mVs financed under the
                    parent PforR and AF, to provide drinking water to more than 3 million people. The
                    national program also includes 33 SAEP-mVs under construction, among which 16 are
                    financed by the World Bank through an IPF project (Small Town Water Supply and
                    Urban Septage Management Project [Approvisionnement en Eau Potable en milieu
                    Rural et D’Assainissement des Eaux usées Urbaines - PEPRAU] - P156738).
               •    A long-term phase (2024–2030) involving the construction of 372 new SAEP-mVs to
                    renew aging structures and extend the service to ensure full access to improved water
                    service in all the rural areas.
                                   Figure 2.1. The Rural Water Supply Systems




        By summing the rehabilitation and the investment programs, the Government will be able to cover
        the targeted number of more than 3 million of beneficiaries to reach universal access (Table 2.1).
                            Table 2.1. The National Program Number of Beneficiaries
                                                                                Number of New Beneficiaries
  Construction of 126 SAEP-mVs (parent PforR)                                           1,660,000
  Construction of 80 SAEP-mVs (AF PforR)                                                1,360,000
  Construction of 33 SAEP-mVs (out of the PforR Program)                                 533,842
  Total                                                                                 3,553,842




                                                                                                              Page 77 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



      (d)   Reform. Larger service areas attracted two large professional operators which were selected, with
            greater ability to attract trained personnel and necessary finance, and will have a strong interest
            in delivering good quality and sustainable services to maintain their reputation. Data collection
            will be performed through a reliable web-based platform, and the ANAEPMR will produce regular
            reports on asset management and service performance. These reports are publicly available (so
            far six reports have been published31) and will allow municipalities and the Government to ensure
            that services are adequately performed and that they are accountable to their citizens. Tariffs will
            be regulated by the Government to ensure financial viability of the regional operators as well as
            to contribute to the financing for the development of the rural water supply systems.32 Where
            tariff proceeds are not sufficient, the Government will commit to allocating sufficient funding,
            including through the asset management contract signed with the ANAEPMR, to cover the costs
            of service expansion and rehabilitation as and when necessary.
      (e)   Ensuring water safety. The regional operators are responsible for the quality of the water
            distributed and must comply with the national water quality standards of Benin listed in Decree
            No. 2011-094 of February 20, 2001. To do so, the operators have to provide a Drinking Water
            Safety Management Plan (Plan de Gestion de la Sécurité Sanitaire de l'Eau - PGSSE) to the MoH
            for approval before implementation. This plan includes a self-monitoring program of water quality
            up to the point of delivery. In addition to the requirements for regional operators, the
            Government will also ensure quality control of the water distributed through an unannounced
            control system provided by the national reference laboratory for water quality control. The
            laboratory is being built and equipped with World Bank funding from other projects. It will be
            operational before the date of commissioning of the regional operators.

 5.         Institutional arrangements:

      (a)   The ANAEPMR is an executive agency of a social and technical nature, with legal personality and
            financial autonomy. The agency is under the direct authority of the Presidency. It is in charge of
            implementing the state’s policy and strategies in the field of drinking water supply in rural areas.
            It is now the only structure in charge of the implementation of infrastructure projects in the rural
            areas, on behalf of the state and the municipalities.33 The ANAEPMR’s mission is to (a) initiate,
            plan, and program the infrastructure and equipment included in the national program; (b) identify
            and mobilize partners and resources; and (c) carry out and supervise the proper execution of the
            works.
      (b)   Figure 2.2 presents the rural water sector institutional framework




 31 https://www.gouv.bj/actualite/804/rapport-semestriel-suivi-patrimoine-performance-service-potable-milieu-rural---janvier---

 juin-2020/.
 32 Benin also has a history of PPP since nearly 15 years (about one-third of the village rural water supply systems are managed by

 local operators). The willingness to pay for rural piped water supply is therefore not seen as a significant risk in the case of Benin.
 It should also be noted that the average water tariff resulting from the selection process of the private operators is far below the
 current tariff paid by the rural water consumers.
 33 The parent PforR included one prior action, successfully completed, to transfer the communes’ responsibilities to the ANAEPMR

 through Framework Partnership Agreements (FPAs) signed between the two entities.



                                                                                                                                  Page 78 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



                           Figure 2.2. The rural water sector institutional framework




         (c)   The ANAEPMR was created in 2017 and has to date a proven track record of delivering an
               investment program and conducting complex and unprecedented reforms in the water
               sector. For the investment program, the agency has designed and supervised the bidding
               process of more than 100 rural water supply systems, the last one being the most important
               tender of the entire Benin portfolio. In addition, supported by a World Bank TA, the
               ANAEPMR has designed and supervised the private operator bidding process, which is at the
               completion stage of contracts’ signature.
         (d)   The World Bank TA will continue during the AF implementation to support the ANAEPMR
               to smoothly launch and implement the affermage contracts. The TA will particularly provide
               its support during two critical periods: (i) within 60 days following the signature of the
               contracts, assist the ANAEPMR to fulfill all the conditions allowing the entry into force
               (issuance of the service order) of the affermage contracts and (ii) during the first year of the
               affermage contract (after the issuance of the service order), assist the ANAEPMR to proceed
               to an initial inventory of the rural water supply systems’ assets together with the regional
               operators. This task is part of the AF DLIs.
         (e)   The ANAEPMR will evolve toward an asset-holding company, to add to its status a
               patrimonial nature. This new status will allow the ANAEPMR to organize the sustainable
               management of the hydraulic infrastructures and equipment and ensure their proper
               operations in partnership with the private operators.
         (f)   Tariff setting and adjustment is still managed by the MEM. A new tariff for the rural water
               service provision is available as a decree to be approved by the Council Ministry. The
               approval of this decree is expected to be effective before the issuance of the service order
               of the regional operators.


                                                                                                          Page 79 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



          (g)   ACEP and citizen engagement. The AQUA-VIE Program is already relying on a citizen
                engagement mechanism through these ACEPs. The ACEPs are present in all the
                municipalities of Benin. They are in charge of representing users’ interests through a
                committee at the municipal level and representing bodies at the locality level, leading to a
                well-developed network throughout the country. The AF will extend capacity building to help
                the ACEPs gain autonomy and sustainability. They will also receive training material (with
                the support of the GWSP) to enhance their participation in key decisions at the local level
                and as part of GRMs during the planning, design, and supervision phases of the works.

 6.       Program expenditure framework. The budget of the Government national program, the NRWSP,
 increased during the implementation of the parent AQUA-VIE Program, from US$240 million to US$506
 million. This is mainly due to the Government contribution, which grew from US$20 million to US$270
 million, completed with other donors’ contributions (US$16 million). The detailed program of expenditure
 is found in the main text (paragraph 51, Table 3).

 7.     Updated Program financing. The AF will mainly increase the World Bank contribution by providing
 US$250 million, whereas the Government will contribute up to US$272 million.

 8.      The unit cost for the Program expenditure framework could be estimated more accurately,
 based on the actual investment cost. The average capital cost per person served for the construction of
 the new SAEP-mV is CFAF 125,000 (US$210) which is in line with comparable regional benchmarks average
 value of US$265 for fully piped system.34

 9.      The DLI framework has been updated to reflect the scale-up of the investment program and to
 create more incentivizes to enhance the successful completion of the reform. The proposed changes are
 summarized in Table 2.2.

                            Table 2.2: Updated DLIs Framework and Rationale for Changes
        Current/Proposed DLIs                                            Comments
  DLI 1 - New household                 These DLIs will be maintained during the implementation of the AF.
  connections built under the
  Program (Number)
  DLI 2 - New standpipes built
  under the Program (Number)
  DLI 3                                 Split into the two DLIs below
  DLI 3(a)                              Already disbursed




 34 Misra, Smita, and Bill Kingdom. 2019. “Citywide Inclusive Water Supply: Adopting Off-Grid Solutions to Achieve the SDGs.”

 World Bank, Washington, DC. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/32046.



                                                                                                                        Page 80 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



        Current/Proposed DLIs                                            Comments
  DLI 3(b) - Service monitoring      The main objective of the DLI3(b) was to have the mWater information
  reports have been published on system fully operational and covering all existing and future systems. This
  the Recipient’s website (Number) service monitoring deployment has been successfully carried out under the
                                     AQUA-VIE Program and is part of the mechanism established under the to
                                     increase transparency, access to information, and awareness, by having an
                                     obligation to publish biannual service monitoring reports including the
                                     updated inventory of assets and operating data for all piped rural water
                                     supply systems. This DLI will be maintained under the AF to keep incentivizing
                                     the ANAEPMR to produce high-level quality of the M&E report. Moreover,
                                     the monitoring reports will be delivered to all the municipalities having
                                     delegated their responsibilities under the Program through the FPAs.35DLI
                                     3(b) demonstrates progress toward the PDO as indicated in the theory of
                                     change (Figure 3), and the reforms for strengthening service delivery
                                     arrangements will go hand in hand with strengthening accountability
                                     responsibilities between the ANAEPMR, the GoB, municipalities, and citizens.
  DLI 4                              Will not be part of the AF
  DLI 5 - NEW - The Program          The water assets are currently estimated at 649 water supply systems that
  Implementing Entity is constituted are more or less functional. About half of these systems will benefit from a
  as an asset-holding company for rehabilitation program. The existing assets will be progressively
  the rural water supply sector      supplemented by new SAEP-mVs (after the implementation of the AF, this
  (Y/N)                              will represent about 210 additional systems). These assets must be managed
                                     efficiently to maintain an effective and sustainable service while considering
                                     extension programs in accordance with the population growth that will lead
                                     to an increase in water demand. The current mission of the ANAEPMR is to
                                     ensure the ownership of investments underway and to ensure the proper
                                     execution of contracts with regional operators. The evolving of its status as
                                     an asset-holding company in the rural water sector appears to be the most
                                     relevant solution to create the necessary conditions for an efficient and
                                     sustainable management of existing and future assets. This is why it seems
                                     judicious, within the framework of the AF, to provide an incentive to ensure
                                     that the appropriate legal actions will be taken in this direction. There is,
                                     therefore, a need to empower the agency to be responsible and accountable
                                     for assets development and service performance on behalf of the
                                     municipalities. This is what the proposed DLI intends to incentivize so that
                                     the initial intention of establishing the ANAEPMR as an asset-holding
                                     company becomes fully realized. This will ensure sustainability of the
                                     hundreds of water systems being built under the program.




 35 The service monitoring reports include the updated inventory of assets and key performance indicators for all piped rural water

 supply systems of the municipalities having signed the FPA.



                                                                                                                             Page 81 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



        Current/Proposed DLIs                                               Comments
  DLI 6 - NEW - When the                  Addition of a new DLI to increase the speed of the operator’s preparation
  Performance Based contracts             phase before the actual provision of water service. This inventory is a
  become effective, an inventory at       mandatory contractual step, which must be carried out by comparing the
  entry36 of assets is agreed             inventory carried out by the ANAEPMR and the inventory of the regional
  between the Program                     operator to be carried out.
  Implementing Entity and the
  regional operators (Y/N)
  DLI 7 - NEW - Reduction in Non-         NRW and the collection rate are critical indicators that determine the
  Revenue Water (NRW) of the              financial viability of the regional operator. By creating an incentive to achieve
  three regional affermages               the target values of these indicators, the likelihood of achieving sustainable
  (Percent)                               water service delivery will increase, as the ANAEPMR and the regional
  DLI 8 - NEW - Increase in the Bill      operator will take proactive measures to keep the targets achievable. The
  Collection Rate of the three            purpose of DLIs 7 and 8 is to improve the technical and financial performance
  regional affermages (Percent)           of the sector, which will increase the sector’s revenues and financing capacity
                                          to contribute to the PDO goal of universal access to water supply in rural
                                          Benin. Indeed, beyond DLI 4 targeting the signing of the PPP affermage
                                          contracts that link the remuneration of the private operators to the
                                          achievement of performance indicators such as NRW and billing collection,
                                          DLIs 7 and 8 create an additional incentive for the ANAEPMR and the
                                          operators to attain swiftly those performance indicators. Because the
                                          operators are not being remunerated by the ANAEPMR but rather from the
                                          water tariff, improving NRW, and billing collection that will directly increase
                                          the revenues of the ANAEPMR and consequently the capacity of the sector to
                                          self-finance new water supply systems. An affermage contract is not like a
                                          lease contract or a classic construction contract where the public entity
                                          remunerates the private firm for services; this is a PPP contract where the
                                          Government only finances the CAPEX while the private operators take the
                                          risk of operating the systems and financing the OPEX by being remunerated
                                          on the tariff by the user. Therefore, the proposed new DLIs are different from
                                          DLI 4 and are not ‘twice’ incentivizing the same outcome, because the money
                                          disbursed on DLIs 7 and 8 as well as the savings earned from the
                                          improvement of the technical and commercial performance (NRW and bill
                                          collection rate) will be used by the ANAEPMR to reinvest in the sector. The
                                          rationale for incentivizing the performance parameters in the regional
                                          affermage contracts goes beyond their kick-off and looks forward to creating
                                          incentives for the successful implementation of the said contracts for the
                                          sustainable development of the sector.

 10.     The AF allocated to the DLIs is summarized in table 2.3 below. The unit costs of the DLI that
 existed in the initial Program are the same. It is important to highlight that they do not represent ‘actual
 unit cost’ for the construction of household connections and public standpipes. The cost per DLR
 mentioned reflects the funding allocated to the corresponding DLIs (so driven by incentives rather than
 by actual costs—unlike in an IPF), noting nevertheless that the Program finances the construction of

 36 In French, ‘inventaire contradictoire’. It is an inventory carried out jointly by the private operators and the ANAEPMR in the

 presence of the municipalities. The results of this inventory must be accepted by all parties to agree on the state of the assets
 that will be made available to the operator when the responsibility for the management of the water supply systems is
 transferred.



                                                                                                                            Page 82 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



 complete multi-village schemes (including production, storage, and primary distribution infrastructure)
 and does not focus only on the last mile of the distribution networks.

                                     Table 2.3: Amount Allocated for the AF
                                                                                              AF Allocated to the
                      DLIs                                       Formula                              DLI
                                                                                                (US$, millions)
  DLI 1: New household connections built under US$2,319 per new household connection                 65.5
  the Program (Number)                         with a maximum of 28,250 connections
  DLI 2: New standpipes built under the        US$12,121 per new standpipe with a                   32.7
  Program (Number)                             maximum of 2,700 standpipes
  DLI 3 (b): Service monitoring reports have   US$3,181,818 per publication of biannual             12.6
  been published on the Recipient’s website    service monitoring report
  (Number)
  DLI 5: NEW - The Program Implementing        US$31,400,000 at constitution of the                 31.4
  Entity is constituted as an asset-holding    ANAEPMR as an asset-holding company
  company for the rural water supply sector
  (Y/N)
  DLI 6: NEW - When the Performance Based      US$25,000,000 at completion of the initial           25.0
  contracts become effective, an inventory at  inventory of the rural water supply systems’
  entry of assets is agreed between the        assets
  Program Implementing Entity and the
  regional operators (Y/N)
  DLI 7: NEW - Reduction in Non-Revenue        US$2,711,000 per percent of decrease in              40.7
  Water (NRW) of the three regional            NRW with a maximum of 15 percent
  affermages (Percent)
  DLI 8: NEW - Increase in the Bill Collection US$3,500,000 per percent of increased                42.0
  Rate of the three regional affermages        collection rate with a maximum of 12
  (Percent)                                    percent
  Total                                                                                            250.0

 11.     M&E. From the start of its activities, the ANAEPMR initiated and implemented a vast M&E system
 that consisted of a systematic and geo-referenced inventory of all the water assets in the rural sector. This
 inventory made it possible to list 649 water supply systems throughout the country, with a
 subcategorization of systems that are not or only slightly functional and are in need of rehabilitation. This
 dynamic database integrates new SAEP-mVs as they are received. The database is used by the ANAEPMR
 to inform the biannual report of the national program, whose dissemination constitutes DLI 3(b). Finally,
 this database constitutes a solid baseline for the realization of the inventory between the ANAEPMR and
 the regional operators (DLI 5).

 12.    The ANAEPMR is also working closely with the World Bank’s Geo-Enabling initiative for Monitoring
 and Supervision teams and is committed to completing the database with water supply sites under
 construction and funded by the AQUA-VIE Program.




                                                                                                             Page 83 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



 13.       The Independent Verification Agent (IVA). The National Institute for Statistics and Demographic
 Analysis37 (Institut National de la Statistique et de la Démographie - INStaD) is confirmed as the IVA for
 the AQUA-VIE parent and AF Program. The technical assessment found that this institute continues to
 fulfil the minimum criteria for an IVA, including in terms of autonomy and adequate capacity. The first
 verification campaign is expected to start at Q4 FY22 for DLI 2 (that is, new standpipes built under the
 Program). This first campaign will allow to possibly readjust the initial protocol to optimize the verification
 process for the remaining campaigns.

 14.     Economic analysis. The conclusions of the Program economic evaluation remain unchanged for
 the AF. The economic analysis of the AF is an update of the cost-benefit analysis carried out for the parent
 Program to consider the most recent data provided by the ANAEPMR with regard to the unit costs of
 investments, the schedule of investments until 2026, the levels of specific consumption used for the sizing
 of the works, the unit price levels of the sale of water at the level of standposts, and private connections.

 15.      The beneficiaries of the Program. The Program will affect a total of 3,076,292 people. These data
 are linked to the data of the population of Benin in 2020 which is estimated at 12.12 million in 2020. The
 number of beneficiaries of the Program is mainly due to the new constructions of 205 water systems. Only
 21 extensions are carried out at the heart of 95 water systems and so cannot be the subject of a separate
 analysis. The rehabilitations concern 360 water systems, of which 191 are out of service and 169 are in
 service. The beneficiary populations of these rehabilitations are not counted as direct beneficiaries of the
 project, but they are retained in the treatment of the impacts of the project.

 16.      Project costs. The investment costs of the project include those of the parent Program and the
 AF. They have been converted into economic costs with a conversion coefficient of 0.85, and the operating
 costs have been converted with a factor of 0.77 in accordance with the results of similar projects
 encountered in the subregion. The assumption of the parent Program on operating costs which fixes CFAF
 5,000 (US$8.16) per beneficiary is irrelevant because it is equivalent to CFAF 685 per m3 (US$1.12) above
 the selling price of water. For the AF, a more realistic hypothesis of CFAF 400 per m3 (US$0.65) was
 adopted pending confirmation of the ex-post analysis.

 17.      The benefits of the project. At this level, the population and income data have been updated on
 the basis of the official documents of the INStaD, and the data on health have been updated on the basis
 of data from the World Bank and the 2019 health statistics yearbook of Benin. Finally, in terms of the
 economic revenues of the Program, the additional revenues acquired after the intervention of the
 Program on the 191 water systems out of service which will be rehabilitated were recorded to the credit
 of the Program, as well as for the 169 water systems in service. The intervention of the project significantly
 improves the quality of the drinking water service which results in the generation of a virtual added value
 which is estimated on the basis of a shadow price of water of CFAF 200 per m3 (US$0.33).

 18.     The theory of change. Delivering high-quality and sustainable rural water supply services is at the
 heart of the reforms initiated by the GoB in the rural water sector. This theory of change assumes that
 strengthening of the service delivery arrangements through the Program will lead to improved quality and
 sustainability of the expanded water supply systems in rural areas.


 37 Previously called Institut National de la Statistique et de l’Analyse Economique – INSAE.




                                                                                                           Page 84 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



                                               Figure 2.3: Detailed Theory of Change of the Program




                                                                                                      Page 85 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



 Results of the Economic Analysis

 19.      Profitability indicators. The results of the analysis are recorded in Table 2.4. The expected
 economic results are very significant and are well above the discount rates used. With an economic
 internal rate of return (EIRR) of 13.2 percent, the NPV at the rate of 6 percent stands at more than CFAF
 167 billion (US$273 million) or an average value of CFAF 5.6 billion per year (US$9 million). The benefits
 of the project multiply by a factor of 1.4 the total costs that will be incurred.

                                             Table 2.4. Results of Economic Indicators
                   AQUA-VIE Program                                 AF                   Parent Program
                       Indicators
                  EIRR                                           13.2%                       12.7%
                  NPV @                        10%           US$75.1 million             US$ 24.4 million
                  NPV @                        6%            US$273.0 million            US$95.0 million
                  Benefit/cost                                    1.4                         1.14

 20.      The comparative results of the Parent Program and the AF. By comparing the results of the
 parent Program and the AF, the relevance of the AF is realized because it will bring the Program to the
 scale of significant growth. Although the EIRR does not show large differences (5 percent), it appears that
 the NPV of the AF represents 3 times that of PAD.

 21.      The sensitivity test. A sensitivity test was carried out on the most sensitive parameters of the
 calculation model, namely the selling price of the water, the specific consumption, and the charges related
 to the operating cost of the systems. The levels of variation tested for these parameters are recorded in
 Table 2.5. It appears from the table that an increase in prices better values investments and brings the
 EIRR to a level of 14 percent. Moreover, it is noted that if prices are maintained at their current level
 (US$0.98 per m3), they make it possible to contain a significant decrease in consumption specific to the
 standpost and the household connections of 20 percent. Similarly, a 30 percent increase in operating
 expenses brings the EIRR below 12 percent or 11.5 percent, which remains higher than the discount rate
 of 10 percent. To raise this value to 12.3 percent, it is absolutely necessary to increase the selling prices
 of water by 10 percent. In the most pessimistic case, which would see a 20 percent drop in specific
 consumption and a 30 percent increase in operating expenses, the EIRR fell to 11.4 percent but remained
 well above the discount rate used. Despite the adjustments that may have to be made to these main
 indicators, it is noted that the economic profitability of the project remains assured and that the EIRR
 evolves in a range of 11.4 percent to 14 percent, that is, above the discount rate of 10 percent.

                                     Table 2.5. Sensitivity Testing of Selected Parameters

   Sensitivity parameters                                                        EIRR     NPV@10      NPV@6      B/C
   10% increase in water prices                                                 14,0%       58 658     186 637   1,5
   20% reduction in specific consumption                                        12,7%       40 386     156 656   1,4
   30% increase in operating expenses                                           11,5%       21 532     125 719   1,3
   10% increase in water prices + 30% increase in operating costs               12,3%       33 267     144 974   1,3
   20% decrease in specific cons. + 30% increase in expenses                    11,4%       20 073     123 325   1,3



                                                                                                                       P
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



 22.     The planned efficiency improvements (asset renewal, NRW, billing collection, and so on) have
 multiple benefits: liberation of resources, climate change mitigation, and reduced water extracted from
 the natural systems. Not only do they contribute to better financial sustainability for water operators, but
 resources are also freed up for the proper maintenance of the new infrastructure and expansion of
 services.

 Key Lessons Learned from the AQUA-VIE parent Program

         •    The M&E system was strengthened to ensure good quality of data and reporting, improve
              decision-making, define rehabilitation needs of existing water supply systems, and ensure
              sector oversight. The M&E system must stay updated to maintain the quality of the data for
              proper reporting and allow efficient asset management by the private operator.
         •    Through the selection of the INStaD as the IVA, a state-owned institute currently placed
              under the authority of the Ministry of Economy and Finance, the Program yielded significant
              development benefits by building capacity within a public agency.
         •    The ANAEPMR developed a national guideline to design the rural water supply system and
              to harmonize the technical characteristics of the new systems under construction. This
              proved to be crucial for the rehabilitation and maintenance program of the regional
              operators.
         •    Specific support to the ANAEPMR, with targeted TA, is needed to help it manage the regional
              operator’s contract. Under the parent Program, TA was provided by the GWSP to define
              adequate service areas and design the contracts, following the new PPP law in Benin.




                                                                                                                P
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



                                                                                                  Table 2.6. Detailed Program Expenditure Framework
                                                                                                  Total expenditures                                                   Total expenditures                                                             Nb Private
                                                                                                                         Of which WB financing    Of which other                             Of which WB      Of which other                Nb Stand                                 Nb Water Supply
                                                                 Activities                         (actual and/or                                                       (actual and/or                                         Boreholes             connectio Beneficiairies                                     Comments
                                                                                                                                 FCFA             financing FCFA                            financing US$     financing US$                 pipe (SP)                                   Systems
                                                                                                   estimated) CFAF                                                      estimated) US$                                                                  n (PC)

                              Parent          Construction 95 Water Sypply Systems                     188,923,080,381         106,336,270,571        82,586,809,810          343,496,510       193,338,674       150,157,836           -      2,576     26,833       1,287,992                   95
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Contracts with PASAEP enterprises
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     24. It should be noted that AGBASSA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     and KODA become 1 Water Supply
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     System and the subtraction of the
                              Parent          Construction 95 Water Supply Systems                      12,508,486,815                                12,508,486,815           22,742,703                          22,742,703          39        398      4,146        199,004                    19 AEV of AVHLO, KPANROU and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SEHOUE. MADENGBE and IBIYEMI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     become the SAEP of ZAFFE. In total 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Water Supply Systems out of 24 have
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     been reduced to have today 19.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Contracts IGIP, ASI BF, MOE, and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PASAEP 24 drilling contractors. The
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     amount includes 5,196,905,629 FCFA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     for the construction of the 3 SAEPmV.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     The remainder concerns other
                                              Construction of 3 Water Supply                                                                                                                                                                                                                         activities financed by OMIDELTA,
                              Parent          Systems("OMIDELTA"), Resource Mobilization,                9,107,638,425                                 9,107,638,425           16,559,343                          16,559,343          98        105      1,094         52,506                     3 including the IGIP contract for the
                                              Studies and Technical Assistance                                                                                                                                                                                                                       elaboration     of    the     National
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Guidelines, technical studies for 34
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SAEP, water resource mobilization (98
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     large boreholes), capacity building,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     and the development of a new water
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     supply system.
   National   AQUA-VIE
   program    Program         Parent          Kouarfa extension ("OMIDELTA")                               994,896,020                                   994,896,020            1,808,902                           1,808,902                     14        145           6,980                    - HYDRO BENIN contract
                                              Construction of 6 Water Supply Systems ("EX
                              Parent                                                                    11,600,000,000                                11,600,000,000           21,090,909                          21,090,909                    216      2,250        108,000                     6 Funding National budget
                                              OMIDELTA")
                                              Construction of 2 Water Supply System (Tohouè &
                              Parent                                                                     2,324,600,000                                 2,324,600,000            4,226,545                           4,226,545                    122      1,272         61,028                     2 Funding National budget
                                              Tangbo-Djèvié)
                              Parent          Rehabilitation of 360 Water supply systems                34,457,619,008                                34,457,619,008           62,650,216                          62,650,216                                                    0                 -
                              Parent          Support to the Reform                                      5,333,316,269            3,592,410,294        1,740,905,975            9,696,939         6,531,655         3,165,284                      -          -                  -                 -
                                              Executive Agency's operating expenses and
                              Parent                                                                    12,984,552,537            8,861,355,881        4,123,196,656           23,608,277        16,111,556         7,496,721                      -          -                  -                 -
                                              equipment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       As a reminder PAD 3,300 SP, 34,500
                                                            Subtotal AQUA-VIE Parent Program           278,234,189,455         118,790,036,746       159,444,152,709          505,880,344       215,981,885       289,898,459         137      3,431     35,740       1,715,510                  125
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PC, 1,660,000 beneficiaries
                                AF            Resource mobilization                                      4,680,000,000            4,680,000,000                                 8,509,091         8,509,091                           160                                        0                 -


                                                                                                       108,782,320,446         108,782,320,446                                197,786,037       197,786,037                                    2,722     28,350       1,360,782                   80
                                AF            Construction 80 Water Supply Systems
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     These extensions will serve 232,506
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     people. These people are included in
                                              Extension of 21 Water Supply Systems                      10,262,860,000           10,262,860,000                                18,659,745        18,659,745                                        0          0                  0                 - the beneficiaries to be served by the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     95 Water Supply Systems in the base
                                AF                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   year
                                AF            Support to the Reform                                      4,200,000,000            4,200,000,000                                 7,636,364         7,636,364                                        -          -                  -                 -
                                              Executive Agency's operating expenses and
                                                                                                         8,746,244,410            6,946,244,410        1,800,000,000           15,902,263        12,629,535         3,272,727                      -          -                  -                 -
                                AF            equipment
                                                                        Subtotal AQUA-VIE AF           136,671,424,856         134,871,424,856         1,800,000,000          248,493,500       245,220,772         3,272,727         160      2,722     28,350       1,360,782                   80
                                                         TOTAL AQUA-VIE Program (Parent+AF)            414,905,614,312         253,661,461,602       161,244,152,709          754,373,844       461,202,657       293,171,187         297      6,153     64,090       3,076,292                  205
                         others in progress   Construction 16 Water Supply Systems PEPRAU               22,151,828,741          22,151,828,741                                 40,276,052        40,276,052                                      391      4,075         195,550                   16
                         others in progress   Construction 19 Water Supply Systems BIDC                 23,815,000,000                                23,815,000,000           43,300,000                          43,300,000                    564      5,875         282,000                   19
                                                                     sous-total autres en cours         45,966,828,741          22,151,828,741        23,815,000,000           83,576,052        40,276,052        43,300,000           0        955      9,950         477,550                   35
                                                  TOTAL AQUA-VIE Program (Parent+AF+other)             460,872,443,052         275,813,290,343       185,059,152,709          837,949,896       501,478,710       336,471,187         297      7,108     74,040       3,553,842                  240
                          To be financed                                                                                   421,192,741,165                                                                       765,804,984                    To be determine                                  371
                                                                       TOTAL national program          882,065,184,217                                                      1,603,754,880                                                                                                        611




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Page 88 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



                      ANNEX 3: FIDUCIARY SYSTEMS FULL ASSESSMENT - ADDENDUM

 Review of the PFM Cycle, including Procurement

 1.       The 2016 Fiduciary Systems Assessment (FSA, on the parent Program) identified weaknesses in
 the legislative and institutional framework in procurement, internal controls and auditing, and governance
 systems and practices in the country. The capacity of the agency, ANAEPMR (for example, newly created
 agency) as well as its governance arrangements were a challenge.

 2.       The key mitigation measures arising from the identified risks that are largely contained in the
 DLIs/PAP included the following: (a) the adoption and promulgation of the decrees required for the
 implementation of the new procurement code and standard bidding documents; (b) the creation of a
 procurement control unit (Cellule Contrôle des Marchés Publics, CCMP) and appointment of the person
 responsible for approving contracts at the ANAEPMR; (c) opening of a DA managed by the CAA and a
 ‘Treasure Saving Service Account for Investment’ managed by the ANAEPMR to prevent cash constraints;
 and (d) biannual joint technical, procurement, and financial internal audit of the Program to ensure
 efficient use of the Program funds. Hands-on support and capacity strengthening of the agency and of the
 MEM’s IGM are also planned during the entire implementation period of the Program.

 3.       During the AF’s FSA, significant changes were noted as summarized below:
      •   The new procurement code has been adopted in 2021 with standard bidding documents. Two
          staff, responsible for approving contracts at the ANAEPMR, were appointed. The review did not
          identify any issues in the funds flow management. An internal auditor weas appointed by the
          Presidency’s Office for Analysis and Investigation (Bureau d’Analyses et d’Investigation - BAI) with
          mandate to carry out at least one mission per quarter. The IGF/IGM/DNCMP has been able to
          conduct only one mission in 2021 covering 2020.
      •   The overall government has moved to performance-based budgeting since 2022.
      •   A new Supreme Audit Institution (SAI) was established in 2021 by the creation of a court of
          accounts whose settlement is still ongoing.

 4.      The budget planning framework remains robust, and the performance-based budget is
 implemented. The annual budgets are always prepared based on the Priority Investment Program (PIP).
 Planning and budgeting related to this Program will continue to follow the national procedures. Based on
 budget instructions/circulars, the teams of the various implementing entities under the responsibility of
 the Administrative and Financial Department (Direction Administrative et Financière, DAF) of each
 participating ministry continue to prepare the Program's budget considering the limits of allocations set
 by the Government and the Program.

 5.     The consolidated budget of the Program will continue to integrate into the budget of the MEM.
 Once the parliament approves the budget, the Government will transfer the appropriations to the agency
 through the Treasury Bank Account managed by the National Treasury through its budget execution
 procedures. To anticipate any delay in the transfer of the Government budget, the agency will request an
 advance up to 25 percent of the amount of the AF.




                                                                                                         Page 89 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



          Table 3.1. The budget of different existing projects financed by IDA and other donors
                                             (CFAF, millions for 2022)
  Budget Code                             Title                                   Donors         Amount
  077003001    OmiDelta - Volet AEP en milieu rural                      The Netherlands           165
                                                                             38
  077003002    Hydraulique villageoise et assainissement en milieu rural (IDB / West African       312
               Phase 2                                                   Economic and Monetary
                                                                         Union - Union
                                                                         Economique et Monétaire
                                                                         Ouest Africaine)
  077003003    Programme AQUA-VIE                                        IDA                      10,368
  077003004    PEPRAU                                                    IDA                       944
 6.       The budget execution performance of the MEM is moderately satisfactory, as reported in Table
 3.2 for 2018, 2019, and 2020.

                  Table 3.2. Budget execution performance of the MEM (CFAF, millions for 2022).
                                                     2018                2019                     2020
  MEM
  Budget                                        24,191.9               58,656.2                 48,535.4
  Execution                                     47,610.2               33,967.3                 33,010.4
  Budget performance rate                        196.8%                 57.9%                     68%
 Source: Department of Budget/ Ministry of Economy and Finance (Ministère de l’Economie et des Finances), MEF,
 end of the year reports 2018, 2019 et 2020.

 7.       The overall budget execution performance of the ANAEPMR is presented in Table 3.3.

               Table 3.3. Budget execution performance of the ANAEPMR (CFAF, millions for 2022).
                                                            2018            2019                   2020
  ANAEPMR
  Budget                                                 34,971           23,079                  16,258
  Execution                                               4,521            7,170                   9,492
  Budget performance rate                                12.93%           31.07%                  58.38%
 Sources: Annual report of the ANAEPMR.

 8.      Table 3.3 shows the budget execution rates at the ANAEPMR. The figures reported raised the
 challenge of budget absorption during the three previous years. According to the agency team, this
 situation is the result of the fact that most of the activities of the ANAEPMR are heavy construction that
 take long time to be completed. This situation raised the risk of low disbursement and the lack of capacity
 of the agency to absorb the funds disbursed against the achievement of the DLIs on the project’s timeline.



 38 The Islamic Development Bank/Banque Islamique de Developpement.




                                                                                                           Page 90 of 108
        The World Bank
        Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



           As of December 31, 2021, the reconciliation between the disbursement made and the actual expenditures
           is presented in Table 3.4 for the parent project.

                                                 Table 3.4. Actual expenditure versus disbursement
                                         Actuals Expenditures,        Actuals       Disbursements Disbursements Reconciliation c = (b)   Reconciliation c =
                                           Avril 30, 2022 (a)     Expenditures,           (b)           (b)             − (a)                (b) − (a)
          Results Areas                                          Avril 30, 2022 (a)

                                             (francs CFA)              US$        (francs CFA)         (US$)          (francs CFA)             (US$)
Results Area 1:  1.1 Construction of       17,516,585,537         28,645,274.79             0.0         00          -17,516,585,537       -28,645,274.79
Increase access  new water supply
to water supply  systems
service          1.2 Rehabilitation                 0.00                  00               0.0               00              00                    00
                 and expansion of
                 existing water
                 supply systems
Results Area 2: 2.1 Supporting the           186,992,598           305,793.29     18,811,798,557 30,763,366.40       18,624,805,959       30,457,573.11
Strengthen       establishment of
service delivery performance-based
arrangements contracts with
                 regional operators
                 2.2 Capacity                 93,720,000           153,262.46              00                00       -93,720,000          -153,262.46
                 building of the rural
                 water supply
                 professionals
                 2.3 Capacity               2,238,260,140         3,660,278.23             00                00      -2,238,260,140        -3,660,278.23
                 building of the
                 ANAEPMR,
                 ministries in charge
                 of water and
                 health, and
                 municipalities
Contingency                                         0.00                  00               00                00              0.00                  00
                  Advances                                                        23,483,332,638 38,402,833.42       23,483,332,638       38,402,833.42
Total Program financing                     20,035,558,275        32,764,608.78   42,295,131,195 69,166,199.82       22,259,572,920       36,401,591.03
           NB: 1 dollar US = CFAF 611,50


           9.       The disbursements amount received is higher than the actual program expenditures mainly due
           to the delay in the implementation of the procurement operations. Therefore, the ANAEPMR should
           accelerate the implementation of the Program activities as already mentioned. The recent signatures
           (April 2022) of the 95 water systems contracts awarded in four lots (US$193 million construction contract)
           will significantly increase the program expenditure.. The main DLIs linked to the reform (RA 2) were
           disbursed first (DLI 3a, 3b), DLI 4 will be disburse soon as the contracts are already signed. The DLIs linked
           to RA 1 will not disburse until the completion of the infrastructure (water systems, household connections
           and standpipes).

           Treasury Management and Funds Flow

           10.    Controls over the use of the Program funds are satisfactory. The funds flow arrangements remain
           adequate. The agency is not experiencing any issue with cash availability. Once the Parliament approves
           the budget, the Government transfers the contribution to the agency through the Treasury Bank Account
           managed by the National Treasury through its budget execution procedures. To anticipate any delay in



                                                                                                                                           Page 91 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



 the transfer of the Government budget, the agency makes the request of advance up to 25 percent of the
 amount of the AF. The agency appropriations are deposited in a bank saving investment account opened
 at the National Treasury and managed by the head and the DAF of the agency without the intervention
 any public accountant.

 11.     The review of the payment timeline on the existing projects shows that the numbers of days
 before payment are reasonable, as presented in Table 3.5.

                               Table 3.5. Timeline of Treatment of Payment Operations

                                                                                                  Number of Days
   No.         Beneficiaries           Receipt Date of the Invoices         Payment Date
                                                                                                   of Treatment
  PEPRAU
    1 ASI BF SA                                 2/24/2020                     3/30/2020                  35
    2 ASI BF SA                                 6/29/2020                     8/10/2020                  42
    3 ASI BF SA                                 9/4/2020                      10/6/2020                  32
    4 ASI BF SA                                12/13/2021                     1/4/2022                   22
    5 CGC                                       1/22/2022                     2/7/2022                   16
    6 LE ROCHER                                12/22/2021                     1/17/2022                  26
  PROGRAMME AQUA-VIE
    1 GRPMT ESSOR                               2/26/2020                     3/9/2020                   12
    2 GRPMT HYDRO R&D                           11/5/2020                     12/3/2020                  28
   3 GRPMT ESSOR                               11/27/2020                    12/14/2020                  17
  BUDGET NATIONAL
   1 GRPMT IBT/ECORE                            8/17/2020                     8/27/2020                  10
   2 GRPMT EWA/OBB                              9/25/2020                     10/6/2020                  11
   3 GRPMT FORAG/                               10/8/2020                    10/20/2020                  12

    4    GRPMT FORAG/AGIRE                     11/25/2020                     12/3/2020                  8

    5  GRPMT IBT/                              12/23/2020                    12/28/2020                  5
       ECORE
  PROGRAMME OMIDELTA
    1 ASF BF SA                                 2/8/2022                      2/28/2022                  20
 Sources: Table prepared based on data collected from the ANAEPMR.
 Note: AGIRE = ; ASF = ; ASI BF SA = ; CGC = ; ECORE = ; ESSOR = ; EWA = ; FORAG = ; GRPMT = ; IBT = ; OBB = ; R&D =
 Research and development.

 12.      With this approach, there is limited risk of liquidity shortfalls or cash rationing.

 13.     Procurement planning. The process of preparing Procurement Plans is quite laborious. Based on
 the budget forecast, the ANAEPMR prepares its work plan and budget, as well as a draft Procurement
 Plan. Once the budget is approved, the agency’s Procurement Plan is significantly revised because of the
 time lag between the forecast and the previous year’s execution. The PP that is supposed to be released


                                                                                                               Page 92 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



 in mid-January is rarely released until late February. For example, the Procurement Plan of 2022 had not
 been approved as of mid-March 2022.

 Management of Contracts for the Last Three Years (2019–2021)

 14.        The statistics of contracts signed during the three previous years are summarized in Table 3.6.

                     Table 3.6. Contracts signed by the ANAEPMR during the three previous years
  Order No.              Designation                       Number                     Observations
     01     Number of contracts signed during the            60        2019: 22 contracts signed out of 36 planned
            period 2019–2021                                           2020: 26 contracts signed out of 32 planned
                                                                       2021: 12 contracts signed out of 18 planned
       02       Number of contracts in progress               31
       03       Number of closed contracts                    48
       04       Number of contracts cancelled                 01
       05       Number of contracts in progress without       27
                delay
       06       Number of contracts in progress with          04
                delay
       07       Number of contracts closed with delay         05
       08       Number of contracts with amendments           16      Mos of the amendments are for either
                                                                      extension of the duration or revision of the
                                                                      technical specifications.
 Source: Framework of the follow-up of the execution of the contracts of the ANAEPMR.

 Procurement Processes and Procedures

 15.      In addition to the delay in the contracting process of the 95 SAEP-mVs, the archiving of contracting
 files remains weak. It is important to address this issue, as it would be challenging to conduct procurement
 audits if records are not available or not easily accessible. This should be one of the focus for the
 procurement team.

 16.     Despite these challenges, significant improvements in the procurement process were noted
 during the review as mentioned in the follow-up of the PAP. However, the following areas need to be
 improved:
         •    Improvement of the archiving system to facilitate ex post review and procurement audit
            •     Reinforcing the agency staffing by the appointment of an additional procurement specialist.

 17.     The accounting and financial reporting standards are adequate. The ANAEPMR, as the agency
 created by the Government to accelerate the implementation of the Government’s priorities program,
 has full autonomy in its operating process. The agency has a separate accounting system using the
 ‘SUCCESS’ accounting software. This accounting system is not, unfortunately, interfaced with the SIGFIP
 or ASTER. At the beginning of the fiscal year, the National Treasury transfers the agency’s appropriations
 as a capital transfer captured immediately as expenditures in the PFM system. So, the agency is not
 producing any financial data for the national system. The day-to-day actual operations are not captured



                                                                                                                Page 93 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



 in the SIGFIP but in SUCCESS. The financial statements are prepared with the data from the SUCCESS
 accounting software.

 18.    As the text that created the agency required, the ANAEPMR applies the SYSCOHADA accounting
 standards. The agency is waived to use the PFM accounting standards.

 19.     The ANAEPMR financial statements for the three previous years (2018, 2019, and 2020) were
 audited with an unmodified audit opinion.

 20.     The internal control framework is adequate, but areas for improvement have been identified.

 21.      The ANAEPMR’s manual of procedures guides the operations. The manual of procedures provides
 distinct segregation of duties between the financial management staff (DAF and two accountants). The
 internal audit missions are carried out by the following:
          •    The IGF/IGM/DNCMP is supposed to undertake two missions per year. However, they were
               able to conduct only one mission during the 2020 fiscal year. As a result, the mission covering
               the fiscal year 2021 has not been initiated.
         •     A private internal audit firm is appointed by the BAI based at the President’s office. This
               private audit firm is conducting a quarterly audit assignment. It has carried out all the
               expected audit missions.

 22.     The audit of 2020 carried out by the IGF covered financial management and procurement. The
 recommendations were implemented as the private auditor in charge of the internal audit followed up
 on the implementations of the recommendations and reports to the BAI.

 23.      The biannual joint internal audit conducted by the IGF/IGM/DNCMP could not be carried out in
 the initial PAD. However, the private audit firm met its obligations of submitting a quarterly report. These
 internal audit missions revealed minor malfunctions, including
          (a) Expiration of the mandate of the board members;
         (b)   Absence of audit conducted by the SAI as requested by the texts, but the ANAEPMR
               explained that it already has a statutory audit that is supposed to replace the SAI audit; and
         (c)   Insufficient quality of some supporting documents and travel authorization.

 24.     An action plan has been implemented by the ANAEPMR and the points identified are in the
 process of being implemented. A follow-up of the implementation of the actions is carried out by the
 internal audit. A summary of the implementation of the actions is presented in Table 3.7.
                        Table 3.7. Summary of the implementation of the audit action plan
                                                                             Partially            Not
         Entities                #                 Implemented
                                                                           Implemented        Implemented
  IGF/IA                          10                     5                      4                  1
  Auditor                          6                     3                      3                  0
 Source: Internal auditor reports as of December 2021.




                                                                                                         Page 94 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



 25.      The actions partially implemented are actions to be implemented through the duration of the
 project. More attention should be paid by the World Bank’s task team during the supervision missions.

 26.    These arrangements should not be changed. However, it may be efficient to recommend to the
 IGF/IGM/DNCMP to conduct one mission per year instead of two missions as mentioned in the parent
 Program regarding the human resources constraints of the IGF.

 27.      The DLI achievement verification process has been reinforced. The INStaD serves as the
 verification entity for the parent Program. It has conducted more than six verifications to review the
 achievement of some DLIs during the previous semesters. This DLIs verification mechanism will be
 maintained for the AF.

 28.     The World Bank also conducted the additional review to confirm the achievement of the results,
 before allowing the release of funds.

 External Audit and Oversight

 29.      As an agency, it is mandatory to have a statutory auditor in charge of the annual audit of the
 financial statements. The reports produced are submitted to the board of the agency. The terms of
 reference of the agency were extended to cover the activities of the PforR. However, a separate audit
 report is prepared and submitted to the World Bank six months after the end of the fiscal year. The audit
 reports for the fiscal years 2019 and 2020 have been received. The auditors expressed an unmodified
 opinion after the audit of the two fiscal years. They also formulated recommendations to improve the
 internal control of the agency. The level of implementation of the recommendations is presented in Table
 3.7. The key issues raised by the auditors are (a) lack of appropriate system of management of project
 assets; (b) archiving approach not adapted to accrual accounting system; (c) errors noted in the
 application of the per diem rates; and (d) noncompliance with the contract provision of an implementing
 agency by making additional advances, and so on.

 30.     During the FSA, evidence emerged that appropriate actions were taken to fix these issues.

 31.      Anti-Corruption Guidelines - F&C. Benin has regulatory and institutional arrangements to
 monitor F&C and comprehensive legal provisions for investigating and prosecuting it. These include
 regular internal audits by the IGF, ARMP, and the BAI and external audits by the SAI. The audit reports of
 ARMP are made public on their website, and the SAI reports are made public on the website of the MEF.
 More efforts are still needed to ensure that audit reports are broadly made available to the public,
 including the IGF reports. There is an effective follow-up of administrative and/or judicial actions Cour de
 répression des infractions économiques et du terrorisme (CRIET), and these are dutifully applied.

 32.     On the parent project, there was no mechanism to collect, consolidate, and report to the World
 Bank credible and material allegations and other indications of F&C under the Program. Based on the
 information available, there were no cases of fraud or corruption on the parent project. For the AF, the
 IGF/IGM will collect, consolidate, and provide to the World Bank, on a semiannual basis, a report on any
 credible and material allegations and other indications of F&C under the Program; any investigations
 launched into such allegations; and any remedial or corrective actions taken or planned in response to
 such allegations or the findings of such investigations. In addition, if the World Bank decides to conduct


                                                                                                        Page 95 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



 its inquiry into allegations or other indications of F&C in connection with the Program, the IGF/IGM will
 cooperate fully with the World Bank’s representatives and take all appropriate measures to ensure the
 full cooperation of relevant persons and entities including, in each case, allowing the World Bank to access
 sites and facilities; meet with relevant persons/entities; and inspect all of their relevant accounts, records,
 and other documents and have them audited by, or on behalf of, the World Bank.

                                             Table 3.8. Follow-up of PAP
   No.              Action                        Completion Measurement                            Status
   2.1    New Public Procurement       • Adoption and promulgation of application Templates of bidding
          Code and compliance of           decrees of the new procurement law no.       documents and
          the ANAEPMR with the             2017-04 dated October 19, 2017               implementing decrees of
          provisions of the new        • Adoption and promulgation of national          the new law 2020-
          Public Procurement Code          standard bidding documents in conformity September 26–29, 2020, on
                                           with the new procurement law                 the Public Procurement
                                       • Application of the new Public Procurement Code in the Republic of
                                           Code by the ANAEPMR through                  Benin are adapted and
                                           o The establishment of the CCMP within effective.
                                              the ANAEPMR and
                                           o The formal designation of the person in
                                              charge of approving the contracts of
                                              the ANAEPMR.
   2.2.   Conducting the               Maintaining the entire procurement process       Effective. During the
          procurement process          through the SIGMAP system during the             assessment, it was noted
          through SIGMAP               implementation of the Program                    that the procurement
          (procurement software)                                                        process is implemented
                                                                                        through the SIGMAP.
   2.3    Public procurement audit (a) Conduct an audit by the ARMP of the              In 2021, a World Bank-
          of the ministry in charge of     public procurement of the ministry in        funded project supported
          the water sector                 charge of the water sector, including the    ARMP in conducting the
                                           ANAEPMR                                      water sector’s public
                                       (b) Procurement audit reports submitted to       procurement audit for fiscal
                                           the World Bank within the agreed period      years 2018, 2019, and 2020.
                                           and published on the ARMP website.
   2.4    Annual preparation of the Annual preparation of the Procurement plan          Effective. Even the process
          Procurement Plan             of the ministry in charge of the water sector to takes a long time to get
                                       accompany its general budget                     approved by Procurement
                                                                                        Plan.
   2.5    Internal audit and internal Signature of a memorandum of understanding The MoU is signed and the
          control                      (MoU) between the ANAEPMR and the IGF as IGF/IGM and DNCMP were
                                       leader of the IGM and the DNCMP for              able to carry out only one
                                       conducting joint biannual inspection missions mission covering 2020.
                                       covering the operational, financial, and
                                       procurement aspects




                                                                                                                Page 96 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



       ANNEX 4: SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENT AND SOCIAL SYSTEMS ASSESSMENT - ADDENDUM

 A.      Presentation

 1.      To ensure that adverse environmental and social risks and impacts continue to be avoided,
 reduced or adequately mitigated, the World Bank team has prepared this addendum to the ESSA to cover
 risks and additional potential adverse environmental and social impacts that may arise from the activities
 of the AF. It is important to note that this addendum is not a new ESSA and should be considered a
 supplement to the ESSA of the parent Program. It should be noted that the assessment of the
 environmental and social systems of the parent Program was carried out in accordance with the
 requirements of the policy and the directive of the World Bank for the financing of PforRs as well as
 considering the obligations of systems at the national and municipal levels with respect to institutional
 capacity and performance, policy and regulatory bases, public consultation, and complaints mechanism
 to manage and mitigate impacts.

 2.      The objectives of the ESSA Addendum are to (a) assess the status of implementation of the
 recommendations and actions of the parent PAP; (b) identify relevant legislative and procedural changes
 since the parent Program’s ESSA was prepared; (c) identify potential new environmental and social risks
 and impacts of the AF; and (d) recommend measures to further strengthen the environmental and social
 system. The purpose of the addendum is to ensure that the environmental and social risks of the AF will
 be well managed and aligned with the principles of sustainable development.

 3.      Methodology for writing the addendum. The ESSA examines the environmental and social
 management systems applicable to the Program to assess their compliance with the provisions of the
 World Bank’s Policy and Directive on Environmental Financing and subsequent amendments to which the
 Program must comply as part of the AF. The methodology used for the realization of this addendum
 follows the best practices and the guidelines of the World Bank on the ESSA for the financing of PforRs.

 4.     The preparation of the addendum involved a series of interviews and consultations with
 stakeholders related to the parent Program. Thus, the addendum reflects the review of several
 documents, including the original ESSA and subsequent reports of the World Bank’s implementation
 support missions (the Aide Memoires), the monthly reports, and quarterly environmental and social
 monitoring. Interviews were also carried out with the main stakeholders at the central level, in particular
 the ANAEPMR, the MCVDD, the ABE, and the ANDF. Investigations were carried out in the field in certain
 town halls/beneficiary municipalities of the AQUA-VIE Program, particularly in the municipalities of Akpo
 Misserete and Ifangni, where various technical and local actors were consulted. Implementing companies
 and representatives of beneficiary communities were also consulted.

 5.       The AF of the program will be implemented on the basis of the environmental and social
 provisions of the initial Program. The environmental and social systems currently in place for the
 implementation of the parent Program have effectively supported the implementation and will therefore
 remain in place for the execution of the AF. This implies in particular that the following environmental and
 social provisions will remain as defined in the current PAP: (a) the consulting firms will be responsible for
 the design, environmental and social impact studies, and works supervision; (b) environmental/social
 screening and impact assessment procedures as well as resettlement action plans will be carried out in


                                                                                                         Page 97 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



 accordance with the guidelines of the Environmental and Social Management Program; and (c) TA will be
 provided to the municipalities by the ANDF—throughout the implementation of the Program and to
 support any cases of physical and/or economic displacements that could lead to the provision of land,
 expropriation, land security, and the allocation of different sites to the Program investments.

 B.      Progress of the Implementation of the Parent Program

 6.      Implementation of the initial Program Environmental Management Action Plan. The review of
 the parent Program Environmental Management Action Plan revealed that the four actions
 recommended/planned in the said action plan are carried out (annex 5) and the application of the various
 related measures are also continuing. These actions relate to (a) the production of the GRGES (the GRGES
 has been developed and implemented); (b) the interinstitutional coordination between the ANAEPMR
 and the ABE (an agreement was signed between the ANAEPMR and the ABE for carrying out
 environmental and social impact studies and obtaining environmental compliance certificates within the
 time limits prescribed by the regulations); (c) the recruitment of human resources of the ANAEPMR for
 Environmental and Social Management (the recruitment and availability of three specialists in
 environmental and social safeguards within the ANAEPMR was noted); and (d) support to municipalities
 for land management continues owing to the support of the ANDF (an agreement has been signed
 between the ANAEPMR and the ANDF in this context to facilitate the land compensation process when
 necessary and to release and secure the sites of the Program works).

 7.     Program environmental and social management and performance: This subsection includes
 environmental and social risks management, performance, and PAP implementation including
 occupational health and safety (OHS).

 8.       E&S benefits of the Program : The positive impacts of the program will be job creation through
 the recruitment of local labor for the realization of the works, which would certainly lead to an increase
 in the income of the households to which the workers belong, the increase in economic activity within the
 framework of the development of management and maintenance activities of the hydraulic works by the
 private sector, improvement of the living environment in schools and other public places (markets, health
 centers, public and private administration) through permanent access to drinking water, increase in
 household income with the reduction of water-related expenses, reduction of water-related diseases
 linked to the consumption of poor quality water. In addition, drinking water services will be accessible to
 women and vulnerable groups (elderly, poor, people with disability, who have been generally excluded
 until now, etc.). These beneficial impacts will contribute to reducing the drudgery of women, especially
 girls, with an increase in the penetration rate of drinking water. In addition, the program will contribute
 to the viability of the project's recipient districts through the permanent availability of water in the
 localities to be served, the improvement and maintenance of the quality of the water served to the
 beneficiary population and the improvement of the living conditions and environment of the beneficiary
 population.

 9.      E&S risks of the Program: As for the negative impacts, they can be summarized as atmospheric
 pollution due to the emission of dust particles and exhaust gases from the machines and work equipment,
 the modification/ degradation of the quality of the landscape by the waste from the construction site, the
 destruction of the vegetation cover and the disturbance of natural habitats, land losses, risks of



                                                                                                       Page 98 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



 propagation of STI/HIV/AIDS and COVID-19, risks of frustration in case of non-use of local labor, temporary
 obstruction during the work of road traffic and activities of the populations, especially during the phase
 of opening trenches to lay water pipes. There is a risk of overexploitation of the water table in certain
 areas, for which measures are already being taken with the support of GWSP in anticipation.

 10.      Risk management measures: To mitigate the negative risks, measures will be taken through the
 development of relevant environmental and social tools (ESIAs, ESMPs and their annexes) and their
 effective implementation on the construction sites with a rigorous follow-up on the following activities:
 (i) Regularly watering the tracks to reduce dust; (ii) Equipment of workers with appropriate Personal
 Protective Equipment and ensure that they are effectively worn; (iii) Sensitizing the personnel and users
 of the work sites on good practices and on preventive methods to fight against COVID-19, STIs and HIV
 AIDS; (iv) Requiring signature of the code of conduct by all site users; (v) Raising awareness of workers
 and the local population on gender-based violence; (vi) Developing and implementing a prevention plan
 against the spread of COVID-19; (vii) Using only the space necessary for excavations; (viii) Destroying only
 the necessary tree stands located within the project right-of-way; (ix) Replanting cut trees; (x) Marking
 out work areas on construction sites; (xi) Putting in place and enforcing safety signs and pictograms on
 work sites; and (xii) Establishing a system for the effective management of complaints. These measures,
 which were diligently implemented as part of the parent program through the implementation of a PAP,
 will also be implemented on an ongoing basis on the AF.

 11.     Occupational health and safety (OHS). In terms of health and safety, the assessments revealed
 that the implementation of the initial Program did not record any serious accidents. The follow-up and
 the production of reports on the construction sites are systematically well done.

 12.      Environmental and social studies. The environmental and social screenings and the
 recommended environmental and social studies are carried out in accordance with the national texts in
 force. To this end, it was noted, for example, that 39 ESIA reports out of 95 were produced and sent for
 validation to the ABE. Of the 39 ESIAs, 30 were validated with 20 environmental and social compliance
 certificates obtained out of 30 expected. Regarding the remaining 56 ESIA reports, 22 are in the process
 of quality review and 34 are in preparation. In addition to the ESIA reports prepared in accordance with
 Benin's laws and regulations and the Reference Guide, documents such as the COVID 19 Action Plan and
 the Code of Conduct have been developed, along with the implementation of a Grievance Redress
 Mechanism. In order to mitigate the risks of the program during the construction phase of the works, the
 following documents have been developed. These are the ESMP for the construction site (PGES-C), the
 Specific Waste Management and Disposal Plan (PPGED) and the Specific Health and Safety Plan (PPSPS).

 13.     Capacity building. The preparation of the GRGES was followed by a dissemination/training
 program for the application of the guide for the various stakeholders involved in the implementation of
 the Program, in particular the staff of the ANAEPMR, the ABE, the ANDF, the Departmental Directorates
 of the MCVDD, the beneficiary municipalities, the Association of Drinking Water Consumers (ACEP), the
 Works companies and work control offices, Drinking water operators.

 14.     Gender equality and gender mainstreaming. The existing program has yielded overall satisfactory
 results with respect to gender equality. Indeed, the first village water supply works carried out in
 Agbohountongon (district of Dan) and in Kissamey (commune of Aplahoué ) by the parent Program had



                                                                                                        Page 99 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



 positive impacts on rural women and vulnerable people in the drinking water supply. These positive
 impacts relate to the alleviation and reduction of chores and loss of time in the search for drinking water,
 the alleviation of the chore of water collection, the improvement of hygiene and the schooling of girls
 (easy access to water for good management of menses, for example), and the ability to develop other
 activities with substantial income following easy access to drinking water. The AF aims to continue
 integrating gender-responsive interventions into its similarly supported activities.

 15.     Citizen engagement. The current Program has produced relatively satisfactory results in terms of
 citizen engagement, and its additional funding should continue to integrate these principles and
 approaches in the same way. Most of the works funded by the parent Program have been elucidated by
 planning processes that have included participation of the local population and local authorities during
 the identification and proposal of sites and the realization of ESIAs and Environmental and Social Audit
 and also during the holding of public consultations. This made it possible to reflect and integrate the
 expectations, concerns, and points of view of the stakeholders concerned. This approach of considering
 the populations should be further extended in all the intervention zones and very well reinforced in the
 framework of the AF, because a part of the representatives of the beneficiaries declared during the public
 consultations carried out in the framework of the AF that they were not very well involved in the activities
 of AQUA-VIE.

 16.     A good environmental and social performance of the parent Program was noted, which is due to
 the appropriation of the procedures by the actors with the dissemination/training for the application of
 the provisions of the GRGES. This performance will certainly continue during the implementation of the
 AF.

 C.      Legislative and Procedural Changes

 17.     The environmental and social system and procedures described in the assessment report of the
 environmental and social systems of the parent Program are still applicable both in terms of laws,
 regulations, and standards and in terms of procedures and institutions for effective implementation of
 these laws, regulations, and standards. The AF will not imply any change in terms of legislation or
 procedures with respect to the nature and type of activities planned and to be implemented on the ground
 by the various Program stakeholders.

 18.      The World Bank has update its PforR policy and directive. The national legislative system is still
 relevant and in phase with the updated PforR World Bank policy and directive. With regard to the national
 legislation, it should be noted that Law 98-030 of February 12, 1999 on the environmental framework law
 and its implementing decrees on the implementation of environmental management tools (ESIA, Audit,
 public hearing, RAP, etc.), in particular Decree No. 2017-332 of July 6, 2017 on the organization of
 environmental assessment procedures in the Republic of Benin and the General Guide to the Conduct of
 Environmental Impact Assessment in Benin, are currently being updated. For the moment they remain
 valid.
 19.      It is worth noting that there are no COVID-related requirements and regulations that may impair
 program’s implementation. Indeed, as a reminder, the measures taken by the Beninese authorities to face
 the COVID-19 pandemic are globally, the vaccination against COVID-19; the requirement of a negative
 PCR test dating back to less than 5 days or a negative antigenic RDT of 72 hours at most before boarding
 to any traveler arriving in Cotonou upon arrival and departure from Cotonou airport; Strict limitation of


                                                                                                       Page 100 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



 entry and exit through Benin's land borders, barriers and restrictions (mandatory wearing of masks,
 respect for social distancing, hand washing, prohibition of large gatherings, etc.) ); the provision of a toll-
 free number for listening and assistance on COVID-19. These existing COVID requirements and regulations
 have not been a major impediment to the implementation of the program to date. The measures
 implemented at the worksites are in line with the measures enacted by the government in the COVID 19
 control. These measures are documented in the Covid 19 Action Plan and are being implemented on the
 parent program.

 D.      Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts of the Additional Financing

 20.      The AF will not introduce any significant changes in the scope and areas of intervention of the
 initial Program. It maintains activities and institutional arrangements and does not introduce new
 activities that would substantially alter the environmental and social risks and impacts associated with the
 parent Program. The institutions that manage environmental and social risks at the central and
 municipal/local levels are the same and are considered strong enough to manage the changes associated
 with the AF.

 21.     COVID risk on the Program. Risks associated with the spread of COVID-19 on construction sites
 are expected to be moderate and may occur during the construction phase of the project. These risks will
 be due to the proximity of workers on construction sites, the grouping of workers and site employees in
 a narrow area or space, the work of site workers in enclosed areas where there is less air circulation, and
 the performance of activities that would require workers to breathe more deeply, such as physically
 demanding work. These listed negative risks are expected to be moderate, temporary, and easily
 mitigated with measures used during the implementation phase of the parent program, such as screening
 for COVID-19; proper ventilation of indoor spaces and wearing of masks; respecting and maintaining social
 distancing; use of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE); routine handwashing by workers and site users;
 and vaccination against COVID-19.

 22.      The activities of the additional funding are not likely to have high and substantial impacts on
 protected areas or to significantly transform natural habitats or irreversibly modify areas of biodiversity
 and/or potentially important cultural resources. The AF activities are expected to be generally positive
 over the long term. Indeed, these activities will improve the rate of access to drinking water, which will
 promote better health and sanitation for rural populations, eradicate waterborne diseases and improve
 living conditions, encourage the practice of proper body and food hygiene, and reduce the incidence of
 waterborne diseases, and so on.

 23.      Adverse environmental and social risks and impacts are expected to be moderate and will be
 generated globally by the site-specific and type-specific construction works and will generally be limited
 to air pollution, water pollution, soil degradation (deterioration of access roads to construction sites due
 to truck trips), poor waste management, destruction of plant cover and wildlife habitats, work accidents,
 traffic accidents, the increased risk of sexually transmitted infection/HIV/AIDS, the proliferation of COVID-
 19 and other conditions, a probable increase in the risk of gender-based violence, Sexual Exploitation and
 Abuse/Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH), and child labor. Similarly, risks of social conflicts between local
 populations and site personnel may be recorded following the non-recruitment of local labor. There are
 also risks of temporary or permanent loss of land or portions of land due to civil works; risks of tensions
 and conflicts related to the choice of sites or the poor spatial coverage of the water access distribution


                                                                                                          Page 101 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



 network; risks of temporary disruptions in the daily activities of the localities due to noise, dust, traffic
 density, etc.; and risks of disruption of the local hydrogeological regime. However, these negative
 environmental and social risks and impacts are expected to be moderate, temporary, predictable, and
 easily mitigated with the planned measures.

 24.       Land acquisition and physical and/or economic displacement. In general, the most significant
 social risks of the AF that are likely to be observed are still the same as those of the initial Program and
 are linked to the acquisition and implementation at the disposal or temporary occupation of the land. The
 AF will require, like the parent Program, the provision of land for the construction of complementary
 multi-village drinking water supply systems. It will use either the existing right-of-way or land belonging
 to the Government or to the municipality or land belonging to landowners who voluntarily by transfer or
 donation can make their land available to the Program and which will be managed using procedures
 deemed satisfactory by national regulations and reinforced by the World Bank. In this regard, there are
 risks of temporary or permanent loss of land or portions of land due to the works. Attention must be paid
 to the land status, in particular the subdivided or undivided nature of the land to accommodate the works.
 Particular attention must be paid to the land status, in particular the subdivided or undivided nature of
 the land to accommodate the works. The change from rural drinking water supply to multi-village systems
 will not impact the magnitude of Program’s impact. The AF is expanding the construction of multi-village
 rural water supply schemes to new areas of the country (as opposed to expanding the size of the multi-
 village rural water supply schemes constructed under the original financing). Thus, the nature and size of
 the multi-village rural water supply schemes (wells, storage, distribution networks) under the AF will not
 differ from the parent Program.

 25.      Risks of poor choice of sites or poor spatial coverage of the water access distribution network.
 In fact, consultations in the communes of Misserété and Ifangni revealed that the multi-village drinking
 water supply systems under construction covered very sparsely populated localities to the detriment of
 the most densely populated localities, which had more network coverage, which can cause frustration
 and could therefore be a source of tension and conflict. Other lesser risks may be related to
 nuisances/inconveniences caused by the works such as access difficulties, traffic diversions, increased
 noise, vibrations, dust emissions, and so on, which could generate temporary disruptions in the day-to-
 day activities of the localities.

 26.      Risk of disruption of the local hydrogeological regime by the construction and operation of
 boreholes for multi-village drinking water supply systems. This hydrodynamic phenomenon could be
 observed in shallow aquifer catchment areas, especially for wells located at proximity to boreholes, and
 result in a risk of drying up and pollution of village wells near exploitation boreholes.

 27.      Risk of overexploitation of groundwater. The increase in the number of boreholes for multi-
 village drinking water supply systems could lead to overexploitation of the resource and the undermining
 of future needs. Indeed, the program could develop negative impacts on groundwater in the event that
 the exploitation of boreholes presents a risk of overexploitation of water resources and possibly the
 gradual lowering of the level of groundwater.

 28.      Risk of cumulative impacts. The effects of climate change can gradually cause a growing recharge
 deficit that could have the impact of lowering the piezometric surface, as well as elements that can affect
 the availability of the resource in the medium or long term, especially with the increase in the number of


                                                                                                        Page 102 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



 multi-village drinking water supply systems owing to the AF. The potential impacts of the AF related to
 the exploitation of groundwater both qualitatively and quantitatively, which will be added to the impacts
 that naturally exist on the resource, must be given special attention in the context of environmental and
 piezometric monitoring.

 E.        Measures and Recommendations for Strengthening the Environmental and Social System

 29.    The completed PAP will be maintained in the AF. Actions under the parent Program (staffing,
 guidance development) are still relevant for the successful implementation of the AF and all actions were
 achieved.

 30.      To further strengthen environmental and social management, especially for the AF, the team will
 continue to work closely with the Government by providing recommendations during implementation
 missions and Program supervision and will ensure its continued effective implementation. Thus, based on
 the analysis carried out for this addendum with respect to the six fundamental principles, the main
 recommendations below have been proposed. Table 4.1 summarizes the key actions to be carried out to
 further improve the management of environmental and social risks within the framework of the AF. These
 recommendations are in phase with the parent Program's Environmental and Social Management Action
 Plan.
                              Table 4.1. Main recommendations - Additional Financing
                                                Responsible Recommendations for the implementation of the
      Description of Action      Deadline
                                                   Entity                            AF
   Ensure good                Throughout the ANAEPMR        • Update and popularize the complaints
   dissemination of the       implementation                  management mechanism through awareness
   complaints management      of the project                  campaigns, posters on construction sites, and
   mechanism and full         (at all phases of               awareness programs on radio and TV if possible.
   involvement of             the project)                  • Inform and sensitize the population and local
   stakeholders.                                              authorities on the extension of the multi-village
                                                              drinking water supply system network relating to
                                                              the AF.
                                                            • Strengthen the information, participation, and
                                                              involvement of local stakeholders in all
                                                              municipalities in the implementation and
                                                              monitoring of construction sites.




                                                                                                           Page 103 of 108
The World Bank
Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



                                                Responsible Recommendations for the implementation of the
      Description of Action      Deadline
                                                   Entity                              AF
   Carry out a land diagnosis Before the start ANAEPMR      • Compensate the populations who voluntarily
   including the              of AF works                     make land available to allow the construction of
   examination/verification                                   multi-village drinking water supply systems to
   of the status of the land                                  compensate for any losses incurred.
   before starting any work                                 • Secure the land before the start of work relating
   relating to the AF and                                     to AF in all localities.
   ensure compensation for                                  • Associate and strongly involve the surveyors in
   any losses.                                                the localities where the subdivision is in progress
                                                              or in those where the subdivision is already
                                                              completed.
                                                            • Ensure the compliance of the subdivision
                                                              documents made available by the surveyors with
                                                              what is contained in the cadaster at the regional
                                                              and central levels.
                                                            • Produce the documentation required to ensure
                                                              the traceability of the actions carried out.
   Monitor and assess the     Throughout the ANAEPMR        • Adjust the volumes of water pumped annually
   risks of overexploitation implementation                   according to the annual recharge of the aquifer.
   and groundwater            of the project                • Monitor the village wells and boreholes located
   depletion.                 (at all phases of               near the sites of the multi-village drinking water
                              the project)                    supply system against the risk of drying out.
                                                            • Carry out piezometric monitoring in connection
                                                              with the environmental monitoring program.
   Take measures to deal      As soon as        ANAEPMR     • Raise awareness among workers and local
   with the possible risks of possible and                    populations.
   gender-based violence, in throughout the                 • Update the MGP and consider any complaints
   particular the risks of    implementation                  related to SEA/SH.
   SEA/SH.                    of the project                • Develop and adopt codes of good conduct.
                              (at all phases of             • Ensure adequate management of complaints
                              the project)                    related to SEA/SH.

 31.     In the meantime, overall operational oversight will continue to engage a wide range of
 stakeholders involved in implementation and ensure that (a) grant results are reviewed and approved; (b)
 intersectoral coordination mechanisms remain in place; and (c) key stakeholders are appropriately
 represented at the strategic level and also include environmental or social specialists as required.

 32.     Adequacy of applicable systems. The strengths, gaps, threats, and opportunities of the national
 systems presented in light of the six fundamental principles applicable to the initial Program remain the
 same for the AF and are as described in the World Bank’s Policy and Guidelines for Financing Programs
 for Results.

 F.        Stakeholder Engagement, Consultations, and Disclosure

 33.      Mapping of stakeholders. During preparation, a list of stakeholders, covering those who will be
 directly or indirectly affected by the Program and those who will directly and indirectly affect the Program,
 has been prepared. The main structures and institutions directly involved in the implementation of the AF


                                                                                                             Page 104 of 108
    The World Bank
    Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



     will be the same as for the initial Program. The main stakeholders are in particular the ANAEPMR, the
     MCVDD, the ABE, the ANDF, the local structures including the communes/town halls, the executing
     companies, the control offices, and the beneficiary communities affected by the program. Consultations
     with government officials, municipalities/town halls, executing companies, control offices, and the
     beneficiary communities concerned took place face-to-face.

     34.    Disclosure. The draft ESSA addendum will be published online on the MEM website and on the
     World Bank external website.


.




                                                                                                      Page 105 of 108
        The World Bank
        Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)


.
                                             ANNEX 5: MODIFIED PROGRAM ACTION PLAN
    Action                                                                                        Completion
    Description          Source                 DLI#   Responsibility        Timing               Measurement           Action

    Technical            Technical                     ANAEPMR          Due Date    31-Jan-2019   Recruitment of :       No Change
    Assistance for the                                                                            • The Technical
    ANAEPMR is in                                                                                 Assistant
    place
                                                                                                  • The Engineering
                                                                                                  Consulting firm
                                                                                                  • The Task Force
                                                                                                  for the recruitment
                                                                                                  of the regional
                                                                                                  operator under
                                                                                                  PPP arrangement

    Adoption of          Technical                     ANAEPMR          Due Date    30-Sep-2018   Preparation and        No Change
    standardized                                                                                  adoption of
    design                                                                                        standardized
    parameters and                                                                                design parameters
    construction                                                                                  and construction
    standards for                                                                                 standards for rural
    rural water                                                                                   water supply
    supply systems                                                                                systems

    Establishment of     Technical                     ANAEPMR          Due Date    30-Jun-2019   Establishment at       No Change
    an information                                                                                the ANAEPMR of
    system for rural                                                                              an information
    water supply                                                                                  system for water
    systems                                                                                       supply systems in
                                                                                                  rural areas with an
                                                                                                  updated inventory
                                                                                                  of all the assets
                                                                                                  and allowing the
                                                                                                  transmission of
                                                                                                  operational data.

    New Public           Fiduciary Systems             ARMP / BAI /     Due Date    31-Dec-2018   The establishment      No Change
    Procurement                                        ANAEPMR                                    of the
    Code and                                                                                      Procurement
    compliance of the                                                                             Control Unit
    ANAEPMR with                                                                                  (Cellule Contrôle
    the provisions of                                                                             des Marchés
    the new Public                                                                                Publics-CCMP)
    Procurement                                                                                   within ANAEPMR is
    Code                                                                                          completed. New
                                                                                                  public
                                                                                                  procurement code
                                                                                                  is followed and
                                                                                                  reflected in the
                                                                                                  agency's
                                                                                                  procedure manual.

    Conducting the       Fiduciary Systems             ANAEPMR          Recurrent   Continuous    Maintaining the        No Change
    procurement                                                                                   entire



                                                                                                                     Page 106 of 108
    The World Bank
    Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



process through                                                                           procurement
SIGMAP                                                                                    process through
                                                                                          the SIGMAP
                                                                                          system during the
                                                                                          implementation of
                                                                                          the Program.

Public               Fiduciary Systems          ARMP /          Recurrent   Yearly        The audit is            No Change
Procurement                                     ANAEPMR                                   completed.
Audit of the
Ministry in charge
of the Water
Sector

Internal audit and   Fiduciary Systems          ANAEMPR / BAI   Due Date    30-Sep-2019   Signature of a MoU      No Change
internal control                                / IGF                                     between the
                                                                                          ANAEPMR and IGF
                                                                                          as leader of the
                                                                                          IGM and the
                                                                                          DNCMP for
                                                                                          conducting joint
                                                                                          annual inspections
                                                                                          missions covering
                                                                                          the operational,
                                                                                          financial and
                                                                                          procurement
                                                                                          aspects.

Guidelines for       Environmental and Social   ANAEPMR         Due Date    30-Sep-2019   The final version of    No Change
Social and           Systems                                                              the GRGES has
Environmental                                                                             been approved by
Management                                                                                The Environmental
(GRGES)                                                                                   Agency of Benin
                                                                                          (ABE) in August
                                                                                          2019

Interinstitutional   Environmental and Social   ANAEPMR and     Due Date    31-Dec-2018   The cooperation         No Change
coordination         Systems                    ABE                                       agreement with
ANAEMPR - ABE                                                                             ABE is cleared by
                                                                                          the ANAEPMR
                                                                                          lawyers and is
                                                                                          signed.

Human Resources      Environmental and Social   ANAEPMR         Recurrent   Continuous    Maintain at least       No Change
of ANAEPMR for       Systems                                                              one social
Environmental                                                                             specialist and one
and Social                                                                                environmental
Management                                                                                specialist within
                                                                                          ANAEPMR.

Support to           Environmental and Social   ANAEPMR         Due Date    30-Jun-2020   Signature of an         No Change
municipalities for   Systems                                                              agreement
land management                                                                           between
                                                                                          ANAEPMR and the
                                                                                          ANDF for the
                                                                                          establishment of a




                                                                                                              Page 107 of 108
    The World Bank
    Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program Additional Financing (P176941)



                                                                                       Technical
                                                                                       Assistance to the
                                                                                       Municipalities
                                                                                       throughout the
                                                                                       process of
                                                                                       expropriation,
                                                                                       compensation,
                                                                                       mobilization and
                                                                                       assignment of the
                                                                                       various sites of the
                                                                                       Program.

.




                                                                                                        Page 108 of 108
