Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                    BURKINA FASO



                                     WATER SUPPLY AND SANITATION PROGRAM


                                  ___________________________________________________




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                            PROGRAM FOR RESULTS (PforR)




Public Disclosure Authorized
                               ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SYSTEM ASSESSMENT (ESSA)

                                  ____________________________________________________




                                                   Report prepared by




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                         Draft


                                                     April 19, 2018
                                                           TABLE OF CONTENTS
 LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ................................................................................. iii
 SUMMARY (ENGLISH) ........................................................................................................................... v
 RESUME (Français) .............................................................................................................................. xviii
 SECTION I. INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................ 1
     I.1 BACKGROUND ............................................................................................................................. 1
               I.2 ESSA GOALS AND APPROACH ................................................................................................. 1
               I.3 METHODOLOGY .......................................................................................................................... 2
 SECTION II. DESCRIPTION OF THE PROGRAM ............................................................................. 4
    II.1 CONTEXT ..................................................................................................................................... 4
               II.2 MAIN CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROGRAM .................................................................... 4
               II.3 ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL IMPACTS / RISKS OF THE PROGRAM ........................ 5
               II.4 OVERVIEW................................................................................................................................. 13
               II.5 PRIOR EXPERIENCES OF THE INSTITUTIONS INVOLVED IN THE PROGRAM ........... 16
 SECTION III. DESCRIPTION OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SYSTEM............... 17
    III.1 ENVIRONMENTAL SYSTEM ................................................................................................. 17
               III.2 SOCIAL ASPECT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM ........................................................................ 21
 SECTION IV. ASSESSMENT OF INSTITUTIONAL CAPACITY AND PERFORMANCE ........ 25
 SECTION V. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT ACTION PLAN .................. 32
 CONCLUSION ......................................................................................................................................... 37
 ANNEXES ................................................................................................................................................. 38
 Annex 1 : Main Legislative Arrangements ............................................................................................. 39
 Annex 2 : Legislation and Regulations Relevant to the Program ......................................................... 40
 Annex 3 : Expropriations and Compensations in Burkina Faso .......................................................... 44
 Annex 4 : Organizational Chart of the Ministry of the Environment, Green Economy, and Climate
 Change ....................................................................................................................................................... 46
 Annex 5 : Examples of main potential hazards associated to the Program ......................................... 47
 Annex 6 : Simplified Socio-environmental Screening Form ................................................................. 49
 Annex 7 : Environmental and Social Management Plan and Resettlement Action Plan ................... 53
 Annex 8 : Letter from the Minister in charge of the Environment relating to the Reclassification of
 DWS Systems in Urban Areas ................................................................................................................. 54
 Annex 9 : List of Main Documents Consulted ........................................................................................ 55
 Annex 10 : Public Consultations .............................................................................................................. 56
 Annex 11 : Account of the National Public Consultation ...................................................................... 58

 List ff   List of Tables
Table 1 : Core Principles ................................................................................................................ 26
Table 2 : Environmental and Social Management Action Plan ...................................................... 35




       BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA                                                   page ii
                     LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AEP              Drinking Water Supply (Approvisionnement en Eau Potable)
AFD              French Development Agency (Agence Française de Développement)
AMBF             Association of Burkina Faso Municipalities (Association des Municipalités du Burkina Faso)
AMOC             Roadmap in Support of the Decentralization of Water Supply and Sanitation Services
                 (Assistance à la Maîtrise d'Ouvrage Communale)
ATC              Municipal Technical Agent (Agent Technique Communal)
BUNEE            National Office for Environmental Assessments (Bureau National des Evaluations
                 Environnementales)
CCFV             Commission of Village Land Conciliations (Commission de Conciliations Foncières
                 Villageoises)
CFV              Village Land Commission (Commission Foncière Villageoise)
CVD              Village Land Commission (Comité Villageois de Développement)
DGA              General Directorate of Sanitation (Direction Générale de l’Assainissement)
DGFOMR           General Directorate of Land Tenure, Training and Organization of the Rural areas (Direction
                 Générale du Foncier, de la Formation et de l’Organisation du Monde Rural)
DGIH             General Directorate of Hydraulic Infrastructure (Direction Générale des Infrastructures
                 hydrauliques)
DGPC             General Directorate of Protection of Culture (Direction Générale de la Protection de la
                 Culture)
DGPE             General Directorate of Preservation of the Environment (Direction Générale de la
                 Préservation de l’Environnement)
DREA             Regional Directorate of Water and Sanitation (Direction Régionale de l’Eau et de
                 l’Assainissement)
DREEVCC          Regional Directorate of the Environment, Green Economy, and Climate Change (Direction
                 Régionale de l’Environnement, de l’Economie Verte et du Changement Climatique)
DTPEAAP          Technical Directorate of Cleanliness, Sanitation and Landscape Management (Direction
                 Technique de la Propreté, de l’Eau, de l’Assainissement et des Aménagements Paysagers)
DTUCFC           Technical Directorate of Urban Development, Construction, and Municipal Land Tenure
                 (Direction Technique de l’Urbanisme, de la Construction et du Foncier Communal)
IDA              International Development Association
ILO              International Labor Organization
LAQE.            Environment Quality Analysis Laboratory (Laboratoire d’Analyse de la Qualité de
                 l’Environnement)
MAAH             Ministry of Agriculture and Hydraulic Developments (Ministère de l’Agriculture et des
                 Aménagements Hydrauliques)
MATD             Ministry of Territorial Administration and Decentralization (Ministère de l’Administration du
                 Territoire et de la Décentralisation)

  BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA       page iii
MEA               Ministry of Water and Sanitation (Ministère de l’Eau et de l’Assainissement)
MEDD              Ministry of the Environment and Sustainable Development (Ministère de l’Environnement et
                  du Développement durable)
MEEVCC            Ministry of the Environement, Green Economy, and Climate Change (Ministère de
                  l’Environnement, de l’Economie Verte et du Changement Climatique)
MTGES             Technical Manual for Environmental and Social Management
NIES              Environmental and Social Impact Statement (Notice d’Impact Environnemental et Social)
NGO               Non-governental Organization
ONEA              National Office of Water and Sanitation (Office National de l’Eau et de l’Assainissement)
RAP               Resettlement Action Plan
PCD-AEPA          Plan Communal de Développement -AEPA
PCU               Program Coordination Unit
PforR             Program for Results
PGES              Plan de Gestion Environnementale et Sociale
PN-AHA            Programme national des Aménagements hydrauliques
PNDD              National Sustainable Development Program (Politique nationale de Développement durable)
PNDES             National Economic and Social Development Plan (Plan national de Développement
                  économique et social)
PNE               National Environmental Plan (Politique nationale d’Environnement)
PNGE              Programme National de Gouvernance de l’Eau
PN-GIRE           Plan National de Gestion intégrée des Ressources en Eau
RAF               Agrarian and Land Reform (Réorganisation agraire et foncière)
SFC               Municipal Land Service (Service foncier communal)
SFR               Service of Rural Land (Service du Foncier Rural)
SNIE              National Water Information System (Système National d’Information sur l’Eau)
UCP               Unité de Coordination du Programme




   BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA         page iv
                                   SUMMARY (ENGLISH)
                        __________________________________________


I. OBJECTIVE AND BACKGROUND
1. This Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) was undertaken by the World
    Bank as part of the preparation of the Program for Results (PforR) for the Water Supply,
    Sanitation, and Water Resource Information Program in Burkina Faso.

2. The Program supports the Government of Burkina Faso priorities for providing universal
   access to water supply services, sanitation services, and strengthening water resources
   management. Based on the objectives and actions proposed by the Government Sector
   Programs, the Program to be supported by this IDA operation will finance a subset of
   investments included in the National Drinking Water Supply Program (PN-AEP) and the
   National Wastewater and Excreta Sanitation Program (PN-AEUE) in selected geographical
   areas and the key actions of the National Integrated Water Resources Management Plan (PN-
   GIRE) and the National Water Governance Program (PNGE). However, the financing of the
   PforR will not involve the National Program of Hydraulic Developments (PN-AHA).

I. GENERAL PRESENTATION OF THE PROGRAM
3. The PforR development objectives are to improve access to water supply and sanitation
    services in targeted areas and to improve information on water resources.

Result Area 1. Improved Access to water supply
4. The Program will support the development of priority infrastructure to improve water supply
   and enhance its operational efficiency. Geographically, the PforR will cover urban areas
   including Ouagadougou and 12 additional secondary centers and rural areas of four selected
   regions.

Result Area 2. Improved access to sanitation
5. The PforR will support sustainable access to sanitation services. In urban areas, the Program
   will support the construction of 85,000 household latrines and 350 public latrines with
   male/female compartments (in schools and markets), benefiting about 850,000 people. In
   rural areas, the Program will support the construction of 50,000 household latrines and 900
   public latrines with male/female compartments (in schools, health centers, and markets),
   benefiting about 500,000 people

Result Area 3. Improved access to reliable information on water resources
6. The Program aims at strengthening water resources management by upgrading, optimizing,
   and modernizing surface and groundwater resources observation networks for surface water
   and groundwater sources; strengthening water resources knowledge; and operationalizing the
   SNIEau). For knowledge and monitoring of surface water, the PforR will support the
   optimization and modernization of the existing hydrometric network of Burkina Faso, by
   acquiring and installing the equipment and software required, and by equipping and training
   the staff of the departments in charge of data collection.



BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA   page v
7. The Program will support the operationalization of the already created SNIEau to make
   water-related data publicly available for users and policy-makers,.

Institutional Arrangement
8. At the institutional level, the PforR will be implemented through two executive agencies: the
   Ministry of Water and Sanitation (MEA) and the National Office of Water and Sanitation
   (ONEA). The Program Coordinating Unit (PCU) of the MEA will have overall responsibility
   for coordinating the Program activities, M & E and reporting and management. Within
   ONEA, a Program Support Unit (PSU) will support the divisions responsible for the
   implementation of water and sanitation activities in urban areas.

9. In targeted areas supported by the Program, the total scale of the financing required to
   implement the Program for water and sanitation is estimated to be US$350 million and for
   the WRM activities is estimated to be US$50. Thus, the estimated cost of the Program over
   the five-year period is US$400 million. The Program will be financed through GoBF
   financing of US$100 million and IDA support of US$300 million, which will be disbursed
   on the basis of verified results.

IV. MAIN ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS
➢ Result Area 1 Activities
In Urban Areas :
    • Construction of ground tanks, pumping stations and water-towers on two sites (East of
      the city, North of the city of Ouaga);
    • Extension and densification works to supply priority development zones (installation of
      725 km of distribution network, construction of 70,000 social connections and
      construction of 100 standpipes).
In Rural Areas :
    • Completion of 1,100 boreholes equipped with Human Motor Pumps (PMH), of which
      700 ones in community places and 400 ones in health centers and schools;
    • Construction of 90 drinking water supply systems;
    • Rehabilitation of 60 Simplified Drinking Water Supply Systems (DWS).

➢ Result Area 2 Activities
10. In both rural and urban areas, latrines are planned to be built, namely:
    • Completion of 135, 000 household latrines;
    • Equipment of 1,300 schools, health centers with adequate sanitation facilities (blocks of
        latrines with separate boys/ girls blocks with a cabin for disabled users in each block in
        the case of schools) and public places.

➢ Result Area 3 Activities
11. The Program will support the strengthening of knowledge and of monitoring systems of
    surface and groundwater resourcesand support the operationalization of SNIEau.

12. These activities overall have positive impact as knowledge and water information
   acquisition contributes to improving decision-making processes. However, potential


BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA   page vi
   excavation work may result in partial destruction of vegetation and in some instances result
   in loss of portions of land and disruption of socio-economic activities.

13. The Program has low adverse environmental and social risks. This is mainly due to the
   following aspects:

  ➢ Exclusion, by the very nature of a PforR, of any investment involving major
    environmental and social risks;
  ➢ Type and nature of the planned improvements and infrastructure;
  ➢ Absence, in accordance with the nature of development works and operations, of major
    cases of air or noise pollution or of significant degradation of the inhabited areas or of
    significant destruction or reduction of vegetation;
  ➢ Existence of various manageable and effective measures to mitigate potential risks and
    monitor impacts;
  ➢ Existence of institutions that are capable of managing most environmental and social
    aspects of the Program and of an appropriate institutional and legal framework.

Positive Environmental Impacts
14. The Program investments will have positive environmental impacts - both directly and
    indirectly, temporarily and permanently. Indeed, the Program will contribute, among other
    things, to:
       Reduce the frequency and incidence of waterborne diseases and improve hygiene and
         sanitation conditions;
       Build ONEA network capacity;
       Improve the management system of the DWS in four regions.

Environmental Risks
15. The main environmental risks associated to the Program are related to the following aspects:
      Destructuration of soil texture caused by deep excavations and trenching;
      Noise nuisance for neighboring populations and for construction site workers (related to
        the use of construction machinery);
      Accidents for workers and nearby residents associated to the circulation of construction
        machinery and possible non-compliance with the safety instructions;
      Accidents and safety problems, especially for the most vulnerable people (children,
        elderly people, women, disabled people) could be significant risks;
      Damage to objects of local cultural and religious heritage.

Beneficial Social benefits
16. The proposed activities by their very nature should bring advantages to the beneficiary
    populations. These advantages include, among others:
      Improvement of living, healthiness and hygiene conditions;
      Establishment of regular interactions between the population and those responsible for
        improvements;
      Socio-economic development of urban and rural areas;
      Fight against poverty and reduction of unemployment;
      Reduction of medical costs resulting from the treatment of diseases associated with


BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA   page vii
       water pollution and lack of sanitation measures;
      Implementation of investments (e.g. latrines) that have been strategically identified and
       that address the needs of all social categories, including women and girls, people with
       disabilities;
      Reduction of the time usually spent by women for finding drinking water and increasing
       the time devoted to childcare and leisure;
      Citizen participation, through strengthened mechanisms for access to information,
       consultation of citizens, as well as grievance management and implementation of
       measures to establish the right of petition and monitoring satisfaction among water
       services users;
      Compensation of any losses in a fair and prior manner through the respect of the
       provisions of social safeguards;
      Establishment of regular interactions with the population and the people responsible for
       improvements.

Social Risks
17. The construction phase will see the opening of construction sites for works and development,
    which will have negative social risks, insofar as they may:

    Require private land acquisition in part or totaly and, consequently, possible
     expropriation for public utility reasons and involuntary resettlement of residential
     households or businesses;
    Generate temporary disruptions in craft and economic activities of individuals and
     households, causing loss of income (shortfalls);
    Generate temporary difficulties in access of residents to their homes, shops and other
     public establishments (schools, dispensaries, etc.);
    Cause accidents on or around construction sites;
    Require temporary deviations for car traffic or restricted pedestrian crossing, and generate
     disruption in activities;
    Contribute – because of the presence of foreign construction workers – to an increase of
     violence and possible sexual harassment of women and increased sexually transmitted
     diseases and HIV/AIDS.
    Generate conflicts and acts of sabotage linked to the non-use of local labor.

18. Moreover, given that these social risks will mainly occur during the works, the latter will be
   organized accordingly and alternative access routes will be put in place and the affected
   people will be duly informed. These points will be the object of specific clauses in the
   Requirement specifications (Cahier des charges) of firms and a regular follow-up will be
   provided by the regional operators and the Commune. Arrangements will also be made for
   the fair and prior compensation of the property that will be affected by the works. Taking
   into account the above and past experience, the foreseeable social risks of the work are
   considered moderate.




BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA   page viii
OVERVIEW

19. The Program will have moderate environmental and social impacts. This is mainly due to the
   fact that the Program, designed as a PforR, excludes, as a matter of principle, any investment
   involving major environmental and social risks.

       ➔ Thus, in accordance with this policy, the Program will automatically exclude any
           activity posing a potentially significant environmental and social risk and
           significant negative impacts.

20. Therefore, any sub-project will be considered non-eligible as long as they involve the
   following:
    Construction or rehabilitation of works that would require social risks, i.e., a significant
       physical displacement of persons or the acquisition of large areas of private land or the
       demolition of a large number of single-family houses or else significant restricted access
       to economic and natural resources;
    Construction or rehabilitation of structures that could create or exacerbate existing land-
       based social conflicts;
    The realization of structures/works that could have an irreversible impact on
       physicalcultural resources of an archaeological or historical nature or places of worship;
    The realization of works having a high and irreversible impact on any zone classified as a
       site of biological or ecological interest.

21. Various controllable and effective measures will help to mitigate the potential risks of
   eligible subprojects, and monitor their impact, during both the works phase and the operation
   of the works.
V. EVALUATION OF THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS

THE ENVIRONMENTAL SYSTEM
Political Framework
22. In Burkina Faso, environmental protection is one of the priority areas for policies having to
    contribute to achieving the goals of sustainable development. Among these policies, the most
    important ones are:

        The National Economic and Social Development Plan (PNDES) aims at reforming
         institutions and modernizing the administration, developing the human capital and
         boosting buoyant sectors for the economy and employment.
        The National Sustainable Development Policy (PNDD) presents a vision for
         sustainable development by 2050.
        The National Environmental Policy (PNE) marks the government will to create a
         frame of reference for taking environmental issues into account in development
         policies and strategies.
        The overall goal of the Water Policy and Strategies is to contribute to sustainable
         development through appropriate solutions to water-related issues.
        The purpose of the National Sanitation Policy and Strategy is to contribute to
         sustainable development by providing adequate solutions to water related problems,


BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA   page ix
           in order to improve the living and housing conditions of the populations, to preserve
           their health and protect natural resources.
Legislative and Regulatory Framework
23. The Burkinabé Constitution, promulgated on 11 June 1991, defines the basic rights and
    obligations of citizens, determines the form of state organization, and organizes the
    implementation of the universal republican principle of the separation of powers. The
    constitution of the IVth Republic contains many environmental references.
Environnemental Code
24. The Environmental Code, adopted through Law No.006-2013/AN of 02 April 2013, is
    devoted to the Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA), the Study and the Notice of
    Impact on the Environment (EIE, NIE).

Water management
25. Law No. 002-2001 / an of 8 February 2001 on water management and implementing
    legislation provides in Article 39 for the EIA / NIE prior to the issuance of the carrying out of
    installations, works, works likely to present dangers to the health and public safety, to reduce
    water resources, to modify substantially the level, the mode of flow or the regime of the
    waters.

Pubic health
26. Law No. 23/94 / ADP of 19 May 1994 on the Public Health Code deals with health
    protection of the environment (air and water pollution).

27. Law 2005-022 on Public Hygiene Code governs public health in Burkina Faso, including
   hygiene on public roads and squares, hygiene of swimming pools and bathing areas, housing,
   foodstuffs, water, industrial and commercial facilities, schools, preschools and sanitary
   buildings, public buildings and the natural environment and the fight against noise.

Sustainable Development
28. Law No. 008-2014/AN of 8 April 2014 on the Orientation Law on Sustainable
    Development aims to create a unified national reference framework to ensure the coherence
    of the interventions of the actors through legal, political, and institutional reforms.

Decentralization
29. Law No. 021-2006/AN of 14 November 2006, on the General Code of Territorial
    Communities states that territorial authorities contribute to the administration of the territory,
    to economic, social, educational, health, cultural, and scientific development, as well as the
    improvement of the living environment.
Institutional Actors in charge of the environment
 The Ministry of the Environment, Green Economy, and Climate Change (MEEVCC)
   provides the implementation and monitoring of the Government policy on the environment
   and sanitation of the living environment. The MEEVCC includes several directorates, among
   which: the General Directorate for the Preservation of the Environment and the Directorate
   for the Prevention of Pollution and Environmental Risks.


BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA     page x
 The National Office for Environmental Assessments (BUNEE) is responsible for
  coordinating the implementation and monitoring of the national environmental assessments
  policy.
 The Ministry of Water and Sanitation (MEA), whose mandate is the definition and
  implementation of the national policy on water and sanitation, wastewater and excreta.
 The National Office for Water and Sanitation (ONEA), under the supervision of the
  Ministry of Water and Sanitation (MEA), aims to: (i) create, manage and protection of
  facilities for collecting, supplying, treating, and distributing drinking water for urban and
  industrial purposes; and (ii) create, promote and improve and manage collective, individual
  or autonomous sanitation facilities for the disposal of wastewater and excreta in urban and
  semi-urban areas.
 The environmental units, created by decree N ° 2008-125 / PRES / PM / MECV of March 7,
  2008, constitute operational entities in the field of environment in the various ministerial
  departments, the administrative regions and the public and private companies.

SOCIAL ASPECTS MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
National Legal Framework
30. The legislatif and regulatory context relates to land legislation, public participation, land
    acquisition, resettlement and land restructuring mechanisms.

31. From the legal point of view, according to Law No. 034-2012/AN of 02 July 2012 on
   Agrarian and Land Reform (RAF) in Burkina Faso, there are three types of land ownership
   regimes in Burkina Faso: (i) Legal State ownership regime; (ii) Local authority ownership
   regime; and (iii) Land tenure rights of individuals.

Right to Property
32. The Constitution of Burkina Faso guarantees the right to private property for all, its
    protection and expropriation. No one shall be deprived of their enjoyment except for
    reasons of public utility and on condition of just compensation determined in accordance
    with the law. This compensation is a prerequisite to the expropriation, except in case of
    emergency or force majeure.
Institutional Actors
33. In terms of land management in Burkina Faso, management organizations or structures are
    defined by the RAF and Law No. 034-2009/AN on rural land tenure and priority
    implementation texts. These organizations are found at four levels: national, regional,
    municipality and village.

    At the national level: With reference to Law No. 034, a national body is set up for
     consultation, monitoring and evaluation of rural land policy and legislation bringing
     together all public, private and public sector, and civil society stakeholders. Currently
     this instance is not yet operational.
    At the regional level: The competent deconcentrated technical services of the State are
     the ones in charge of providing support to the Rural Land Services (SFR) of local
     authorities as stipulated by Law No. 034 on rural land tenure.



BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA   page xi
    At the municipality level: the Rural Land Service (SFR) at the level of each rural
     municipality is responsible for all the activities of management and security of the land
     area of the municipality and activities of land tenure security of the rural land property
     of individuals on the municipal territory.
    At the village level: A Village Land Commission, created in each village and composed
     of customary and traditional village authorities in charge of land, is responsible for
     contributing to securing and managing the estate.

Constitutional Appeal Bodies
34. The Office of the Ombudsman of the Republic of Faso was established by Organic Law No.
    22/94/ADP of 17 May 1994. The Ombudsman is an independent administrative authority,
    which receives no instruction from any political, administrative, legislative, or judicial
    authority, and which receives the grievances of the citizens relating to the working of State
    administrations, municipal authorities, public institutions and any other organization
    entrusted with a public service mission.

Conclusion
    In the areas of environmental and social management, most Burkinabe institutions are in
      place and their mandate is clearly defined. The national environmental impact assessment
      system is based on a well-rounded process of diagnosis and assessment of the nature of
      impacts and preparation of appropriate environmental and social safeguards.
    However, the institutions have limited human resources with a strong need for capacity
     building. Moreover, they do not have enough financial resources to function in a suitable
     way.
    Administrative procedures are generally slow and do not allow for rapid and timely
     decision-making (see, for example, long delays in obtaining the Environmental
     Compliance Advice from project proponents).
    Public consultations only concern ESIAs in public inquiries, whereas these should extend
     to NIES.
    Public inquiries are often public information sessions and do not result in meaningful
     public consultations that promote stakeholder participation in decision-making.
    The complaints management system is not operational, especially in the context of
     interventions in rural areas.


VI. ADEQUACY OF APPLICABLE SYSTEMS

35. The strengths, gaps, risks and opportunities of country systems are presented in the light of
   the Fundamental Principles applicable to the Program - as described in the Bank Policy and
   Directive on the Financing of Programs for Results (PforR).




BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA   page xii
   ➔ Core Principle 1: Overall principle of environmental and social impact assessment and
       management.. This Principle is applicable to the Program. to the Program. Indeed, the
       work funded under the Program could entail negative impacts at low to moderate risk.
       The ESES has been prepared and its recommendations will be integrated into the overall
       action plan of the program.
        With regard to strengths: Burkina Faso has adequate regulatory andlegal
           frameworks to appropriately manage the environmental and social impacts of the
           Program and an institution in charge of environmental assessments (BUNEE).
        With regard to weaknesses and gaps : At the institutional level, coordination
           between the central and the regional levels is not adequate (for example, between the
           BUNEE and the regional directorates), the sharing of information is not efficient and
           this state of affairs does not facilitate monitoring of the implementation of project
           ESMPs. Institutions in charge of environmental and social management need human
           capacity building and do not have enough financial resources to function in a suitable
           way
        With regard to actions and opportunities : Organization of initiatives to raise
           awareness among all actors and stakeholders about the problems of environmental
           management, of impact. Initiated measures to strengthen more appropriately the
           capacities of central and local officials in environmental and social safeguard
           procedures.
        With regard to risks: Poor implementation of environmental and social management
           rules and procedures. Failure to enforce current environmental regulations in a timely
           manner.

   ➔ Core Principle 2: Natural Habitats and Physical and Cultural Resources
       This principle is not applicable to the Program. Indeed, no program activity will take
       place within biodiversity protection areas. No investment will be eligible if it threatens
       fragile ecosystems. No investment will be eligible if it directly threatens the cultural and
       religious heritage of a region.

   ➔ Core Principle 3: Public and Workers Safety
       This principle is applicable. Indeed, the work undertaken under the Program could have
       an impact on the safety of the public and construction site workers. Site workers may be
       exposed to work-related accidents/injuries, water pollution, air pollution, noise, vibration,
       solid waste, and toxic or hazardous materials on the site. The population in areas close to
       the sites could also be exposed to the same dangers.
        With regard to strengths: The legislatif system of Burkina Faso includes provisions
           on safety on building sites. The safety of workers is ensured by the Labor
           Inspectorate. There are national policies and guidelines concerning the public and
           workers safety and health.
        With regard to weaknesses and gaps: The provisions on worker safety are not always
           included in civil works contracts. The insufficient number of screening officers does
           not allow for regular monitoring of the application of site provisions.
        With regard to opportunities: Presence at the local level of branches of the Labor
           Inspectorate



BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA   page xiii
        With regard to risks: Inability to enforce the current environmental, social and
         security regulations in a timely manner. Non-involvement of Labor Inspectorate
         officials.

   ➔ Core Principle 4: Land Acquisition
       This principle is applicable. Indeed, the works could involve temporary or permanent
       and physical or economic displacements of residential households or businesses and
       require the acquisition of private land and, consequently, expropriation for reasons of
       public utility and involuntary resettlement of residential households or businesses.
        With regard to strengths: The indemnities or compensation to the affected people are
          defined by the existing land regime in Burkina Faso
        With regard to weaknesses and gaps: National land acquisition procedures are
          unclear and incomplete as regard the Bank requirements. Informal occupants are not
          recognized by the Burkinabe law. Customary land ownership is recognized but must
          be confirmed before being compensated.
        With regard to opportunities: Provide a compensation system, including for informal
          occupants. Provide fair and prior compensation. Provide adequate follow-up of the
          affected people so that they recover at least the ex-ante project conditions and that
          they do not become poor anymore.
        With regard to risks: Lack of human resources and financial means at the level of
          national and local institutions in charge of enforcing laws and arrangements. Lack of
          coordination among the relevant institutional actors.

   ➔ Core Principle 5: Social Considération: Indigenous Peoples and Vulnerable Groups
       This principle is applicable (with the exception that there are no indigenous peoples in
       Burkina Faso, as defined by the Bank's related policy).
        With regard to strengths: Surveys aim to inform the populations on the realization of
          the project and to collect their observations; information posters are posted for this
          purpose in public places.
        With regard to weaknesses and gaps: The Burkinabe legislation does not provide for
          specific measures for vulnerable groups. The local complaint management system is
          not operational
        With regard to opportunities: Define and implement a stakeholder engagement
          strategy as part of the outreach program, targeting in particular vulnerable groups.
          Specify any form of support to the most vulnerable groups. Ensure the functionality
          of the complaint management system
        With regard to risks: Lack of clarity and coherence regarding the mechanism for
          implementing public consultations and stakeholder engagement could alienate the
          poor and vulnerable groups.

   ➔ Core Principle 6: Social Considerations – Social Conflict
       This principle is not applicable. Indeed, the program is not implemented in conflict
       areas.




BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA   page xiv
Conclusion
36. From the previous analysis of the legal and institutional framework for the environmental
    and social management in Burkina Faso, a number of conclusions can be drawn:

    Most institutions are in place and their mandate has been defined. However, their actions
     are not sufficienty coordinated and they lack human and financial resources.
    There is no efficient coordination between central level and regional level for
     environmental and social management.
    Administrative procedures are slow and do not allow for quick and timely decision-
     making.
    Public consultations conducted in the framework of public inquiries concern only ESIAs
     whereas these should also extend to NIES
    The complaints management system is not operational, especially under rural
     interventions.

37. It has to be recognized that these gaps wille ventually to be bridged by appropriate reforms
   and arrangements. Together with the community of technical and financial partners, the
   World Bank is already playing and could play further an important role in supporting the
   needed improvements.

38. However, as of now, in keeping with this PforR, it is possible to seize the opportunity to
   improve certain technical and administrative aspects, to create a new dynamic, to specify and
   consolidate partnerships and synergies among stakeholders, and strengthen the institutional
   capacity of all stakeholders involved in environmental and social safeguards at the national,
   regional, communal and village levels.

   ➔ In light of the Burkina Faso environmental and social management systems previously
       analyzed, the proposed program is considered adequate for Program for Results
       (PforR) financing.

VII. ACTION PLAN FOR ENVIRONMENTALL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT
39. The Program will support specific measures to improve the conditions for the performance of
    the environmental and social management system in the implementation and monitoring of
    the Program activities. These measures are proposed as part of an Environmental and Social
    Management Action Plan (ESM/AP) - this Plan is part of the overall Program Action Plan as
    such. The ESM/AP identifies three components of recommendations, each with distinct and
    complementary activities.

   ➢ First component of the ESM/AP: Strengthening the Program’s Environmental and
     Social Management System for Investment. This component includes the following
     elements:
        Technical Manual. Preparation of a Technical Manual for Environmental and Social
         Management (MTGES) of the Program investments for the Ministry of Water and
         Sanitation (MEA), particularly its National Office of Water and Sanitation (ONEA)
         and all technical services, as well as all stakeholders, who will be involved at

BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA   page xv
           national, regional and local level in the implementation of the Program, so that
           environmental and social management procedures are duly understood, perfectly
           owned and followed. The Manual, which will particularly address the gaps identified
           in the national systems (see the six Core principles), will be an integral part of the
           Progamme Operations Manual (Special Annex) and will include, among other things,
           land acquisition procedures and the grievance mechanism.

        Interinstitutional Convention between the Ministry of Water and Sanitation (MEA),
         National Office for Water and Sanitation (ONEA), on one hand, and the National
         Bureau of Environmental Assessments (BUNEE), on the other hand. The content of
         this agreement will establish the conditions for collaboration (awareness raising;
         information and training; rapid review and certification of sub-projects;
         environmental and social control and monitoring; etc.). This convention could be
         supplemented by collaboration protocols with other well-targeted institutions.

   ➢ Second component of the ESM/AP: Capacity Building in Environmental and Social
     Management of key actors and representatives of Program stakeholders. This component
     includes two distinct types of activities:

        PCU Human Resources for Environmental and Social Management. Recruitment
         or appointment by MEA and ONEA of a social specialist and an environmental
         specialist within the PCU, who will be employed full-time throughout the
         implementation of the Program.

        Training at MTGES. A training program will be developed for the implementation
         of the MTGES for all the different stakeholders involved in the implementation of the
         Program, in particular: the members of the environmental units of the MEA, ONEA,
         and of the other ministries involved, the members of the communal "Environment and
         local development" commissions and of the "Land and Land Development"
         commissions, of BUNEE, and of Regional Directorates for the Environment, Green
         Economy and Climate Change (DREEVCC) of social action, etc..

        Specialized Training in Monitoring and Control of GES mitigation and
         reporting measures: This more in-depth training in monitoring and control and
         reporting preparation will be provided to representatives of all local, regional and
         national institutions (including contractors) involved in collecting, processing and
         analysing information regarding the implementation of mitigation measures.

40. All the costs for these elements of the ESM/AP will be included in the overall budget of the
   Program. Conversely, the cost of environmental and social mitigation measures will be
   incorporated into the budgets of the investment sub-projects themselves.




BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA   page xvi
                       ________________________________________


               The World Bank organized the public consultation with representatives
               of key stakeholders, civil society organizations and the private sector to
               present and discuss the draft ESSA.
               Throughout the duration of the Program, the Burkinabe party will be
               responsible for organizing consultations on the specific activities
               (investment sub-projects) of the Program.
               The final revised version of ESSA will be publicly disseminated
               through the MEA/ONEA website and also the World Bank external
               website.
               Hard copies will be available at national and regional levels with the
               institutions involved.


                     ____________________________________________




BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA   page xvii
                                      RESUME (Français)
                        __________________________________________


I. OBJECTIF ET CONTEXTE
    1. Cette Évaluation des Systèmes Environnementaux et Sociaux (ESES) a été entreprise par
       la Banque mondiale dans le cadre de la préparation du Programme pour les Résultats
       (PPR) du secteur de l’Eau, l’Assainissement et la Gestion intégrée des Ressources en Eau
       au Burkina Faso.

   2. Le Programme appuie les priorités du Gouvernement du Burkina Faso pour fournir un
      accès universel aux services d'approvisionnement en eau, aux services d'assainissement,
      et renforcer la gestion des ressources en eau. Sur la base des objectifs et des actions
      proposées par les Programmes sectoriels gouvernementaux, le Programme à soutenir par
      cette opération IDA financera un sous-ensemble d'investissements inclus dans le
      Programme national d’Approvisionnement en Eau Potable (PN-AEP) et le Programme
      national d’Assainissement des Eaux usées et Excrétas (PN-AEUE) dans des zones
      géographiques sélectionnées et les actions clés du Plan National de Gestion intégrée des
      Ressources en Eau (PN-GIRE) et du Programme National de Gouvernance de l’Eau
      (PNGE). Cependant le financement du PPR ne concernera pas le Programme national des
      Aménagements hydrauliques (PN-AHA).

I. PRESENTATION GENERALE DU PROGRAMME
    3. Les objectifs de développement du PPR sont d'améliorer l'accès aux services
       d'approvisionnement en eau et d'assainissement dans les zones ciblées et de renforcer
       l’information sur les ressources en eau.

Domaine de Résultats 1. Accès amélioré à l’approvisionnement en eau
  4. Le Programme soutiendra le développement d'infrastructures prioritaires pour améliorer
     l'approvisionnement en eau et son efficacité opérationnelle. Sur le plan géographique, le
     PPR couvrira des zones urbaines, comprenant Ouagadougou et 12 centres secondaires et
     les zones rurales de quatre régions sélectionnées.

Domaine de Résultats 2. Accès amélioré à l'assainissement
  5. Le PPR soutiendra l'accès durable aux services d'assainissement. Dans les zones urbaines,
     le PPR appuiera la construction de 85.000 latrines domestiques et 350 latrines publiques
     avec des sections distinctes pour hommes et femmes (dans des écoles et des marchés),
     pour bénéficier environ 850.000 personnes. Dans les zones rurales, le programme
     appuiera la construction de 50.000 latrines domestiques et 900 latrines publiques avec des
     sections distinctes pour hommes et femmes (dans des écoles, centres de santé et
     marchés), pour bénéficier environ 500.000 personnes.




BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA   page xviii
Domaine de Résultats 3. Accès amélioré à une information fiable en matière de ressources en
eau
    6. Le programme vise à renforcer la gestion des ressources en eau en améliorant, optimisant
       et modernisant les réseaux d'observation des ressources en eaux de surface et souterraines
       pour les sources d'eau de surface et souterraines; renforcer les connaissances sur les
       ressources en eau; et opérationnaliser le SNIEau. Pour la connaissance et le suivi des
       eaux de surface, le PforR soutiendra l'optimisation et la modernisation du réseau
       hydrométrique existant au Burkina Faso, en acquérant et en installant les équipements et
       logiciels nécessaires, et en équipant et formant le personnel des services chargés de la
       collecte des données. Pour la connaissance et le suivi des eaux de surface, le PPR
       soutiendra l'optimisation et la modernisation du réseau hydrométrique existant du
       Burkina Faso, en acquérant et installant les équipements et logiciels nécessaires et en
       équipant et formant le personnel des départements chargés de la collecte de données.

   7. Le Programme appuiera l'opérationnalisation du SNIE, qui a déjà été créé, pour rendre les
      données relatives à l'eau accessibles publiquement aux utilisateurs et aux décideurs.

Dispositif institutionnel
   8. Au plan institutionnel, le PPR sera mis en œuvre à travers deux agences d'exécution :
       Ministère de l’Eau et de l’Assainissement (MEA) et l’Office national de l’Eau et de
       l’Assainissement (ONEA). L’Unité de Coordination du Programme (UCP) du MEA aura
       la responsabilité générale de la coordination des activités du Programme, du suivi-
       évaluation et reportage et de la gestion. Au sein de l’ONEA, une unité d’appui au
       Programme (UAP) appuiera les divisions chargées de la mise en œuvre des activités de
       l’eau et l’assainissement en milieu urbain.

   9. Dans les zones ciblées par le Programme, l'ampleur totale du financement nécessaire pour
      mettre en œuvre le Programme pour l'eau et l'assainissement est estimée à 350 millions
      de dollars USA et les activités de gestion des ressources en eau sont estimées à 50 dollars
      USA. Ainsi, le coût estimatif du programme sur la période de cinq ans est de 400 millions
      de dollars. Le programme sera financé par un financement du GoBF de 100 millions de
      dollars EU et un soutien de l'IDA de 300 millions de dollars EU, qui seront décaissés sur
      la base de résultats vérifiés

IV. PRINCIPALES INCIDENCES ENVIRONNEMENTALES ET SOCIALES
➢ Activités du Domaine de Résultat 1
En milieu urbain
    • La construction de réservoirs au sol, de stations de pompage et de châteaux sur deux sites
       (l’Est de la ville, Nord de la ville de Ouaga) ;
    • Les travaux d’extension et de densification pour l’alimentation des zones de
       développement prioritaires (pose de 725 km de réseau de distribution, réalisation de 70
       000 branchements sociaux et construction de 100 bornes fontaines).
En milieu rural
    • La réalisation de 1.100 forages équipés de Pompes à Motricité humaine (PMH) dont 700
       dans les lieux communautaires et 400 dans centres de santé et établissements scolaires ;
    • La réalisation de 90 systèmes d’adduction d’eau potable ;

BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA   page xix
   • La réhabilitation de 60 Adductions d’Eau potables simplifiés (AEP).

➢ Activités du Domaine de Résultat 2
  10. En milieu rural et en milieu urbain il est prévu la réalisation de latrines, à savoir :
  • La réalisation de 135 000 latrines familiales;
  • L’équipement de 1 300 écoles et centres de santé en ouvrages d’assainissement adéquats
      (blocs de latrines avec des blocs séparés garçons/filles avec une cabine pour handicapés
      dans chaque bloc dans le cas des écoles et lieux publics.

➢ Activités du Domaine de Résultat 3
  11. Le Programme soutiendra le renforcement des connaissances et des systèmes de suivi des
      ressources en eau de surface et souterraines et l'opérationnalisation du Système national
      d’Information sur l’Eau (SNIEau).

   12. Ces activités ont dans l’ensemble des impacts positifs dans la mesure où l’acquisition de
       connaissances et informations sur l’eau contribuent à l’amélioration des processus
       décisionnels. Toutefois, les travaux éventuels de fouilles pourraient engendrer une
       destruction partielle de la végétation et occasionner par endroits des pertes de portions de
       terrains et des perturbations d’activités socio-économiques.

   13. Le Programme comportera des risques environnementaux et sociaux adverses faibles.
       Cela tient essentiellement aux aspects suivants :

  ➢ L’exclusion, en vertu de la nature même d’un PPR, de tout investissement comportant des
    risques environnementaux et sociaux majeurs;
  ➢ Le type et la nature des aménagements et des infrastructures prévus;
  ➢ L’absence, en vertu de la nature d’ouvrages et opérations d’aménagement, des cas
    majeurs de pollution atmosphérique ou sonore ou de dégradation significative de
    l'environnement habité ou de destruction ou réduction importante d’espaces verts ;
  ➢ L’existence de différentes mesures maîtrisables et efficaces, permettant d’atténuer les
    risques éventuels et assurer le suivi d’impact;
  ➢ L’existence d’institutions capables de gérer la plupart des aspects environnementaux et
    sociaux du Programme et d’un cadre institutionnel et juridique approprié.

Retombées environnementales bénéfiques
   14. Les investissements du Programme auront des impacts environnementaux positifs - à la
       fois d’une manière directe et indirecte, temporaire et permanente. En effet, le Programme
       contribuera, entre autres choses, à :
     Réduire la fréquence et l’incidence des maladies hydriques et améliorer des conditions
        d’hygiène et de salubrité ;
     Renforcer les capacités du réseau de l’ONEA ;
     Renouveler le dispositif de gestion des AEP dans quatre régions ;

Risques environnementaux
   15. Les principaux risques potentiels du Programme sont liés aux aspects suivants :


BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA   page xx
      Déstructuration de la texture du sol causée par des excavations en profondeur et le
       creusement de tranchées;
      Les engins de chantier et le matériel bruyant pouvant créer
      Nuisances sonores pour les populations riveraines et pour les ouvriers sur les
       chantiers (à cause de l’utilisation d’engins de chantier);
      Accidents pour les travailleurs et les populations riveraines à cause de la circulation des
       engins et l’éventuel non-respect des consignes de sécurité pouvant provoquer des ;
      Accidents et problèmes de sécurité surtout pour les personnes les plus vulnérables
       (enfants, personnes âgées, femmes, handicapés, etc.) pouvant constituer des risques non
       négligeables ;
      Dégâts à des objets du patrimoine culturel et religieux local.

Retombées sociales bénéfiques
   16. Les activités proposées devraient par leur nature même être avantageuses pour les
       populations bénéficiaires. Ces avantages incluent, entre autres :
     L’amélioration des conditions de vie, de salubrité et d’hygiène;
     L’instauration d’interactions régulières entre la population et les responsables des
        aménagements;
     Le développement socio-économique des zones urbaines et rurales ;
     La lutte contre la pauvreté et la réduction du chômage ;
     La réduction du montant des frais médicaux résultant du traitement des maladies
        associées à la pollution de l’eau et au manque de mesures d’assainissement;
     La mise en œuvre d’investissements (par ex. les latrines) qui ont été identifiés de
        manière stratégique et qui répondent aux besoins de toutes les catégories sociales, y
        compris les femmes et les jeunes filles ;
     La réduction du temps traditionnellement consacré par les femmes à la recherche de
        l’eau potable et l’augmentation du temps consacré aux soins des enfants et au loisir ;
     La participation citoyenne, à travers le renforcement des mécanismes d’accès à
        l’information, de consultation des citoyens, ainsi que de gestion des doléances et la mise
        en place de mesures visant à instaurer le droit de pétition et de suivi de la satisfaction
        des usagers des services de l’eau ;
     La compensation des éventuelles pertes de manière juste et préalable à travers le respect
        des dispositions de sauvegardes sociales ;
     L’instauration d’interactions régulières avec la population et les responsables des
        aménagements.

Risques sociaux
   17. La phase des travaux verra l’ouverture de chantiers de construction d’ouvrages et
       d’aménagement, qui pourraient avoir des risques sociaux négatifs, dans la mesure où
       cela, dans certains cas, peut :
    Nécessiter l’acquisition partielle ou totale de terrains privés et, par conséquent,
       l’expropriation éventuelle pour cause d’utilité publique et des réinstallations involontaires
       de ménages résidentiels ou d’entreprises ;
    Générer des perturbations temporaires d’activités artisanales et économiques des
       personnes et des ménages, causant des pertes des revenus (manque à gagner) ;



BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA   page xxi
    Créer des difficultés temporaires d'accès des habitants à leurs logements, à leurs
     commerces et autres établissements publics (écoles, dispensaires, etc.) ;
    Provoquer des accidents sur les chantiers ou autour des chantiers;
    Nécessiter de déviations temporaires de la circulation de voitures ou des restrictions du
     passage des piétons et générer des perturbations dans les activités;
    Contribuer – à cause de la présence de travailleurs de chantier étrangers – à un
     accroissement de la violence et des actes éventuels d’harcèlement sexuel des femmes et
     l’accroissement de maladies sexuellement transmissibles et du VIH/SIDA ;
    Engendrer des conflits et des actes de sabotage liés à la non utilisation de la main
     d’œuvre locale.

   18. Par ailleurs, compte tenu du fait que ces risques sociaux se manifesteront principalement
       pendant les travaux, ces derniers seront organisés en conséquence et des voies d’accès
       alternatives seront mises en place et les personnes affectées seront dûment informées. Ces
       points feront l’objet de clauses spécifiques des Cahiers de Charges des entreprises et un
       suivi régulier sera assuré par les opérateurs régionaux et la Commune. Des dispositions
       seront prises également pour la compensation juste et préalable des biens qui seront
       touchés par les travaux. Tenant compte de ce qui précède et de l'expérience passée, les
       risques sociaux prévisibles des travaux sont considérés modérés.

VUE D’ENSEMBLE

   19. Le Programme comportera des impacts environnementaux et sociaux limités ou modérés.
       Cela tient essentiellement au fait que le Programme, conçu comme un PPR, exclut, par
       principe, tout investissement comportant des risques environnementaux et sociaux
       majeurs.

       ➔ Ainsi, en conformité avec cette politique, le Programme exclura d’office toute
           activité posant un risque environnemental et social potentiellement important et des
           impacts négatifs significatifs.

   20. Par conséquent, sera considéré comme non éligible tout sous-projet concernant :
    La construction ou la réhabilitation d’ouvrages qui comporterait des risques sociaux, à
       savoir un déplacement physique important de personnes ou d’acquisition de vastes
       surface de terres privées ou de démolition d’un grand nombre de maisons individuelles
       ou encore des restrictions d’accès significatives aux ressources économiques et
       naturelles;
    La construction ou la réhabilitation d’ouvrages qui pourraient engendrer ou exacerber des
       conflits sociaux de nature foncière existants ;
    La réalisation d’ouvrages/travaux qui pourraient avoir un impact irréversible sur des
       ressources culturelles physiques de nature archéologique ou historique ou des lieux de
       culte;
    La réalisation des travaux ayant un impact élevé et irréversible sur toute zone classée
       comme site d’intérêt biologique ou écologique.




BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA   page xxii
   21. Différentes mesures maîtrisables et efficaces permettront d’atténuer les risques éventuels
       des sous-projets éligibles, et assurer le suivi de leur impact, à la fois pendant la phase des
       travaux et lors du fonctionnement des ouvrages.

V. EVALUATION DES SYSTEMES NATIONAUX

LE SYSTEME ENVIRONNEMENTAL
Cadre politique
   22. Au Burkina Faso, la protection de l’environnement constitue un des axes prioritaires des
       politiques devant contribuer à la réalisation des objectifs du développement durable.
       Parmi ces politiques, les plus importantes sont les suivantes :

        Le Plan National de Développement Economique et Social (PNDES), vise à réformer
         les institutions et à moderniser l’administration, à développer le capital humain et à
         dynamiser les secteurs porteurs pour l’économie et l’emploi.
        La Politique nationale de développement durable (PNDD) présente une vision en
         matière de développement durable à l’horizon de 2050.
        La Politique nationale d’Environnement (PNE) marque la volonté du gouvernement
         de créer un cadre de référence pour la prise en compte des questions
         environnementales dans les politiques et stratégies de développement.
        La Politique et stratégies en matière d’eau a pour objectif général de contribuer au
         développement durable en par des solutions appropriées aux problèmes liés à l’eau.
        La Politique et stratégie nationales en matière d’assainissement a pour objectif de
         contribuer au développement durable en apportant des solutions appropriées aux
         problèmes liés à l’assainissement, afin d’améliorer les conditions de vie et d’habitat
         des populations, de préserver leur santé et de protéger les ressources naturelles.
Cadre législatif et réglementaire
   23. La Constitution burkinabé, promulguée le 11 juin 1991, définit les droits et obligations
       fondamentaux des citoyens, détermine la forme d’organisation de l’état, organise la mise
       en œuvre du principe républicain universel de la séparation des pouvoirs. La constitution
       de la IV° République contient de nombreuses références environnementales.
Code de l’environnement
   24. Le Code de l’Environnement, adopté par la loi N°006-2013/AN du 02 avril 2013, est
       consacrée à l’Evaluation Environnementale Stratégique (EES), à l’Etude et à la Notice
       d’Impact sur l’Environnement (EIE, NIE).

Gestion de l'eau
   25. La loi n ° 002-2001 du 8 février 2001 relative à la gestion et à la mise en œuvre de l'eau
       prévoit à l'article 39 pour l'EIE / NIE avant la réalisation des installations, travaux,
       travaux susceptibles de présenter des dangers pour la santé et la sécurité publique, pour
       réduire les ressources en eau, pour modifier sensiblement le niveau, le mode
       d'écoulement ou le régime des eaux.




BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA    page xxiii
Santé publique
   26. La loi n ° 23/94 / ADP du 19 mai 1994 portant code de la santé publique porte sur la
       protection de la santé de l'environnement (pollution de l'air et de l'eau).

   27. La loi 2005-022 sur l'hygiène publique régit la santé publique au Burkina Faso,
       notamment l'hygiène des routes et des places publiques, l'hygiène des piscines et des
       zones de baignade, le logement, les denrées alimentaires, l'eau, les installations
       industrielles et commerciales, les écoles maternelles et les bâtiments sanitaires. , les
       bâtiments publics et l'environnement naturel et la lutte contre le bruit.

Développement durable
   28. La loi N° 008-2014/AN du 08 avril 2014 portant loi d’orientation sur le développement
       durable a pour but de créer un cadre national unifié de référence pour assurer la
       cohérence des interventions des acteurs à travers des réformes juridiques, politiques et
       institutionnelles.

Décentralisation
   29.A noter enfin que d’après la loi n°021-2006/AN du 14 novembre 2006, portant code
      général des Collectivités Territoriales, les collectivités territoriales concourent à
      l’administration du territoire, au développement économique, social, éducatif, sanitaire,
      culturel et scientifique ainsi qu’à l’amélioration du cadre de vie.
Acteurs institutionnels chargés de l’environnement
 Le Ministère de l’Environnement, de l’Economie Verte et du Changement Climatique
   (MEEVCC) assure la mise en œuvre et le suivi de la politique du Gouvernement en matière
   d’environnement et d’assainissement du cadre de vie. Le MEEVCC inclut plusieurs
   directions, parmi lesquelles : la Direction générale de la Préservation de l’Environnement et
   la Direction de la Prévention des Pollutions et des Risques Environnementaux.
 Le Bureau National des Evaluations Environnementales (BUNEE) a pour missions la
   coordination de la mise en œuvre et du suivi de la politique nationale en matière
   d'évaluations environnementales.
 Le Ministère de l’Eau et de l’Assainissement (MEA), dont le mandat est la définition et la
   mise en œuvre de la politique national en matière d’eau potable et d’assainissement.
 L’Office national de l’Eau et de l’Assainissement (ONEA), placé sous la tutelle du
   Ministère de l’Eau et de l’Assainissement (MEA) a pour objet : (i) la création, la gestion et la
   protection des installations de captage, d’adduction, de traitement, et de distribution d’eau
   potable pour les besoins urbains et industriels; et (ii) la création, la promotion et
   l’amélioration ainsi que la gestion des installations d’assainissement collectifs, individuels ou
   autonomes pour l’évacuation des eaux usées et des excrétas en milieu urbain et semi urbain.

SYSTEME DE GESTION DES ASPECTS SOCIAUX
Cadre légal national
   30. Le contexte législatif et réglementaire a trait à la législation foncière, la participation du
       public, les mécanismes d’acquisition de terrain, de réinstallation et de restructuration
       foncière.



BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA    page xxiv
   31. Du point de vue légal, selon la loi n° 034-2012/AN du 02 juillet 2012 portant
       Réorganisation Agraire et Foncière (RAF) au Burkina Faso, il y a trois types de régimes
       de propriété des terres au Burkina Faso : (i) Régime légal de propriété de l’Etat ; (ii)
       Régime de propriété des collectivités territoriales ; et (iii) Patrimoine foncier des
       particuliers.

Droit à la propriété
   32. La Constitution du Burkina Faso garantit à tous le droit à la propriété privée, à sa
       protection ainsi qu’à l’expropriation. Nul ne saurait être privé de sa jouissance si ce n’est
       pour cause d’utilité publique et sous la condition d’une juste indemnisation fixée
       conformément à la loi. Cette indemnisation doit être préalable à l’expropriation, sauf cas
       d’urgence ou de force majeure.

Acteurs institutionnels
   33. En matière de gestion des terres au Burkina Faso, les organisations ou structures de
       gestion sont définies par la RAF et la loi n°034-2009/AN portant régime foncier rural et
       textes prioritaires d’application. Ces organisations se situent à quatre niveaux : national,
       régional, communal et village.

    Au niveau national : En référence à la loi n°034, il est institué une instance nationale de
     concertation, de suivi et d’évaluation de la politique et de la législation foncière rurale
     réunissant l’ensemble des acteurs publics, privés et de la société civile. Actuellement
     cette instance n’est pas encore opérationnelle.
    Au niveau régional : Ce sont les services techniques déconcentrés compétents de l'Etat
     qui sont chargés d'apporter un appui aux Services Fonciers Ruraux (SFR) des
     collectivités territoriales tel que stipulé par la loi n°034 portant régime foncier rural.
    Au niveau communal : le Service Foncier Rural (SFR) au niveau de chaque commune
     rurale est chargé de l’ensemble des activités de gestion et de sécurisation du domaine
     foncier de la commune et des activités de sécurisation foncière du patrimoine foncier
     rural des particuliers sur le territoire communal.
    Au niveau villageois : Une Commission Foncière Villageoise, créée dans chaque village
     et composée des autorités coutumières et traditionnelles villageoises chargées du
     foncier, est chargée de contribuer à la sécurisation et la gestion du domaine.

Instances constitutionnelles de recours
    34. Le bureau du Médiateur de la République du Faso a été par la loi organique
        n°22/94/ADP du 17 mai 1994. Le médiateur est une autorité administrative indépendante,
        qui ne reçoit d’instruction d’aucune autorité politique, administrative, législative ou
        judiciaire, et qui reçoit les réclamations relatives au fonctionnement des Administrations
        de l'État, des collectivités territoriales, des établissements publics et de tout autre
        organisme investi d'une mission de service public.

Conclusion
    Dans le domaine de la gestion environnementale et sociale, la plupart des institutions sont
      en place et leur mandat a été défini. Le système national d'évaluation de l'impact sur
      l'environnement est basé sur un processus bien défini de diagnostic et d'évaluation de la


BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA   page xxv
     nature des impacts et de préparation de sauvegardes environnementales et sociales
     appropriées.
    Cependant, les institutions ont des ressources humaines limitées avec un fort besoin de
     renforcement des capacités. De plus, ils n'ont pas assez de ressources financières pour
     fonctionner de manière appropriée.
    Les procédures administratives sont lentes et ne permettent pas des prises de décisions
     rapides et en temps opportun ;
    Les enquêtes publiques sont souvent des séances d’information du public et ne donnent
     pas lieu à de véritables consultations publiques ;
    Le système de gestion des plaintes n’est pas opérationnel, surtout dans le cadre
     d’interventions en milieu rural.

VI. ADEQUATION DES SYSTEMES APPLICABLES

   35. Les forces, les lacunes, les risques et les opportunités des systèmes nationaux sont
       présentés à la lumière des Principes clés applicables au Programme - tels qu'ils sont
       décrits dans la Politique et la Directive de la Banque pour le financement des
       Programmes pour les résultats (PPR).

   ➔ Principe clé 1 : Principe général de l'évaluation et de la gestion de l'impact
       environnemental et social. Ce Principe est applicable au Programme. En effet, les
       travaux financés dans le cadre du Programme pourraient entraîner des impacts négatifs à
       risque faible à modéré. L'ESES a été préparée et ses recommandations seront intégrées
       dans le plan d'action global du programme.
        Au niveau des forces : Le Burkina Faso dispose de cadres réglementaires et
           juridiques adéquats permettant de gérer d’une manière appropriée les impacts
           environnementaux et sociaux du Programme et d’une institution en charge des
           évaluations environnementales (BUNEE).
        Au niveau des faiblesses et écarts : Au niveau institutionnel, la coordination entre le
           niveau central et le niveau régional n'est pas adéquate (par exemple entre le BUNEE
           et les directions régionales), le partage de l'information n'est pas efficace et cet état de
           fait ne facilite pas le suivi de la mise en œuvre des PGES. Les institutions en charge
           de la gestion environnementale et sociale ne disposent pas des ressources humaines ni
           des moyens financiers appropriés.
        Au niveau des actions et opportunités : Organisation d’initiatives de sensibilisation
           de tous les acteurs et parties prenantes au sujet des problèmes de la gestion de
           l’environnement, de l’impact. Lancement de mesures pour renforcer d’une manière
           plus appropriée les capacités des responsables centraux et locaux en matière de
           procédures de sauvegarde environnementale et sociale.
        Au niveau des risques: Une mauvaise mise en œuvre des règles et procédures de
           gestion environnementale et sociale. L'incapacité de faire appliquer les règlements
           environnementaux actuels en temps opportun.

   ➔ Principe clé 2 : Habitats naturels et Ressources physiques et culturelles
       Ce principe n’est pas applicable au Programme. En effet, aucune activité du Programme
       n’aura lieu au sein de zones de protection de la biodiversité. Aucun investissement ne

BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA      page xxvi
       pourra être éligible s’il menace des écosystèmes fragiles. Aucun investissement ne pourra
       être éligible s’il menace directement le patrimoine culturel et religieux d’une région.

   ➔ Principe clé 3 : Sécurité du public et des travailleurs
       Ce principe est applicable. En effet, les travaux entrepris dans le cadre du Programme
       pourraient avoir un impact sur la sécurité du public et des travailleurs des chantiers. Les
       travailleurs dans les chantiers pourraient être exposés à des accidents/blessures liées au
       travail, à la pollution de l'eau, à la pollution de l'air, aux nuisances sonores, aux vibrations
       aux déchets solides et aux matériaux toxiques ou dangereux sur le site. Les populations
       des zones proches des chantiers pourraient aussi être exposées aux mêmes dangers.
        Au niveau des forces : Le système législatif / réglementaire du Burkina Faso
           comprend des dispositions en matière de sécurité sur les chantiers. La sécurité des
           travailleurs est assurée par l’Inspection du Travail. Il existe des politiques et
           directives nationales concernant la sécurité et la santé du public et des travailleurs.
        Au niveau des faiblesses et écarts. Les dispositions de la sécurité des travailleurs ne
           sont pas toujours incluses dans les contrats de travaux de génie civil. Le nombre
           insuffisant d’agents de contrôle ne permet pas un contrôle régulier de l’application
           des dispositions sur les chantiers.
        Au niveau des opportunités : Information et formation au sujet des mesures de
           sécurité dans les chantiers. Présence au niveau local de démembrements de
           l’Inspection du Travail
        Au niveau des risques : L'incapacité de faire appliquer les règlements
           environnementaux, sociaux et sécuritaires actuels en temps opportun. La non-
           implication des responsables de l‘Inspection du Travail

   ➔ Principe clé 4 : Acquisition de terres
       Ce principe est applicable. En effet, les travaux pourraient impliquer des déplacements
       physiques ou économiques temporaires ou permanents de ménages résidentiels ou
       d’entreprises et nécessiter l’acquisition de terrains privés et, par conséquent,
       l’expropriation pour cause d’utilité publique et des réinstallations involontaires de
       ménages résidentiels ou d’entreprises.
        Au niveau des forces : Les indemnités ou compensation des personnes affectées sont
           prévues par le régime foncier existant au Burkina Faso
        Au niveau des faiblesses et écarts : Les procédures nationales d’acquisition de terres
           manquent de clarté et ne sont pas complètes. Les occupants informels ne sont pas
           reconnus par la loi burkinabè. Les propriétés coutumières des terres sont reconnues,
           mais doivent faire l’objet de confirmation avant être indemnisées.
        Au niveau des opportunités : Assurer un système d’indemnisation, y compris pour les
           occupants informels. Assurer une compensation juste et préalable. Assurer un suivi
           adéquat des personnes affectées afin qu’elles retrouvent les conditions ex-ante projet
           et qu’elles ne deviennent plus pauvres.
        Au niveau des risques : Manque de ressources humaines et de moyens financiers un
           niveau des institutions nationales et locales en charge de faire respecter les lois et les
           dispositifs. Manque de coordination entre les acteurs institutionnels concernés.

   ➔ Principe clé 5 : Considération sociales : Peuples autochtones et Groupes vulnérables

BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA      page xxvii
       Ce principe est applicable (à l’exception du fait qu’il n’y a pas de Peuples autochtones
       au Burkina Faso, tel que définis par la politique de la Banque y relative).
        Au niveau des forces : Des enquêtes visent à informer les populations de la
          réalisation du projet et pour recueillir leurs observations ; des affiches d’information
          sont apposées à cet effet dans les places publiques.
        Au niveau des faiblesses et écarts : La législation burkinabé ne prévoit pas de
          mesures spécifiques pour les groupes vulnérables. Le système de gestion des plaintes
          au niveau local n’est pas opérationnel.
        Au niveau des opportunités : Définir et mettre en place une stratégie d'engagement
          des parties prenantes dans le cadre du programme de sensibilisation, ciblant en
          particulier les groupes vulnérables. Préciser toute forme d’appui aux groupes les plus
          vulnérables. S’assurer de la fonctionnalité du système de gestion des plaintes
        Au niveau des risques : Le manque de clarté et de cohérence concernant le
          mécanisme de mise en œuvre de consultations publiques et d'engagement des parties
          prenantes pourrait aliéner les groupes pauvres et vulnérables.

   ➔ Principe clé 6 : Considérations sociales – Conflit social
       Ce principe n’est pas applicable. En effet, le Programme n’est pas mis en œuvre dans
       des zones de conflit.

   Conclusion
   36. De l'analyse précédente du cadre juridique et institutionnel de la gestion
       environnementale et sociale au Burkina Faso, un certain nombre de conclusions peuvent
       être tirées:

    La plupart des institutions sont en place et leur mandat a été défini. Cependant, leurs
     actions ne sont pas suffisamment coordonnées et elles manquent de ressources humaines
     et financières.
    Il n'y a pas de coordination efficace entre le niveau central et le niveau régional pour la
     gestion environnementale et sociale.
    Les procédures administratives sont lentes et ne permettent pas une prise de décision
     rapide et rapide.
    Les consultations publiques menées dans le cadre des enquêtes publiques ne concernent
     que les EIES alors que celles-ci devraient également s'étendre aux NIES
    Le système de gestion des plaintes n'est pas opérationnel, en particulier dans le cadre
     d'interventions rurales.

   37. Force est de reconnaître que ces lacunes doivent être comblées par des réformes et des
       dispositifs appropriés. Ensemble avec la communauté des partenaires techniques et
       financiers, la Banque mondiale joue déjà et pourrait jouer davantage un rôle important
       pour appuyer les améliorations nécessaires.

   38. Cependant, d’ores et déjà, dans le cadre de ce PPR, il est possible de saisir l’occasion
       pour améliorer certains aspects techniques et administratifs, créer une nouvelle
       dynamique, préciser et consolider les partenariats et les synergies entre les intervenants,
       et renforcer les capacités institutionnelles de toutes les parties prenantes intervenant en

BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA   page xxviii
       matière de sauvegardes environnementale et sociale aux niveaux national, régional,
       communal et villageois.

       ➔ A la lumière des systèmes de gestion environnementale et sociale du Burkina Faso
           analysés précédemment, le Programme proposé est considéré adéquat pour un
           financement d’un Programme pour les Résultats (PPR).

VII. PLAN D’ACTION EN MATIERE DE GESTION ENVIRONNEMENTALE ET
SOCIALE
   39. Le Programme soutiendra des mesures spécifiques pour améliorer les conditions
       concernant la performance du système de gestion environnementale et sociale dans la
       mise en œuvre et le suivi des activités du Programme. Ces mesures sont proposées dans
       le cadre d’un Plan d'action de gestion environnementale et sociale (PA/GES) - ce Plan
       faisant partie du Plan d’Action global du Programme en tant que tel. Le PA/GES identifie
       trois volets de recommandations, chaque volet comportant des activités distinctes et
       complémentaires.

   ➢ Premier volet du PA/GES : Renforcement du système de gestion environnementale et
     sociale des investissements du Programme. Ce volet comprend les éléments suivants :
        Manuel technique. Préparation d’un Manuel Technique pour la Gestion
         environnementale et sociale (MTGES) des investissements du Programme à
         l’intention du Ministère de l’Eau et de l’Assainissement (MEA) et sont Office
         National de l’Eau et de l’Assainissement (ONEA) et de l’ensemble des services
         techniques, ainsi que de toutes les parties prenantes, qui seront impliquées aux
         niveaux national, régional et local dans la mise en œuvre du Programme, pour que les
         procédures de gestion environnementale et sociale soient dûment comprises,
         parfaitement appropriées et suivies. Le Manuel, qui traitera en particulier des lacunes
         identifiées dans les systèmes nationaux (voir les six Principes clés), fera partie
         intégrante du Manuel d'Opération du Programme (Annexe spéciale) et inclura, entre
         autres, les procédures d'acquisition des terres et la gestion des plaintes.

        Convention interinstitutionnelle entre le Ministère de l’Eau et de l’Assainissement
         (MEA), Office National de l’Eau et de l’Assainissement (ONEA), d’une part, et le
         Bureau National des Evaluations Environnementales (BUNEE), d’autre part. Le
         contenu de cette convention établira les conditions de collaboration (sensibilisation,
         information et formation ; examen et la certification rapide des sous-projets ; contrôle
         et suivi environnemental et social ; etc.). Cette convention pourrait être complétée
         par des protocoles de collaboration avec d'autres institutions bien ciblées.

   ➢ Deuxième volet du PA/GES : Renforcement des capacités en matière de gestion
     environnementale et sociale des principaux acteurs et représentants de parties prenantes
     du Programme. Ce volet inclut deux types d’activités distinctes :



BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA   page xxix
        Ressources humaines de l’UCP pour la Gestion Environnementale et Sociale.
         Recrutement ou nomination de la part du MEA et ONEA d’un spécialiste social et
         d’un spécialiste environnemental au sein de l’UCP, qui seront employés à plein temps
         tout au long de la mise en œuvre du Programme.

        Formation sur le MTGES. Un programme de formation sera élaboré pour
         l’application du MTGES à l’intention de toutes les différentes parties prenantes
         impliquées dans la mise en œuvre du Programme, en particulier : les membres des
         cellules environnementales du MEA, ONEA et des autres ministères impliqués, les
         membres des commissions communales « Environnement et développement local » et
         des commissions « Aménagement du territoire et du Foncier », du BUNEE, et des
         Directions Régionales de l’Environnement, de l’Economie Verte et du Changement
         Climatique (DREEVCC), et de l’Action sociale, etc.

        Formation spécialisée en matière de suivi et contrôle des mesures d’atténuation
         GES et de Rapportage : Cette formation plus approfondie en matière de suivi et
         contrôle et de préparation des Rapports sera octroyée aux représentants de toutes les
         institutions locales, régionales et nationales (y compris les entreprises de travaux)
         impliquées dans la collecte, traitement et analyse des informations concernant la mise
         en œuvre des mesures d’atténuation.

   40. Tous les coûts de ces éléments du Plan Action GES seront intégrés dans le budget global
       du Programme. Par contre, le coût des mesures d’atténuation de nature environnementale
       et sociale seront intégrés aux budgets des sous-projets d’investissements eux-mêmes.


                       ________________________________________
               La Banque mondiale a organisé la consultation publique avec les
               représentants des principales parties prenantes, les organisations de la
               société civile et le secteur privé pour présenter et discuter la version
               préliminaire de l’ESES.
               Par la suite, pendant toute la durée du Programme, c’est à la partie
               burkinabé que reviendra la responsabilité d’organiser les consultations
               sur les activités spécifiques (sous-projets d’investissement) du
               Programme.
               La version révisée finale de l’ESES sera diffusé publiquement à travers
               les sites Internet du MEA et de l’ONEA et également le site internet
               externe de la Banque mondiale.
               Des copies imprimées sur papier seront disponibles au niveau national
               et régional auprès des institutions concernées.
                     ____________________________________________




BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA   page xxx
                                SECTION I. INTRODUCTION


I.1 BACKGROUND
    41. This Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) was undertaken by the
        World Bank as part of the preparation of the Program for Results (PforR) for the Water,
        Sanitation and Integrated Water Resource Management Sector in Burkina Faso.

   42. The Program supports the Government of Burkina Faso’s priorities for providing
       universal access to water supply services, sanitation services, and strengthening water
       resources management. Based on the objectives and actions proposed by the Government
       Sector Programs, the Program to be supported by this IDA operation will finance a subset
       of investments included in the National Program for Drinking Water Supply (NP-DWS)
       and the National Sewage and Excreta Water Sanitation Program (PN-AEUE) in selected
       geographical areas and the key actions of the National Plan for Integrated Water
       Resources Management (PN-GIRE) and the National Water Governance Program
       (PNGE) ). However, the financing of the PforR will not involve the National Program of
       Hydraulic Developments (PN-AHA).

I.2 ESSA GOALS AND APPROACH
    43. ESSA reviews the program's environmental and social management systems to assess
        their compliance with the provisions of the Bank's PforR funding policy. The aim is to
        make sure that it does not involve significant environmental and social risks and that the
        systems put in place make it possible to identify and manage potential risks. In particular,
        the ESSA identifies and analyzes gaps that would exist between the national systems and
        the basic principles applying to the program, and recommends actions to improve the
        coherence of environmental and social management systems with the requirements of the
        Bank.

   44. Unlike conventional investment programs or projects, the PforR supports a government
       program by underscoring the following objectives: (i) to finance the borrower specific
       program expenditures; (ii) to link the disbursement of funds directly to the achievement
       of specific results; (iii) to use and, where appropriate, strengthen the systems to make
       sure that the funds are used in an appropriate manner with adequate consideration of the
       environmental and social impact of the program; and (iv) to build institutional capacity
       allowing to achieve the expected results.

   45. The World Bank's PforR funding policy outlines the basic principles of environmental
       and social management that must be respected in the ESSA. The coherence of the
       Program's systems is considered by the Program based on: (i) the systems defined by
       laws, regulations, procedures, etc. ("the system as defined"); and (ii) the ability of
       Program institutions to effectively implement the systems ("the system as applied in
       practice"). It identifies and analyzes the gaps between the national systems and the basic
       principles of the Program at the two levels indicated above. It should thus be emphasized
       that, by virtue of the nature of the programmatic interventions, ESSA focuses on the
       system as such, by giving only guidance on the type, nature and characteristics of the
       activities implemented under the Program.

   46. The basic principles that must be respected in the assessment of environmental and social
       systems are as follows:

    Promoting environmental and social sustainability in program design;
    Avoiding, minimizing or mitigating or compensating negative impacts, and promoting
     informed decision-making about the environmental and social impacts of the program;
    Avoiding, minimizing or mitigating or compensating negative impacts on physical
     cultural resources resulting from the program;
    Protecting public and worker safety against the potential risks associated with: (i) the
     construction and/ or operation of facilities under the program; (ii) exposure to toxic
     chemicals, hazardous waste, air pollution and noise pollution under the program; and (iii)
     reconstruction or rehabilitation of infrastructure within the urban perimeter;
    Managing the potential acquisition of private land and the loss of access to economic
     goods and services in a manner that avoids or reduces physical and economic
     displacement, and helps affected people to improve, or at least restore, their livelihoods
     and standard of living;
    Taking account of cultural relevance and equitable access to the benefits of the program,
     by paying particular attention to the rights and interests and needs and concerns of all
     social categories, including vulnerable groups;
    Helping to prevent, reduce or even eradicate social conflicts.

   47. Thus, the program's approach excludes any activity posing a potentially significant
       environmental and social risk and various negative, varied, irreversible and
       unprecedented negative impacts.

   48. ESSA aims to identify the strengths and weaknesses of the environmental and social
       system applicable to the program with a view to identifying the actions needed to
       improve its performance. Specific measures to address identified weaknesses or gaps are
       also proposed as part of an Environmental and Social Management Action Plan, which is
       an integral part of the Program's Action Plan as such, with a view to improving current
       practices and procedures to make them more in line with the Bank's arrangements.

I.3 METHODOLOGY
    49. The preparation of ESSA and the development of measures to strengthen environmental
        and social management systems has benefited from various information and a process of
        consultation with institutional actors, especially:
     The review of available documents and data on national environmental and social
        procedures and the related political, institutional and regulatory frameworks, analysis of
        the environmental and social safeguards capacities of institutions involved in the
        Program; and World Bank documentation on PforRs and ESSAs (see Annex 9 for the list
        of documents consulted) ;
     Interviews and working meetings with representatives of state and non-state institutions
        involved in the Program and key stakeholders and field visits;


BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA   page 2
    Consultations with representatives of key stakeholders and civil society organizations to
     better explain ESSA expectations, identify environmental and social issues of the
     Program, assess technical assistance and capacity building needs (see Annex 10 for the
     record of these consultations).
    A National Public Consultation was held on March 27th, 2018, with the participation of
     representatives from all stakeholders, development partners, civil society organizations
     and the private sector. Comments from the workshop have been incorporated into the
     revised version of the ESSA (with a complete list of participants) see Annex 11.
    The ESSA report will be publicly disseminated in the country, through the website of the
     Ministry of Water and Sanitation (MEA), as well as on the World Bank's external
     website. Public comments will be solicited during the defined period.




BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA   page 3
                      SECTION II. DESCRIPTION OF THE PROGRAM


II.1 CONTEXT
    50. Burkina Faso is one of the poorest countries in the world, with more than 40 per cent (or
        7.7 million) of the population living below the poverty line in 2014, with about 90 per
        cent of the poor living in rural areas. Members of poor households remain almost totally
        excluded from several basic services and access to infrastructure. Per capita gross
        national income was US$750 in 2014. The country was ranked 185 out of 188 countries
        on the 2015 Human Development Index.

II.2 MAIN CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROGRAM
    51. The PforR's development objectives are to improve access to water and sanitation supply
        services in targeted areas and to strengthen water information.

Result Area 1. Improved access to water supply
   52. The Program will support the development of priority infrastructure to improve water
       supply and enhance its operational efficiency. Geographically, the PforR will cover urban
       areas including Ouagadougou and 12 additional secondary centers and rural areas of four
       selected regions.

Result Area 2. Improved acces to sanitation
   53. The PforR will support sustainable access to sanitation services. In urban areas, the
       Program will support the construction of 85,000 household latrines and 350 public
       latrines with male/female compartments (in schools and markets), benefiting about
       850,000 people. In rural areas, the Program will support the construction of 50,000
       household latrines and 900 public latrines with male/female compartments (in schools,
       health centers, and markets), benefiting about 500,000 people

Result Area 3. Improved access to reliable information on water resources
   54. The PforR will support sustainable access to sanitation services. In urban areas, the
       Program will support the construction of 85,000 household latrines and 350 public
       latrines with male/female compartments (in schools and markets), benefiting about
       850,000 people. In rural areas, the Program will support the construction of 50,000
       household latrines and 900 public latrines with male/female compartments (in schools,
       health centers, and markets), benefiting about 500,000 people

   55. Regarding knowledge and monitoring of surface water, the PforR will support the
       optimization and modernization of the existing hydrometric network of Burkina Faso, by
       acquiring and installing the equipment and software required and by equipping and
       training the personnel of the departments responsible for data collection.

   56. With regard to groundwater, the PforR will support the organization and updating of
       existing groundwater resources data and the rationalization of the piezometric network
       for better knowledge and monitoring of groundwater sources. In particular, the Program
       will support studies to estimate aquifer recharge and runoff, assess water withdrawals in
       the sector (industrial, agricultural, mining, and household consumption) to accurately
BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA   page 4
        estimate exploitable reserves and a comprehensive study of the largest aquifer in the
        country. In addition, the Program will support the optimization of primary and secondary
        piezometric monitoring networks.

    57. For the SNIE, the Program will support the operationalization of the SNIE that has
        already been established to make water-related data publicly available to users and
        decision makers, and improve its coherence and quality. This includes support to the
        development of the SNIE platform to be used for data dissemination; the drafting and
        adoption of a decree for the institutionalization of the SNIE; the establishment of data
        exchange protocols for the SNIE; and publicize the water data repository. Emphasis will
        be placed on improving the quality and access to water information and expanding public
        access beyond the data to the analytical results (trends, water balance, etc.).

Institutional Arrangement
   58. At the institutional level, the PforR will be implemented through two implementing
       agencies: the Ministry of Water and Sanitation (MEA) and the National Office of Water
       and Sanitation (ONEA). The Program Coordinating Unit (PCU) of the MEA will have
       overall responsibility for the coordination of Program, monitoring and evaluation and
       reporting and management activities. Within ONEA, a Program Support Unit (PSU) will
       support the divisions responsible for the implementation of water and sanitation activities
       in the urban environment

    59. In targeted areas supported by the Program, the total scale of the financing required to
        implement the Program for water and sanitation is estimated to be US$350 million and
        for the WRM activities is estimated to be US$50. Thus, the estimated cost of the Program
        over the five-year period is US$400 million. The Program will be financed through GoBF
        financing of US$100 million and IDA support of US$300 million, which will be
        disbursed on the basis of verified results.

II.3 ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL IMPACTS / RISKS OF THE PROGRAM
    60. Overall Impact of the Program. Les activités prévues dans le cadre du Programme
        porteront essentiellement sur les aspects suivants :
➢ Result Area 1 Activities
In Urban Areas :
   • Construction of ground tanks, pumping stations and water towers on two (2) sites (East of
      the city, North of the city of Ouaga) ;
   • Extension and densification works for the supply of priority development zones
      (installation of 725 km of distribution network, completion of 70,000 social connections
      and construction of 100 standpipes).1
In Rural Areas :
   • Completion of 1,100 boreholes equipped with Human Motor Pumps (PMH), of which
      700 ones in community centers and 400 ones in health centers and schools;

1
 A letter from the Minister in charge of the Environment dated 26 February 2018 authorized the realization of NIES
on all drinking water supply projects in urban areas (see copy of this letter in Annex 8).

BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA                page 5
   • Completion of 90 drinking water supply systems;
   • Rehabilitation of 60 Simplified Drinking Water Supplies (DWS).

➢ Result Area 2 Activities
  61. In rural and urban areas, latrines are planned, namely:
  • Construction of 135,000 household latrines;
  • Equipment of 1,340 schools and health centers with adequate sanitation facilities (latrine
      blocks with separate boys/girls blocks with a cabin disabled for disabled users in each
      block in the case of schools) and public places.

➢ Result Area 3 Activities
  62. Activities will have positive impacts as they will contribute to the improvement of
      decision-making processes. However, potential excavation work may result in part in
      destruction of vegetation, and in some instances, result in loss of portions of land and
      disruption of socio-economic activities. These works are subject to simple environmental
      and social Requirements - in accordance with national arrangements (see Box in Section
      II).

   63. Positive impacts. The Program activities will have major benefits for both the
       environment and the population (access to drinking water, less hardship in drinking water
       supply and time saving for women, reduction of water-borne diseases, improvement of
       living conditions, improvement of hygiene, fight against poverty, reduction of
       unemployment, etc.). These positive effects are numerous and should be maintained over
       the long term.

   64. Core Principles. This ESSA was prepared in accordance with the six key principles
       outlined in paragraph 8 of the World Bank Policy on PforR Financing, with the objective
       of managing program risks and promoting sustainable development. These principles are:

    Core Principle 1- Environment : Promoting environmental and social sustainability in
     program design, avoiding, minimizing or mitigating undesirable impacts, promote
     information-based decision-making about the environmental and social impacts of the
     program
    Core Principle 2- Natural Habitats and Cultural Resources: Avoiding, minimizing or
     mitigating adverse impacts on natural habitats and cultural resources resulting from the
     program
    Core Principle 3- Public and Workers Safety: Protecting the safety of the public and
     workers from the potential risks associated with: (i) construction and/or works of
     infrastructure or other work depending on the program; (ii) exposure to toxic chemicals,
     hazardous wastes, noise, vibrations, and other hazardous materials dependent on the
     program; (iii) reconstruction or rehabilitation of infrastructure located in areas subject to
     natural hazards
    Core Principle 4- Land Acquisition: Managing land acquisition and loss of access to
     natural resources in a way that avoids or minimizes displacements, and assists affected
     people by promoting, or at least, by restoring their livelihoods and their living conditions.


BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA   page 6
        Core Principle 5- Vulnerable Groups: Paying particular attention to the cultural
         relevance of, equitable access to, program benefits, granting special attention to the rights
         and interests and needs and concerns of vulnerable groups. Vulnerable groups will
         include thez elderly, women heads of family, and people living with disabilities.
        Core Principle 6- Social Conflict: Avoiding exacerbating social conflict, especially in
         fragile states, post-conflict areas, or disputed territorial areas.

II.3.1 ENVIRONMENTAL RISKS OF THE PROGRAM
       65. The negative environmental and social impacts of investments will generally be limited,
           of low to medium magnitude, reversible and easily controllable and manageable. The
           associated risks are considered moderate. They will be easy to identify in advance, to
           prevent and minimize and compensate with simple good practices and effective
           mitigation measures.

       66. Environmental and social screening of the various sub-projects that will be subject to
           funding will make it possible to identify both the scale of the potential negative impacts
           and the required planning tools, as well as the control and monitoring systems required
           (by means of a simple and efficient screening system).2

       67. The Program will have limited adverse environmental and social impacts and risks. This
           is mainly due to the following aspects:

     ➢ Exclusion, by the very nature of a PforR, of any investment involving major
       environmental risks (namely World Bank Class A projects) ;
     ➢ The type and nature of the planned improvements and infrastructure (generally small,
       well located and over a relatively limited spatial extent, and involving reduced surface
       excavation works) ;
     ➢ The very nature of the planned activities, based on the results of previous diagnostic
       studies, based on specific social, economic and environmental parameters;
     ➢ The nature of works and development operations that should not generate major cases of
       air or noise pollution or significant degradation of the inhabited environment or
       significant destruction or reduction of green spaces;
     ➢ The existence of various controllable and effective measures making it possible to
       mitigate potential risks and provide impact monitoring, during both the construction
       phase and the works' operation;
     ➢ The existence of institutions capable of managing most of the environmental and social
       aspects of the Program;
     ➢ The existence of an appropriate institutional and legal framework making it possible to
       effectively manage all aspects of the Program's Environmental and Social Management
       (ESM).




2
    See Box in Section II.

BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA     page 7
  Positive Environmental Impact
   68. Without doubt, the Program's investments will have a positive environmental impact -
       both directly and indirectly, temporarily and permanently. Indeed, the Program will
       contribute, among other things, to:

      Significantly improve people's access to drinking water;
      Improve sanitation;
      Reduce the frequency and incidence of waterborne diseases;
      Improve hygiene and healthiness conditions;
      Build the ONEA network capacity;
      Reinforce the DWS system of centers already served by ONEA by increasing existing
       water storage capacities as well as in new centers;
      Improve the DWS management system in three regions;
      Support the implementation of the Roadmap for Assistance to the Municipal Project
       Ownership (AMOC) by strengthening the capacities of the 125 municipalities and
       setting up the Municipal Technical Agents;
      Improve the institutional capacities of the actors involved.

Negative Environmental Risks during the Preparation Phase
   69. During the preparation phase, the main risk consists in negligence in the preparation of
       tender documents for the environmental and social aspects and their low consideration in
       carrying out the technical studies and/or the preparation of unsatisfactory environmental
       and social studies. This risk may be aggravated if technical (sub)project design
       alternatives have not been rigorously considered and the information and public
       participation aspects are not taken into account in a culturally appropriate and socially
       acceptable manner.

   70. On the other hand, the structural interventions envisaged under the Program should not
       raise particular risks in terms of public safety and worker safety. Protection against these
       risks will be provided in accordance with applicable national and international rules.
       Measures to mitigate these risks will mainly involve: (i) public and stakeholder
       consultation during site selection and preparation and validation of studies; (ii) quality
       control and the implementation of validation procedures for environmental and social
       studies and their dissemination; and (iii) site supervision by environmental and social
       experts.

   71. The main mitigation measures recommended during this phase mainly consist in
       screening all the sub-projects, according to agreed parameters, as well as establishing an
       evaluation sheet of the impacts of activities prior to their completion and the inclusion in
       the Scopes of Work of calls for bid of a section on compliance with environmental and
       social clauses and site safety.

Environmental Risks during the Works
   72. The phase of works will see the opening of construction sites, which could generate solid
       waste (bags of cement and other types of packaging, residues of drinking water system
       materials, workers' household waste, etc.), include nuisances associated with vehicles and


BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA   page 8
       machinery (dust, noise, emissions and accidental spills of hydrocarbons and used oils) or
       involve adverse effects (tree pulling, reduction of green spaces, etc.).

   73. Despite the fact that they are not permanent (since they cease with the closure of the
       worksites), the effects of these impacts can nevertheless persist (in particular the effects
       of solid wastes and probable spills of used oils and machinery greases) if sites conduct
       and closure are not accompanied by environmental respect procedures. In particular:

        Destructuration of soil texture caused by deep excavations and trenching
        Noise nuisance for neighboring populations and for construction site workers related
         to the use of construction machinery
        High level of air pollution (related to dust emission) associated to the circulation of
         machines and vehicles;
        Accidents for workers and nearby residents associated to the circulation of
         construction machinery and possible non-compliance with the safety instructions;
        GHG emissions related to exhaust fumes of construction vehicles;
        Accidents and safety problems, especially for the most vulnerable people (children,
         elderly people, women, disabled people) could be significant risks;
        Disturbances in population daily activities during construction, rehabilitation or
         extension because of deviations in car traffic or restricted pedestrian access and
         housing access;
        Pollution of some drinking water sources and contamination of the groundwater
         during construction works;
        Tree and vegetation cutting or pulling;
        Inconvenience for the local population, and especially the most vulnerable people,
         because of the noise and the dust emission on the building sites;
        Accidents and safety problems especially for the most vulnerable people (children,
         elderly people, women).

   74. The mitigation measures that accompany this work phase consist in the rigorous
       implementation of the measures proposed in the Environmental and Social Management
       Plans (ESMP) and in a regular monitoring of the application of the site guidelines as
       defined. in the Scopes of work of firms, the establishment of non-ccompliance cases and
       the identification of corrective measures as well as the follow-up of their implementation.

Negative Environmental Risks during the Operation Phase
   75. The adverse environmental impacts associated with this phase for structural investments
       could be due to inadequate design, lack of maintenance and upkeep, inadequate use of
       structures, deterioration of infrastructure or inadequate application of safety measures.
       They can cause a malfunction or a deterioration of the works and generate some negative
       impacts.

   76. The mitigation measures recommended at this level are good works site management
       practices. They in general consist in putting in place emergency measures in case of
       accidental contamination.



BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA   page 9
   77. The environmental monitoring system that will accompany the operation phase will have
       to make it possible to identify these malfunctions in real time in order to make the
       necessary corrections.
II.3.2 SOCIAL IMPACTS OF THE PROGRAM
   78. The negative social impacts of the Program - particularly those associated with private
       land acquisition - will be time-limited and restricted in space owing to the relatively low
       land needs in the various investments planned under the Program. Most PAPs will be
       temporarily affected by civil works. Some may have to move permanently. However, the
       number of PAPs will be very small due to the nature of the activities. Land acquisition
       needs are minimal. As the investment sites are not yet precisely defined, it is not possible
       to determine the number of PAPs at the current stage, although they will most likely
       limited.

   79.The sites for carrying out the DWS activities are located either in the field of ONEA,
       town halls or on off subdivison private land plots which are also subject to negotiation
       with the owners. With regard to administrative reserves, they can be resettled if they are
       occupied by third parties.

   80. Indeed, it is unlikely that any form, even temporary, of involuntary resettlement of
       residential households or businesses proves necessary. However, at this stage, social
       hazards associated with private land acquisition cannot be ruled out. The PforR activities
       that will be implemented, will observe the laws applicable to expropriation, namely the
       law on agrarian and land reform, as well as the law on rural land tenure. Indeed, property
       rights are a fundamental right defined and guaranteed by the Constitution (Annex 3
       presents the main national laws and procedures on expropriation and compensation).
Positive Social Impacts
   81. The proposed activities by their very nature should be advantageous to the beneficiary
       populations. These benefits among others include:

      Improvement of living conditions, healthiness and hygiene of populations;
      Socio-economic development of urban and rural areas;
      Fight against poverty and reduction of unemployment;
      Reduction of medical costs resulting from the treatment of diseases associated with
       water pollution and lack of sanitation measures;
      Implementation of investments (e.g. latrines) that have been strategically identified and
       that address the needs of all social categories, including the most vulnerable categories,
       especially women and girls;
      Reduced time usually spent by women in fetching drinking water and increased time
       devoted to childcare and leisure;
      Citizen participation, through the strengthening of mechanisms for access to
       information, consultation of citizens, as well as grievance management and
       implementation of measures to establish the right of petition and satisfaction monitoring
       of water services users;
      Compensation for any losses in a fair and prior manner;

BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA   page 10
         Establishment of regular interactions with the population and people in charge of the
          implemntation of the activities of the Program.

      82. With the promotion of private connections in households, the responsibility for the
          payment of drinking water by women is actually transferred to the head of household,
          which reduces the financial burden for the woman. The multiplication of private
          connections in households will also promote the preservation of water quality. The
          increase in the number of fire hydrants makes it possible to improve the service twice
          because the density of the users increases from 1,000 to 500 per fountain and
          consequently greatly reduces the waiting time for the water withdrawal. Thus, the level of
          service will reduce the financial burden and the water chore for the woman
      83. In order to ensure the social benefits of the Program, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP)
          must be prepared by each structural investment sub-project requiring any physical
          movement of persons, any land acquisition and/or loss of access to economic assets or
          workplaces (even for persons without official title deeds). The purpose of a RAP is to
          assess the social impacts associated with the temporary or permanent resettlemet of
          individuals and to propose compensation for losses and support, in consultation with
          affected persons. Populations affected by resettlement will have to benefit fully from the
          allowances and support measures to which they are entitled before the start of works.3

Social Risks during the Preparation Phase
   84. In general, the most significant social hazards that are likely to be observed are related to
       temporary land acquisition or occupation. However, other smaller magnitude hazards
       may be related to disturbances caused by work such as access difficulties, traffic
       deviations, noise, vibrations, dust, etc. that could cause disruptions in the day-to-day
       activities of neighborhoods. Depending on the type, scope and extent of eligible work
       under the Program, the social hazards will be those that are typically related and limited
       to the construction phase, and which are generally site-specific. Nevertheless, if the
       ESMP or RAP are poorly designed and badly implemented, this could have negative
       impacts on public health and safety and create social tensions.4

      85. During the preparation phase, the main social hazard is potentially associated with works
          that may require some land acquisition.

      86. To avoid private land acquisitions or demolition of individual houses, the Program will
          always seek alternative solutions, without forcing land transfers.

      87. Where private land acquisition or demolition of an individual house cannot be avoided,
          the acquisition procedures must favor the acquisition by mutual agreement, after
          consultation and informed and documented consent on the transfer and the amount of
          compensation, which must be remitted to the beneficial owner before any work is started.

      88. In case physical displacement cannot be avoided, owing to the absence of technical
          and/or land related alternatives, the social impacts associated with the acquisition of land

3
    See also Box, Section II.
4
    Annex 6 presents the procedure related to the preparation and implementation of RAPs.

BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA       page 11
       will have to be duly identified, analyzed and mitigated. A specific screening process first
       and foremost will make it possible to exclude from the Program financing any
       subprojects with a major social impact (Category A activities requiring a thorough ESSA
       according to the Burkina Faso nomenclature), which would require the displacement of
       residential households or commercial activities and/or the involuntary acquisition of large
       areas of land, and subsequently, in the case of moderate impacts, the implementation of
       initiatives to inform affected persons and compensation measures, even before start of
       work

   89. For any sub-project submitted for approval to the designated bodies, it will be important,
       upstream, that the PCU safeguard specialists systematically verify that the populations
       concerned have been well informed and consulted, especially when the proposed works
       require any form of temporary or permanent displaceemnt of persons or land acquisition
       or restricted access to resources or infrastructure or economic goods or interruptions of
       public services as a result of the works.

       ➔ Public consultations will have to be conducted in the appropriate language (s) by the
           companies in charge of the works, take into account the time constraints and the
           availability of the persons consulted. If necessary, separate meetings for men and
           women in order to allow all participants to express themselves appropriately. It is also
           important to ensure that the most vulnerable populations are fully consulted in order
           to minimize the risks of elite capture of program benefits.

       ➔ A redress mechanism will have to be developed to handle complaint cases. The
           requirements to be met are (i) to allow non-literate persons, to be able to submit their
           complaints, (ii) not to be forced to move from their locality, (iii) to have the choice to
           refer to several instances and (iv) ) to expect an answer within a known time period.
           The complaints processing circuit and the response times will be adequately
           documented.

Social Risks during the Works
  90. The construction phase will see the opening of construction sites for structures and
       development, which will have negative social impacts, insofar as they can:

    Require obstructed temporary access to residential households or businesses (in the case
     of investments in reinforcement of existing structures) ;
    Require the private land acquisition in part or totally and, as a result, possible
     expropriation for public purposes and involuntary resettlement of residential households
     or businesses;
    Generate temporary disruptions in craft and economic activities of individuals and
     households, causing loss of income (shortfall) ;
    Create temporary difficulties for residents to access their homes, shops and other public
     establishments (schools, dispensaries, etc.) ;
    Lead to interruptions of drinking water and electricity services and temporary closure of
     public institutions (schools, dispensaries, hospitals) and community facilities (e.g.,
     markets, slaughterhouses, etc.) ;

BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA    page 12
    Cause accidents and safety problems, especially for users without protection) ;
    Cause accidents on or around construction sites;
    Require temporary deviations to car traffic or restricted pedestrian crossing and generate
     disruptions in activities;
    Contribute - because of the presence of foreign construction workers - to increased
     violence and possible sexual harassment acts against women and increased sexually
     transmitted diseases and HIV/AIDS;
    Generate conflicts and acts of sabotage related to the misunderstanding of the inhabitants
     on the choice of the sites of implementation of the works ;
    Generate conflicts and acts of sabotage linked to the non-use of local labor;
    Damage objects of local cultural and religious heritage.

   91. In addition, given that these social hazards will mainly occur during the works, the latter
       will be organized accordingly and alternative access routes will be put in place and
       affected persons will be duly informed. These points will be the object of specific clauses
       of the Scopes of Work of firms and a regular follow-up will be provided by the regional
       operators and the Commune. Taking account of the above and the past experience, the
       foreseeable social hazards of the work are considered moderate and manageable,
       provided adequate measures are applied.

Social Risks during the Operation Phase
   92. As with environmental effects, the social risks of the operation phase could be due to
       inadequate design, lack of awareness raising among the population, lack of maintenance
       and upkeep, or inappropriate use or infrastructure degradation or insufficient enforcement
       of safety measures.

   93. The environmental and social monitoring system that will accompany the operation phase
       will have to make it possible to identify these malfunctions in real time in order to make
       the necessary corrections. Companies responsible for the works must be well informed of
       all their social obligations and provide regular monitoring.

   Note about Child Labor
   ➔ Child labor is prohibited in the Burkinabe Law since Order No. 539 / ITLS/HV of 29 July
      1954 on child labor. This ban was renewed after independence in the various Labor
      Codes (of 1992, 1998, 2004, and 2008).

   ➔ Burkina Faso ratified ILO 182 Convention in 2001 (regarding, inter alia, works which,
       by their nature or the conditions in which it operates, are likely to affect child health,
       safety, or morality).

II.4 OVERVIEW
    94. In light of the elements of the previous subsections, it can be emphasized that the
        Program will have moderate environmental and social impacts. This is mainly due to the
        fact that the Program, designed as a PforR, excludes, as a matter of principle, any
        investment involving major environmental and social risks.


BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA   page 13
        ➔ Thus, in accordance with this policy, the Program will automatically exclude any
             activity posing potentially significant environmental and socialrisk and significant
             negative, irreversible, diverse, varied and unprecedented impacts.

    95. Therefore, any sub-project will be considered non eligible as it involves the following:

     Construction or rehabilitation of works that would require social risks, namely a
      significant physical displacement of persons or the acquisition of large areas of private
      land or the demolition of a large number of individual houses or else, restricted
      significant access to economic resources;
     Construction or rehabilitation of structures that could exacerbate existing land-based
      social conflicts;
     Construction or rehabilitation of structures that could exacerbate existing land-based
      social conflicts;
     Realization of structures/works that could have an irreversible impact on physical cultural
      resources of an archaeological or historical nature or places of worship; 5
     Realization of works having a high and irreversible impact on any zone classified as a site
      of biological or ecological interest.

    96. In Section IV, the strengths, weaknesses and gaps, actions and opportunities and risks of
        the national system are presented in the light of the Key Principles that are applicable to
        the Program, and as described in the Bank policy and the Directive for the financing of
        the Program for Results

    97. Various controllable and effective measures will make it possible to mitigate the potential
        risks of eligible subprojects, and monitor their impact, during both the works phase and
        the operation of the structures. These measures correspond to those generally
        implemented in site monitoring and will be included in the Scopes of Work of the
        contracting firms and the monitoring of their application is carried out using tools
        (monitoring sheets).

    98. Burkina Faso has both an appropriate legal arsenal to effectively manage all aspects of
        the environmental and social management of the Program and specialized agencies,
        capable of managing most environmental and social aspects of the Program.

    99. Finally, it is opportune to recall that, under the Bank's policy for PforRs, any
        structures/works are also excluded when their estimated cost could be higher than certain
        specific amounts (high-value contracts) and that they would require a mandatory review
        by the Operations Procurement Review Committee (OPRC) of the World Bank.




5
 In the event that excavation works identifed archaeological or cultural properties, regulatory preventive measures
would be taken, with the involvement of the Directorate General of Cultural Heritage (DPC) in accordance with the
provisions contained in Articles 4, 5, 6 and 6. 7 of the UNESCO Convention on the Protection of the World Cultural
and Natural Heritage – ratified by Burkina Faso in 1984).

BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA                page 14
About Potential Social Conflicts
   100.      The Program does not operate in a conflict-affected context. Nevertheless, its
      design, and in particular its component on improving citizen participation, precisely aims
      at enabling citizens (including women, young people and the most vulnerable
      populations) to have access to information, to be consulted, to have easy access to
      appropriate complaints mechanisms.

   101.       In addition, the Program aims to support in each Participating Municipality the
      establishment of petition procedures and mechanisms that citizens can use. In this sense,
      the Program should help to mitigate social tensions and promote greater social cohesion.

Environmental and Social Management Instruments
   102.       All sub-projects to be funded by the Program will need to be reviewed using
      appropriate screening instruments (see Box 1 below). Environmental and social
      diagnoses will be conducted for each of the (sub)projects to determine the type of
      planning tool required based on the scale and significance of the environmental and
      social impacts.

Box 1 : SCREENING OF SUB-PROJECTS AND ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL
MANAGEMENT INSTRUMENTS                oriécccccc




    In accordance with the environmental assessment procedures in Burkina Faso and the
    requirements of the World Bank's PforR funding policy, all sub-projects subjet to Program
    funding will be subject to a screening or selection process, according to the following principles:

    According to Burkinabe procedures (Decree No. 2015-1187) for works in the water sector:
     An Environmental and Social Prescription will be prepared for « Category C » work with
       insignificant impact;
     An Environmental and Social Impact Notice (NIES) will be prepared for « Category B »
       activities with a moderate impact, to obtain an Environmental Compliance Notice from the
       Minister in charge of the environment.
     An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) will be prepared for « Category A »
       activities with a significant environmental and social impact, to obtain an Environmental
       Compliance Advice from the Minister in charge of the environment.
     The impact study must be supplemented by a public inquiry, the purpose of which is to collect
       the opinions, the counter-proposals of the parties involved in relation to the EIA that is
       presented
     A resettlement action plan (RAP) will be prepared when the number of involuntary physical
       and/or economic displacements is more than 200 people
     A succinct resettlement plan will be prepared when the number of involuntary physical and/or
       economic displacements is between 50 and 199 people.
     When the number of physical and/or economic involuntary displacements is less than 50
       people, the measures and modalities of resettlement are included in the report of the
       Environmental and Social Impact Statement

    The Contractual requirements (Caher des charges) of the contractors and regional operators
    responsible for the execution of the works will imperatively contain all the technical devices and
    environmental and social mitigation measures planned, as well as a monitoring and control


BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA          page 15
   system that meets the standards in force (including the safety of construction site workers and
   local people).
   All environmental and social safeguard instruments prepared for subprojects will have to be
   subject to appropriate public disclosure.
   Local beneficiaries will need to be informed of the commitments contained in these instruments
   and have access to a complaints management mechanism in the event of non-observance of these
   commitments.


II.5 PRIOR EXPERIENCES OF THE INSTITUTIONS INVOLVED IN THE PROGRAM
    103.      ONEA already has proven experience in environmental and social safeguards,
       particularly in the implementation of the Urban Water Sector Project (PSEU) (P149556).

   104.      In the context of community investment projects, MEA has also assumed
      responsibilities for environmental and social safeguards.

   105.      In the context of another PforR - the Public Administration Modernization
      Program (PPA) (P132216) - the Ministry of the Public Service of Labor and Social
      Security and the ministries of Justice and education have acquired experience in
      environmental and social safeguards. This program is still being implemented in Burkina
      Faso, with the involvement of BUNEE.

   106.       All these experiences are assets for a good consideration of environmental and
      social safeguards in the implementation of this PforR.




BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA         page 16
    SECTION III. DESCRIPTION OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SYSTEM


III.1 ENVIRONMENTAL SYSTEM

Political Framework 6
   107.        In Burkina Faso, environmental protection is one of the priority areas for policies
        having to contribute to achieving the sustainable development objectives. Among these
        policies, the most important ones are the following:

      108.      The National Economic and Social Development Plan (PNDES), adopted by the
         Governement on 20 July 2016, is built around three strategic axes and aims at reforming
         the institutions and modernizing the administration, developing the human capital and
         boosting buoyant sectors for economy and employment. It plans to use a participatory
         approach, a national economic and social development referential to make it possible to
         define and implement sectoral and regional priority actions over the 2016-2020 period. It
         builds on the "Burkina 2025" vision, the orientations of the Presidential Program and
         takes account of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), as well as the new
         emerging areas. Through its Axis 2 "developing human capital", the specific objective
         OS 2.5 "to improve the living environment, access to water, sanitation and quality energy
         services" aims to ensure that everyone's access to a decent living environment, to quality
         water and sanitation is guaranteed.

      109.      The National Sustainable Development Policy (PNDD), adopted in 2013, sets out
         a vision for sustainable development by 2050, in which "all sector strategies, all
         development plans and programs contribute to improving the populations level and
         quality of life, especially the poorest ones ". The protection of the environment, in
         addition to the preservation of natural resources, aims to provide a better living
         environment to the populations. Aiming at ensuring the environmental sustainability of
         any national initiative, the PNDD is part of promoting a healthy living environment
         through the sanitation of the natural environment.

      110.       The National Environmental Policy (NEP), adopted in 2007, reflects the
         Government's will to create a reference framework for taking environmental issues into
         account in the development policies and strategies. Environmental concerns involve, on
         the one hand, the natural resources (including water resources) which are threatened by
         accelerated degradation under the combined effects of climatic and anthropogenic
         factors, and on the other hand, the living environment in which the problems arise in
         terms of pollution and various nuisances. With particular reference to domestic
         wastewater and excreta, it notes that in urban areas, existing management systems consist
         mainly of traditional latrines and catch basins, and that a part of the population still does
         not have infrastructure for sanitation. These facilities are sources of odor nuisances and
         proliferation of insects and pests.



6
    See also Annex 1.

BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA     page 17
      111.       The overall objective of The Water Policy and Strategy, adopted by the Council of
         Ministers at its meeting on 1 July 1998, is to "contribute to sustainable development by
         providing appropriate solutions to water-related problems so that water does not become
         a limiting factor for socio-economic development. " This policy covers all uses of water.
         The consideration of sanitation issues thus comes from the penultimate guidance on the
         preservation of a healthy environment. The policy and strategy document devotes its
         guidance No. 4 to the actual implementation of the sanitation strategy and resource
         protection measures.

      112.       The objective of the National Sanitation Policy and Strategy, adopted in July
         2007, is to contribute to sustainable development by providing appropriate solutions to
         sanitation problems in order to improve the living and housing conditions of populations,
         to preserve their health and to protect natural resources.

      113.      Other related policies are linked with the water and sanitation sector. These
         include, in particular, the National Public Hygiene Policy, the National Gender Policy,
         the National Health Policy, and the National Social Protection Policy (2013-2022).

Legislative and Regulatory Framework 7
Constitution
   114.        The Constitution of Burkina Faso defines the fundamental rights and obligations
       of citizens, determines the form of state organization, and organizes the implementation
       of the universal republican principle of the separation of powers. The constitution of the
       Fourth Republic promulgated on 11 June 1991 contains many environmental references.
       Thus its preamble affirms the Burkinabè people's awareness of "... the absolute necessity
       of protecting the environment ...". The constitution recognizes (Article 29) to Burkinabè
       citizens the right to a healthy environment, while indicating that "the protection, the
       defense and the promotion of the environment are a duty for all". Also, its Article 14
       states that natural resources "belong to the population" and "must be used for the
       improvement of their living conditions". It starts from these provisions that many policies
       and strategies have developed for the protection of the environment.

Code of the Environment
   115.       Adopted by Law N°006-2013/AN of 02 April 2013, the Code of the Environment
      is devoted to the Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA), the Study and the Impact
      Notice on the Environment (EIE, NIE) in its Articles 25 to 34. According to Article 25 of
      this Law, the activities likely to have significant effects on the environment are subject to
      the prior opinion of the Minister of the Environment. The opinion is based on a Strategic
      Environmental Assessment (SEA), an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) or an
      Environmental Impact Statement (EIS).

Water management
  116.      Law No. 002-2001 / an of 8 February 2001 on water management and
      implementing legislation provides in Article 39 for the EIA / NIE prior to the issuance of

7
    See also Annex 2.

BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA   page 18
       the carrying out of installations, works, works likely to present dangers to the health and
       public safety, to reduce water resources, to modify substantially the level, the mode of
       flow or the regime of the waters.

Pubic health
   117.       Law No. 23/94 / ADP of 19 May 1994 on the Public Health Code deals with
       health protection of the environment (air and water pollution).

Public health
   118.        Law 2005-022 on Public Hygiene Code governs public health in Burkina Faso,
       including hygiene on public roads and squares, hygiene of swimming pools and bathing
       areas, housing, foodstuffs, water, industrial and commercial facilities, schools, preschools
       and sanitary buildings, public buildings and the natural environment and the fight against
       noise.

Sustainable Development
   119.       Law No. 008-2014/AN of 08 April 2014 on the Sustainable Development
       Orientation Law aims to create a unified national reference framework to ensure the
       coherence of actors' interventions through appropriate legal, political, and institutional
       reforms; to ensure economic efficiency, environmental sustainability and social equity in
       all development actions.

   120.       Several implementing decrees have been passed by the Government to strengthen
      its actuality. Annex 2 presents all these legal provisions, including the following aspects:
      the forest code, the public hygiene code, the public health code, the agrarian and land
      reform and the law relating to water management.

Decentralization
   121.       Law No. 021-2006/AN of 14 November 2006, on the General Code of Territorial
      Collectivities, states that the territorial collectivities co-operate with the State in the
      administration of the territory, in economic, social, educational, health, cultural, and
      scientific development, as well as the protection, development of natural resources and
      the improvement of the living environment. In Section 3 of the Code (which deals with
      the environment and natural resources), Article 89 confers on the urban commune, among
      others, the following competences: (i) elaboration of municipal action plans for the
      environment; (ii) participation in the protection and management of groundwater and
      surface water resources; (iii) sanitation; and (iv) fight against insalubrity, pollution and
      nuisances.

Institutional Actors in charge of the Environment

Ministry of the Environment, Green Economy, and Climate Change (MEEVCC)

   122.       The Ministry provides the implementation and monitoring of the Government's
      policy in terms of environment and sanitation.



BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA   page 19
       In environmental matters, it is responsible for: (i) the protection of the environment and
        the monitoring of international environmental conventions ratified by the country; (ii) the
        development and monitoring of environmental education programs; and (iii) the
        coordination of activities to combat desertification and other causes of environmental
        degradation.
       In the area of sanitation of the living environment, it is responsible for: (i) initiating,
        coordinating, regulating and monitoring actions related to cleansing the environment and
        improving the living in both rural and urban areas; (ii) developing a national policy for
        landscaping and beautification; (iii) developing regulatory texts in the fight against
        pollution and nuisances; (iv) supporting local government for public healthiness; (v)
        developing and controlling standards; and (vi) recycling and treating solid waste.

      123.       MEEVCC includes several directorates, amongst which the following:8

       The General Directorate for the Preservation of the Environment (DGPE). Accordig to
        Order No.2017-099/MEEVCC/SG/DGPE on the organization, powers and operation of
        the General Directorate for the Preservation of the Environment of 16 March 2017, the
        mission of the DGPE is to coordinate the implementation and the monitoring of the
        national policy in terms of improving the living environment, environmental education,
        fight against pollution and other nuisances and landscaping. It in addition has experience
        in raising awareness of environmental and health risks and impacts of human activities,
        monitoring the quality of water around mining, industrial, and artisanal sites, water
        analysis for the benefit of individuals, and of water analysis in cases of pollution.

       The Directorate of Prevention of Pollutions and Environmental Risks (DPRE) and the
        Environmental Quality Analysis Laboratory (LAQE) which, in their missions, provide
        support for the operationalization of BUNEE missions.

Ministry of the Environment and Sustainable Development (MEDD) : National Office for
Environental Assessments (BUNEE)
   124.        Article 2 of Order No. 2015-123 MERH/SG/ UNEE of 30 July 2015 specifies the
       tasks, organization and working of the National Office of Environmental Assessments
       (BUNEE). The mission of BUNEE is to coordinate the implementation and monitoring of
       the national environmental assessment policy. In this capacity, it is responsible for:

       Implementing national strategies in strategic environmental assessment, environmental
        impact assessment and environmental audit and environmental inspection;
       Promoting the practice of environmental assessments in collaboration with other
        structures of the Ministry;
       Validating environmental assessment reports;
       Issueing environmental requirements;
       Organizing the sessions of the Technical Committee on Environmental Assessments;
       organizing validation sessions for rehabilitation and closure plans for establishment or
        project sites;

8
    Annex 4 presents the whole organizational chart of the MEEVCC.

BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA   page 20
     Conducting public inquiries regarding the validation of environmental impact assessment
      reports;
     Following-up and monitoring in environmental terms projects and programs that have
      been subject to an environmental assessment;
     Preparing draft compliant feasibility or environmental compliance advices for the
      signature of the Minister of the Environment;
     Analyzing plans for the disinterestedness and resettlement of populations affected by
      project or program implementation;
     Participating in the work of interministerial structures responsible for environmental
      issues;
     Organizing and conducting environmental inspections over the whole national territory;
     Collecting revenue from BUNEE provided services.9

    125.       The Ministry of Water and Sanitation (MEA), the mandate of which is the
       definition and implementation of the national policy in terms of drinking water and
       sanitation.

    126.      The Ministry of Water and Sanitation (MEA) supervises the National Office for
       Water and Sanitation (ONEA). The objects of the Office are: (i) establishing, managing
       and protecting drinking water collection, supply, treatment and distribution facilities for
       urban and industrial purposes; and (ii) creating, promoting and improving, as well as
       managing collective, individual or autonomous sanitation facilities for the disposal of
       wastewater and excreta in urban and semi-urban areas. The relations between the State
       and ONEA are governed by a three-year contract and scopes of work that set the
       conditions for creating, operating and protecting water and sanitation infrastructure under
       ONEA management.

III.2 SOCIAL ASPECT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
III.2.1 National Legal Framework
    127.       The legal and regulatory context relates to land legislation (laws applicable to land
       tenure, land status), public participation, land acquisition, resettlement and land
       restructuring mechanisms. Other social aspects such as the social protection of the
       vulnerable ones, the management of the workers, the work of the under age people, the
       abuses on the communities living in the works execution zones will be considered. 10

    128.     From the legal viewpoint, according to Law No. 034-2012/AN of 02 July 2012 on
       Agrarian and Land Reform (RAF) in Burkina Faso, there are three types of land
       ownership regimes in Burkina Faso:


9
   To perform these missions, the BUNEE currently has a staff of 64 agents, 15 of whom are senior managers, i.e., a
ratio of 23.43%. The following profiles make up the team of executives: social affairs administrators (1), medical
biologist (1), lawyer (1), geology (1), environmental inspector (1) and certified teacher of senior and junior high
schools (1). These executives are engaged in analyzing the ESIA / NIES reports, monitoring Environmental and
Social Management Plans (ESMP) and conducting environmental inspections and possibly environmental audits in
accordance with the regulations for the whole country .
10
   Annex 3 presents the main laws and procedures involving expropriations.

BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA                page 21
     • Legal State Ownership Regime. The national land estate is a common heritage of the
       nation and the State, as guarantor of the general interest, organizes its management in
       accordance with the principles set out in Article 3 of the same law. The law thus confers
       to the State the ownership of all the lands of the National Land Area (DFN) with the
       exception of those ceded by the State.
     • Local Authority Ownership Regime. Local authorities have their own land, consisting of
       the parts of the national land estate ceded as State property.11 All lands located within the
       territorial limits of a territorial collectivity are of right the property of this territorial
       collectivity.
     • Land Tenure Rights of Individuals. The right to private ownership of land is recognized
       by law. The RAF in its Article 30 stipulates that the land heritage of individuals shall
       consist of: all land and other immovable property belonging to them in full ownership;
       rights of enjoyment on the lands of the unallocated real estate private estate of the State
       and local authorities and on the land heritage of individuals; rural land holdings; and rural
       land use rights. Thus the surrendered or acquired lands cease to be the property of the
       State.
     129.       The customary land tenure system is the accepted and dominant form of
        enjoyment of land tenure rights in rural Burkina Faso. In general, rural populations do not
        in fact recognize state ownership of land. Even though land and resources, particularly in
        conservation sites, protected areas or public utility areas, have been declared State
        property, they remain subject to the customary land management regime on a daily basis.
        Generally in the villages, landowners, in particular the village chiefs or the land chiefs or
        the lineage chiefs are the ones who are in charge of the land management.

Right to property
   130.        The Constitution of Burkina Faso guarantees to all the right to private property,
       its protection, as well as to expropriation. The right of property is guaranteed, but it
       cannot be exercised contrarily to social utility or in such a way as to prejudice the
       safety, freedom, existence or property of others. It can only be infringed in cases of
       public necessity established in the legal forms. No one shall be deprived of its
       enjoyment except for reasons of public utility and on the condition of just compensation
       determined in accordance with the law. This compensation must be prior to
       expropriation, except in case of emergency or force majeure».
     131.      Other laws provide that the national land property is the property of the State and
        therefore recognize the State's right of expropriation for reasons of public utility in the
        context of developments or achievements for the general interest in the different sectors
        of production.12 The RAF is somewhat explicit about the conditions, measures and
11
  This is stipulated by the RAF and subsequently by Law No. 055-2004/AN of 21 December 2004 on General
Code of Territorial Collectivities (CGCT) in Burkina Faso (and implementing texts) in its Article 80.
12
  See the following laws : La No. 034-2009/AN of 16 June 2009, La No. 034- 2002/AN of 14 November
2002, and Law No. 002-2001/AN 08 February 2001. These laws pose the principle of expropriation and
compensation and refer to the RAF with regard to compensation measures.

BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA     page 22
         modalities for evaluating compensation. According to the terms of the RAF, "the
         national land property is automatically owned by the State", and therefore the State may
         proceed with expropriations for public purposes.
     132.      The right of expropriation for the benefit of the State for public utility reasons
        provides for the repair of property and assets losses of the populations living in the area
        of a public utility zone. Compensation is the value for repairing losses. On the issue of
        compensation, the provisions of Articles 323 to 326 of the RAF define the methods of
        fixing compensations. Indeed, Article 319 states that "The compensation for
        expropriation is set either amicably or by the Judge. It is established in accordance with
        Article 323, taking account in each case of: (i) the status of the present value of the
        property, (ii) the gain or loss that results, for the party of such non-expropriated property,
        of the execution of the proposed work ". Also, it specifies that "the compensation of
        expropriation must include only the current and certain damage directly caused by the
        expropriation; it cannot extend to uncertain, eventual or indirect damage. Expropriation
        may give rise to in- kind compensation ". The above legal provisions are what regulates
        the legal mechanisms of expropriation for utility purposes in Burkina.

     133.       In the context of this program, in the case of physical or economic displacement
        of persons, all categories of PAPs will have to be taken into account in the RAP. For
        PAPs holding appropriate land titles prior to the works, the procedure of expropriation for
        reasons of public utility in force in Burkina will have to be followed and the
        compensation will have to include the costs of obtaining land titles. Although national
        resettlement systems are flawed in relation to Bank policy, the chances of people being
        resettled as a result of the project are minimal. The program excludes activities that will
        cause the displacement of a large number of people.

Institutional Actors
   134.        In terms of land management in Burkina Faso, the management organizations or
       structures are defined by the RAF and Law No. 034-2009/AN on rural land tenure and
       priority implementing texts. These organizations are at four levels: national, regional,
       communal and village.

      At national level: At national level: With reference to Law No. 034, a national body for
       consultation, monitoring and evaluation of rural land policy and legislation is set up
       bringing together all public, private and public sector, civil society stakeholders
       concerned with the rational, equitable, peaceful and sustainable management of land in
       rural areas, including representatives of customary authorities, local authorities, research
       institutions and centers of excellence. Currently this instance is not yet operational.
      At regional level: At the regional level: The competent deconcentrated technical services
       of the State are those which are in charge of providing support to the Rural Land
       Services (SFR) of local authorities as stipulated by Law No. 034 on rural land tenure.13


13
   This support focuses on capacity building, technical assistance of the regions in the establishment of their regional
land offices, management of their own land domain as well as in the development and the concerted and
participative implementation of their regional land use planning scheme.

BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA                     page 23
    At municipal level: the Rural Land Service (SFR) at the level of each rural municipality
     is responsible for all the activities of management and security of the land area of the
     municipality (including local areas of natural resources for common use ) and activities
     to secure land tenure of the rural property of individuals in the municipality. In
     conjunction with the village commissions, the SFR regularly holds the rural land
     registers (register of rural land holdings, register of rural land transactions, register of
     local land charters, register of rural land conciliations). There is also, at the communal
     level, a local land consultation body that each rural commune can create to examine all
     issues relating to land tenure security for local actors, local land management and
     governance, land equity issues and sustainable use of rural lands and make any
     proposals they deem appropriate. This body has an advisory role. All these land
     management structures at the municipal level, as provided for by Law No. 034 on rural
     land tenure, are not operational in all communes, since not all the implementing texts
     have yet been adopted.
    At village level: A Village Land Commission, created in each village and composed of
     customary and traditional village authorities in charge of land, is responsible for
     contributing to the security and management of land.

   135.      In addition to these land management structures, Law No. 034 defines
      intermediary institutions and services to support the management and securing of rural
      land (such as the competent deconcentrated technical services of the State, responsible
      for providing their support to rural land services in managing the land area of local
      authorities and securing the rural land assets of individuals).
Constitutional Appeal Body
   136.        The Office of the Ombudsman of the Republic of Faso was established by
       Organic Law No. 22/94/ADP of 17 May 1994. The Ombudsman is an independent
       administrative authority, which receives no instruction from any political, administrative,
       legislative, or judicial authority, and which receives the grievances of the citizens relating
       to the working of State administrations, municipal authorities, public institutions and any
       other organization entrusted with a public service mission.




BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA    page 24
             SECTION IV. ASSESSMENT OF INSTITUTIONAL CAPACITY AND
                                 PERFORMANCE


      137.      From the previous analysis of the legal and institutional framework for
         environmental and social management in Burkina Faso, a number of conclusions can be
         drawn:

       In the areas of environmental and social management, most Burkinabe institutions are in
        place and their mandate is clearly defined. The national environmental impact assessment
        system is based on a well-rounded process of diagnosis and assessment of the nature of
        impacts and preparation of appropriate environmental and social safeguards
       However, the institutions have limited human resources with a strong need for capacity
        building. Moreover, they do not have enough financial resources to function in a suitable
        way.
       Administrative procedures are generally slow and do not allow for rapid and timely
        decision-making (see, for example, long delays in obtaining the Environmental
        Compliance Advice from project proponents).
       Public consultations only concern ESIAs in public inquiries, whereas these should extend
        to NIES.
       Public inquiries are often public information sessions and do not result in meaningful
        public consultations that promote stakeholder participation in decision-making.
       The complaints management system is not operational, especially in the context of
        interventions in rural areas.


      138.      It has to be recognized that these gaps wille ventually to be bridged by appropriate
         reforms and arrangements. Together with the community of technical and financial
         partners, the World Bank is already playing and could play further an important role in
         supporting the needed improvements.

      139.       However, as of now, in keeping with this PforR, it is possible to seize the
         opportunity to improve certain technical and administrative aspects, to create a new
         dynamic, to specify and consolidate partnerships and synergies among stakeholders, and
         strengthen the institutional capacity of all stakeholders involved in environmental and
         social safeguards at the national, regional, communal and village levels.

140.     The strengths, weaknesses and gaps, actions and opportunities and risks of national
   systems are presented in Table 4 below, in the light of the Key Principles that are applicable to
   the Program, as described in the World Bank Policy and the guideline for Financing Programs
   for Results.



   BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA   page 25
Table 1 : Core Principles
  Core Principle 1: General Principle of Environmental and Social Assessment and
  Management
  Bank Policy for PforR      Bank's Guidelines for PforR Financing: The program procedures will:
  Financing
                              Operate within an appropriate legal and regulatory framework to
  Environmental and
                               guide program-wide environmental and social assessment
  social management
  procedures and              Incorporate elements of good environmental and social assessment
  processes are intended       practice including (i) preliminary screening of potential effects ;
  to (a) promote               (ii) consideration of the strategic and technical aspects involved,
  environmental and            as well as potential cumulative and transboundary impacts.; (iii)
  social sustainability in     identification of measures to mitigate undesirable environmental
  program design (b)           and social impacts that cannot be avoided or minimized; (iv) a
  avoid, minimize or           clear articulation of institutional responsibilities and resources to
  mitigate undesirable         support the implementation of plans; and (v) responsiveness and
  impacts; and (c)             accountability through stakeholder consultation, periodic reporting
  promote decision-            of program information,
  making on the               The establishment of a conflict management mechanism oriented
  environmental and            towards: (i) conflict resolution, (ii) systematic recording of
  social effects of the        grievances through appropriate channels; (iii) periodic reporting of
  program                      the grievance management situation - specifying the nature of the
                               grievances resolved and the status of unresolved grievances and the
                               reasons for the non-resolution.
  Applicable : The work funded under the Program could indeed have low to moderate negative
  impacts.
  The ESSA has been prepared and its recommendations will be incorôrated into the overall
  action plan of the program.
  By following the principles presented in the ESSA, a NIES or an ESMP will be imperatively
  prepared for any individual investment project which, according to the initial diagnosis and the
  screening system put in place, would have a moderate impact.
  STRENGTHS
   The country has adequate legislatifs and regulatory frameworks to appropriately manage the
     environmental and social impacts of the Program.
   The country has an institution in charge of environmental assessments (BUNEE)
   The national environmental impact assessment system is based on a well-rounded process of
     diagnosis and assessment of the nature of impacts and preparation of appropriate
     environmental and social safeguards

  WEAKNESSES AND GAPS
   Environmental and social project management procedures follow a centralized logic – by
    concentrating responsibilities at the BUNEE level.
   Despite the existence of the regulatory framework, the institutions in charge do not have the
    human resources or the financial means to enforce the laws.
   Timelines for obtaining Environmental Compliance Advices from project proponents
      are relatively long.

BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA         page 26
  ACTIONS AND OPPORTUNITIES
   Organization of awareness-raising initiatives of all actors and stakeholders about the
    problems of environmental management
   Launch of training initiatives aimed to strengthen more appropriately the capacities of
    central (especially BUNEE) and local officials in environmental and social safeguard
    procedures
   Opportunities for institutional actors to strengthen the dialogue with users and their social
    accountability as service providers
   The forthcoming decentralization reform of BUNEE
   The on-going development of a national compensation reference system for PAPs
   Individuals and communities who think they have been harmed as a result of the Program
    need to be informed about how to approach the existing National Recourse Mechanism or
    the World Bank Grievance Redress Service (GRS) - so that their complaints are reviewed
    promptly to address relevant concerns.

  RISKS
   Poor implementation of environmental and social management rules and procedures.
   Failure to enforce current environmental regulations in atimely manner.

  Core Principle 2: Natural Habitats and Physical Cultural Resources
  The Bank's Policy for        The Bank's guideline for funding PforRs as relevant to be supported by
  Financing PforRs:            the program:
  Environmental and             include appropriate measures for the identification and
  Social Management                preliminary screening of potentially important resources of
  Procedures and                   biodiversity and cultural sites;
  Processes are designed        support and promote the conservation, maintenance and
  to avoid, minimize or            rehabilitation of natural habitats;
  reduce undesirable            avoid the significant conversion or degradation of critical natural
  impacts on Natural               sites and if this is not technically feasible, include measures to
  Habitats and Cultural            mitigate the impacts of program activities;
  Resources resulting           take into account the adverse impacts on physical cultural property
  from the Program.                and, if justified, take measures, adequate to avoid, minimize or
                                   mitigate such impacts.
  Non applicable : No program activity performed within biodiversity areas. No investment will
  be eligible if it threatens fragile ecosystems. No investment will be eligible if it directly threatens
  the cultural and religious heritage of a region.



  Core Principle 3: Public and Workers Safety

  The Bank's PforR financing         Bank Guideline for Financing PfrRs:
  policy: Environmental and           promote the safety of the community, individuals and
  social management procedures          workers through proper design, securing operations for
  and processes are designed to         constructing and maintaining infrastructure and activities
  ensure the safety of the public       that may depend on such infrastructure, inspection or
  and workers against potential         taking corrective measures, if necessary, of associated
  risks associated with: (a             works;

BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA             page 27
  construction and / or                promote the use of good practices in the production,
  management of facilities or              management, storage, transport and disposal of hazardous
  other operational practices              materials from the construction or operations of the
  developed under the program;             program;
  (b) exposure to chemical             promote the adoption of integrated pesticide management
  materials or hazardous waste;            practices to manage or reduce disease vectors; provide
  and                                      training to workers involved in the production, supply,
  (c) reconstruction or                    storage, transportation, use, and disposal of hazardous
  rehabilitation of infrastructure         chemicals in accordance with international guidelines and
  located in areas near hazardous          conventions;
  natural areas                        integrate measures to avoid, minimize or reduce
                                           community, individual or worker risks when program
                                           activities are located in hazardous natural areas such as
                                           floods, hurricanes, earthquakes, and other severe weather
                                           or climate events.
  Applicable. The work undertaken under the Program could have an impact on the safety of the
  public and construction site workers. Worksite workers could be exposed to work-related
  injuries, water pollution, air pollution, solid waste, and toxic or hazardous materials on the site.
  People in areas near the sites could also be exposed to the same dangers.
  STRENGTHS
   Burkina Faso's legal system includes safety provisions on construction sites. The safety of
     workers is ensured by the Labor Inspectorate.
   There are national policies and guidelines regarding the safety and health of the public and
     workers. These cover a range of key aspects, including the control of environmental
     pollution; labor law ; regulations on occupational health and safety; and standards for
     emissions and releases in the work environment.

  WEAKNESSES AND GAPS
   Worker safety provisions are not always included in civil works contracts.
   The insufficient number of screening officers does not allow for regular monitoring of the
    application of site provisions
   The national EIA system does not include all aspects of public and workers safety.
   There is a general lack of awareness of public health and safety issues, particularly with
    regard to exposure to hazardous materials or safety aspects at work

  ACTIONS AND OPPORTUNITIES
   Information and training on safety measures in construction sites.
   Role of the Labor Inspectorate at the local level.

  RISKS
   Not entirely efficient enforcement of current environmental regulations.
   Non-involvement of Labor Inspectorate officials


  Core Principle 4: Land Acquisition
  The Bank's PforR financing      The Bank's guideline for financing the PforR: if relevant to be
  policy: Acquisition of land     borne by the Program:
  and loss of access to natural    avoid or minimize land acquisition and associated
  resources is managed to             undesirable impacts;

BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA            page 28
  avoid or minimize                identify and address the economic and social impacts caused
  displacements, and to make          by land acquisition or loss of access to natural resources,
  sure that the affected people       including the affected populations who may not have legal
  are assisted in improving           rights to the assets or resources that they use or occupy;
  or, at least, rehabilitating     provide sufficient compensation to purchase replacement
  their livelihoods and their         assets of equivalent value to those lost and to support any
  living conditions                   transition expenses paid before the acquisition of the land or
                                      the restriction of access;
                                   take additional measures to improve or restore livelihoods if
                                      the acquisition of the land has caused the loss of income-
                                      generating opportunities (e.g. loss of crop production, or
                                      employment); and
                                   restore or replace the public infrastructure or community
                                      services that would be affected.
  Applicable. The work could: (i) involve temporary physical displacements of residential
  households or businesses; (ii) require the acquisition of private land and, consequently,
  expropriation for public purposes and involuntary resettlement of residential households or
  businesses; and (iii) temporarily disrupt local craft and economic activities.
  By following the principles presented in the ESSA, a PAR will be imperatively prepared for any
  individual investment project which, according to the social assessment and the screening set
  up, would have a moderate social impact.

  STRENGHTS
  The indemnities or compensation of affected persons are set through the existing land tenure
  system in Burkina Faso .
  In terms of complaints and conflict management, the Burkinabe law recognizes the recourse to
  the competent courts in the event of refusal by the Compensation Commission.

  WEAKNESSES AND GAPS
   The national land acquisition procedures are unclear.
   The minimization of the movement of persons is not explicitly provided for by national
    legislatio
   The legislation on expropriation for public utility purposes in Burkina Faso does not
    specifically deal with certain matters, such as loss of income and livelihood, restriction of
    access to material goods, natural resources (economic resettlement).
   Informal occupants are not recognized by the Burkinabe law
   According to national procedures, in the event of disagreement, payment of the
    compensation to the affected persons is made after the decision of the court or after the
    decision of the court of cassation. But appeals are not suspensive of work.
   Customary land ownership is recognized, but must be confirmed before being compensated
    and informal title deeds are not recognized by national legislation
   There are no specific measures for assisting resettlement.
   Monitoring/evaluation is not provided for by national law in the event of resettlement.

  ACTIONS AND OPPORTUNITIES
   Provide a system of compensation in kind and/or in cash, as the case may be.
   Make sure that informal occupants receive compensation and assistance for their
    resettlement as well as recovery of their economic situation.
   Provide adequate follow-up of the affected people so that they recover the ex-ante project
    conditions and do not become poorer

BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA          page 29
   Set up a relocation assistance system
   Establish a genuine joint administration/civil society mechanism for handling and following
    up complaints
   Provide for indicators for monitoring social compliance with national standards.
   Exclude from the program investments that cause the displacement of a large number of
    people.

  RISKS
   Non-observance of the existing legislation.
   Lack of human resources and financial means at level of national and local institutions in
     charge of enforcing laws and arrangements.
   Lack of coordination among the institutional actors involved - which results in a lack of
     clarity and complementarity in the actions and a low capitalization of lessons learned.

  Core Principle 5 : Social Considerations: Indigenous Peoples and Vulnerable Groups
  Bank Policy for PforR    The Bank's PforR Financing Guideline: if relevant to be covered by the
  Funding: Adequate        Program:
  attention to cultural     engage in free, prior and informed consultation if indigenous
  relevance, and               peoples are potentially affected (positively or negatively) to
  equitable access to          determine whether the Program has a comprehensive community
  program benefits, with       support component;
  special attention to the  make sure that indigenous peoples can participate in defining the
  rights and interests of      opportunities they can benefit from operating customary resources
  indigenous peoples           or endogenous knowledge
  and the needs and         pay attention to groups that are vulnerable, in difficulties, or
  concerns of vulnerable       disadvantaged, including, if relevant, poor people, disabled,
  groups.                      women and children, elderly people, or marginalized ethnic
                               groups.
                           If necessary, special measures will be taken to promote equitable
                           access to the benefits of the program.
  Applicable (with the exception of the fact that there are no indigenous peoples in Burkina Faso).
  The program includes specific measures favoring vulnerable groups: the establishment of water
  price equity, its accessibility by the rural poor and the total subsidy for vulnerable people of
  sanitation infrastructure. The identification of vulnerable groups will be done by the community
  on reliable and consensual criteria.
  STRENGTHS
   Surveys are aimed at informing the population about conducting the project and to gather
     their observations; information posters are posted for this purpose in public places. The law
     provides for the services of the Ombudsman of Faso in favor of vulnerable persons.
   The social action services present in all project regions are willing to provide support to the
     program (identification of vulnerable people among others)
  WEAKNESSES AND GAPS
   Burkinabe law does not provide for specific measures for vulnerable groups.
   The complaint management systemat local level is not operational.
  ACTIONS AND OPPORTUNITIES
   Define and put in place a strong strategy for stakeholder engagement (awareness raising and
    consultation, information disclosure and grievance mechanism) as part of the outreach

BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA         page 30
    program, targeting in particular vulnerable groups.
   Specify any form of support to the most vulnerable groups through appropriate
    compensation.
   Ensure the functionality of the complaint management system
   Ensure subsidies for sanitation infrastructure for the benefit of vulnerable people
   Respect the equity of water price and its accessibility by the poor in rural areas
   Inform and sensitize the beneficiary populations on the consideration of gender and
    vulnerable people in the program, as well as on the grievance management mechanism

  RISKS
  Lack of clarity and coherence regarding the mechanism for implementing public consultations
  and stakeholder engagement could alienate poor and vulnerable groups.

  Core Principle 6 : Social Considerations – Social Conflict

  The Bank's Policy for            The Bank's Guideline for Financing PforR) pays particular
  Financing the PforR: Avoid       attention to conflict risks including distributional equity and
  exacerbation of social conflict, cultural sensitivities.
  especially in fragile states, in
  post-conflict areas or areas
  subject to territorial disputes
  Non applicable. The Program is not implemented in a conflict zone.




BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA          page 31
     SECTION V. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT ACTION
                              PLAN

141.     The Program will support specific measures to improve conditions for the performance
   of the environmental and social management system in the implementation and monitoring of
   Program activities. These measures are proposed as part of an Environmental and Social
   Management Action Plan (ESM/AP) - this Plan is part of the overall Program Action Plan as
   such. The ESM/AP identifies three components of recommendations, each with distinct and
   complementary activities

     ➢ First Component of the AP/ESM: Strengthening of the Program's environmental and
       social management system for investment. Ce volet comprend les éléments suivants :
          Technical Manual. Preparation of a Technical Manual for Environmental and Social
           Management (MTGES) of investment for the Ministry of Water and Sanitation (MEA)
           and its National Office for Water and Sanitation (ONEA) and all technical services,
           as well as all stakeholders, who will be involved at national, regional and local level
           in the implementation of the Program, so that environmental and social management
           procedures are duly understood, perfectly appropriate and followed. This Manual will
           be an integral part of the Program Operation Manual (Special Annex).

             This Manual will be useful not only for the implementation of the Program, but also
             for the other projects of the Ministry of Water and Sanitation (MEA) and its National
             Office of Water and Sanitation (ONEA).

             It will be in compliance with both national environmental and social assessment
             procedures and the World Bank's PforR funding policy. In particular, the Manual will
             present the procedures and tools for the preparation of an Environmental and Social
             Management Plan (ESMP) for structural sub-projects with moderate environmental
             risks and a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). for structural subprojects with moderate
             social risks.

             The Manual will particularly address the gaps identified in the national systems (see
             above). In particular, the Manual will aim to define and set up the complaint and
             grievance management system at the local level - in parallel with the agreed
             procedures (including in relation to the services of the Ombudsman and the
             grievances submitted to the Grievance Settlement Service (GRS) of the World Bank).

          Interinstitutional Convention between the Ministry of Water and Sanitation (MEA),
           National Office for Water and Sanitation (ONEA), on one hand, and the National
           Bureau of Environmental Assessments (BUNEE), on the other hand. The content of
           this agreement will establish the conditions for collaboration (awareness raising,
           information and training, rapid review and certification of sub-projects,
           environmental and social control and monitoring, etc.). This convention could be
           completed with collaboration protocols with other well-targeted institutions



  BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA   page 32
   ➢ Second Component of the AP/ESM: Capacity building in terms of environmental and
     social management for key actors and representatives of Program stakeholders. This
     component includes two distinct types of activities:

        Human Resources of the PCU for Environmental and Social Management.
         Recruitment or appointment by MEA and ONEA of a social specialist and an
         environmental specialist within the PCU, who will be employed full-time throughout
         the implementation of the Program and have:

               •   Basic training in environmental and/or social sciences;
               •   A minimum of years of experience in conducting environmental and social
                   management of similar programs / projects.
            These specialists, in close collaboration with all the stakeholders, will be responsible
            for ensuring: (i) the coordination and monitoring of the implementation of all the
            actions relating to the environmental and social management of the Program; (ii) the
            organization of all training, information and awareness raising initiatives on the
            environmental and social risks of the Program; (iii) the collection and centralization
            of all information relating to the monitoring of mitigation measures; (iv) the
            monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of mitigation measures and the
            integration of data at the information system level (in accordance with the principles
            described and presented in the MTGES); (v) the monitoring of the implementation
            and operation of the complaint management system; and (vi) the preparation of
            reports on the environmental and social aspects of the Program.

        Training to MTGES. A training program will be developed for the implementation
         of the MTGES for all the different stakeholders involved in the implementation of the
         Program, in particular: the members of the environmental units of the MEA, ONEA,
         and of the other ministries involved, members of the "Environment and local
         development" communal commissions, of the "Territorial and Land
         Development"commissions, BUNEE, and the Regional Directorates for the
         Environment, Green Economy and Climate Change (DREEVCC), of social action,
         etc.

           This training will aim to sensitize and inform a fairly broad audience on the content
           of the Program MTGES. This will include, in particular: (i) understanding of MTGES
           and its procedures and practices; and (ii) control of environmental and social
           management tools, namely: Screening Form, EIA, ESMP and Resettlement Action
           Plan (RAP), which will be prepared for individual sub-projects, according to the
           extent of their respective environmental and social risks, in accordance with the
           national arrangements and the World Bank's policy on PforR funding. It should be
           noted that these initiatives will support the establishment and operation of the citizen
           engagement and complaint management system.

        Specialized training in monitoring and control of GES mitigation and reporting
         measures: This more in-depth training in monitoring and control and reporting will
         be provided to representatives of all local, regional and national institutions

BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA   page 33
             (including contractors) involved in the collection, processing and analysis of
             information regarding the implementation of mitigation measures. The Monitoring
             Sheets (contained in the MGTES), once completed by the contracting firms, will be
             verified and validated by the local and regional authorities, before being sent to the
             environmental and social protection specialists of the PCU, to be recorded at the level
             of integrated information and monitoring evaluation system. The monitoring reports
             will include, as a matter of priority, the monitoring of the implementation of the
             environmental and social mitigation measures for each of the approved and
             completed sub-projects.

142.     Table 2 summarizes all the elements of the ESM Action Plan, an integral part of the
   overall Action Plan of the Program:

          All costs of these elements of the ESM Action Plan will be included in the Program
           overall budget
          Conversely, the cost of environmental and social remedies will be included in the
           investment budgets of sub-projects themselves.




  BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA   page 34
Table 2 : Environmental and Social Management Action Plan
                                                                                            DLI or
   N°          Measures                Activities        Responsibility    Deadline          Loan
                                                                                           Covenant

    1.   STRENGTHENING THE ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SYSTEMS
         OF THE PROGRAM
  1.1     Technical Manual       Preparation and         MEA/ONEA in      90 days after   Loan
          for Environmental      adoption of a           collaboration    the entry       Covenant
          and Social             MTGES                   with BUNEE       into force of
          Management                                                      the Program
          (MTGES)




  1.2     MEA /ONEA -            Preparation and         MEA/ONEA         90 days after
          BUNEE                  enforcement of an       and BUNEE        the entry
          Interinstitutional     MEA / ONEA and                           into force of
          Agreement              BUNEE                                    the Program
                                 interinstitutional
                                 cooperation
                                 agreement.

                                 The content will
                                 define the conditions
                                 for collaboration for
                                 the rapid review and
                                 certification of
                                 program subproject
                                 reports

    2. CAPACITY BUILDING IN TERMS OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL
       MANAGEMENT

  2.1     Human Resources        Recruitment and         MEA/ONEA         Program         Loan
          for Environmental      keeping of at least                      entry into      Covenant
          and Social             one social specialist                    force
          Management             and an environmental
                                 specialist within the
                                 PCU.


BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA          page 35
  2.2     Training to MTGES      Development of the       MEA/ONEA in     90 days after   Loan
                                 training program for     collaboration   the entry       Covenant
                                 the application of the   with BUNEE      into force of
                                 MTGES for the                            the Program
                                 various stakeholders
                                 involved in the
                                 implementation of the
                                 Program.

  2.3     Monitoring, Control    More specialized         PCU             90 days after   Loan
          and Reporting          training in the                          the entry       Covenant
                                 monitoring and                           into force of
                                 control of various                       the Program
                                 environmental and
                                 social mitigation
                                 measures: for
                                 stakeholders at local,
                                 regional and national
                                 level




BURKINA FASO: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Water Resources Information Program, ESSA          page 36
  CONCLUSION

143.      The World Bank organized a public consultation with representatives of key
   stakeholders, civil society organizations and the private sector to present and discuss the
   draft ESSA (see Minutes in Annex 10).

144.     Throughout the duration of the Program, the Burkinabé party will be responsible for
   organizing consultations on the specific activities (investment sub-projects) of the Program.

145.    The final revised version of ESSA will be publicly disseminated through the World
   Bank external website and also on the MEA and ONEA websites.

146.      Hard copies will be available at national and regional branches of the relevant
   institutions.




         BURKINA FASO: Programme pour le Secteur de l’Eau, ESES       page 37
                                   ANNEXES




BURKINA FASO: Programme pour le Secteur de l’Eau, ESES   page 38
Annex 1 : Main Legislative Arrangements


 POLICY DOCUMENTS AND PLANNING                                           APPRAISAL
           DOCUMENTS
National Economic and Social Development Plan
(PNDES)
National Policy for Sustainable Development
(PNDD)
National Environmental Policy (PNE)                Create a reference framework for the consideration of
                                                   environmental issues in development policies and
                                                   strategies.
National Territory Development Policy adopted      Three fundamental orientations: i) economic
by Decree No. 2006-                                development; ii) social integration; iii) sustainable
362/PRES/PM/MEDEV/MATD/MFB/MAHRH/                  management of the natural environment
MID/MECV of 20 July 2006
National Gender Policy (PNG) of Burkina Faso       Promote a participatory and equitable development of
                                                   men and women in respect of their fundamental rights.
National Climate Change Adaptation Plan (PNA)      This law inter alia provides for :
                                                   - preserving water resources and improving access to
                                                   sanitation;
                                                   - protecting people and property against extreme weather
                                                   events and natural disasters
                                                   - protecting and improving populations health.
National Rural Land Security Policy (PNSFMR)       Provide the effective mobilization and actual
                                                   development of rural lands, water resources, forests,
                                                   wildlife and fisheries resources.
National Water Policy                              The main objective is to "contribute to the sustainable
                                                   development of the country, by providing appropriate
                                                   solutions to water-related problems, in an environment
                                                   particularly affected by climate change and in observance
                                                   of an integrated water resources management »
National Sanitation Policy and Strategy (July      The overarching objective of the policy is to contribute to
2007)                                              sustainable development by providing appropriate
                                                   solutions to sanitation-related problems in order to
                                                   improve living and habitat conditions of populations,
                                                   preserving their health and protecting natural resources.
National Public Hygiene Policy (PNHP) (Decree      The following main objectives: (i) to provide the
No. 2004-538/PRES/PM/MS/MFB/MATD)                  indispensable conditions for survival; ii) to prevent
                                                   diseases and intoxications; (iii) to keep an enabling
                                                   climate for productivity of human activities; iv)
                                                   guarantee comfort and pleasure of life.




       BURKINA FASO: Programme pour le Secteur de l’Eau, ESES               page 39
  Annex 2 : Legislation and Regulations Relevant to the Program


LAWS AND REGULATIONS                                                      APPRAISAL
The Constitution of Burkina Faso        According to the provisions of Article 15 of the Constitution, property rights are
                                        guaranteed for all and can only be infringed in cases of public necessity
                                        established in legal forms. No one shall be deprived of their enjoyment except
                                        for reasons of public utility and on the condition of just compensation
                                        determined in accordance with the law. This compensation must be prior to
                                        expropriation except in case of emergency or force majeure.
The 1804 Civil Code                     The Code provides that "No one may be compelled to surrender their property,
                                        except for reasons of public utility, and with just and prior compensation".
Law No. 008-2014/AN of 08               Guaranteeing economic efficiency, environmental sustainability and social
April 2014 on orientation on            equity in all development actions
sustainable development in
Burkina Faso
Law 034-2012/AN of 02 July              Article 300 of this law provides that "Expropriation for public purposes is a
2012 on Agrarian and Land               form of involuntary transfer of actual real estate rights allowing the authorities,
Reform (RAF) in Burkina Faso            in the respect of the rights of the holders of real property rights, to mobilize the
                                        land resources for the needs of territory development operations, recognized as
                                        being of public utility "..
                                        Despite the adoption of Decree No. 2014-481 / PRES / PM / MATD / MEF /
                                        MHU of 3 June 2014 determining the terms and conditions of application of the
                                        RAF Law, there remains to date a legal vacuum because the specific question of
                                        compensation scales for those affected is not dealt with.
Law 034-2009/AN of 16 June              It applies to rural land. The State as guarantor of the general interest organizes
2009 on Rural Land Regime               the actual legal recognition of legitimate local land rights on rural lands, ensures
                                        the guarantee of property rights and enjoyment regularly established on land
                                        (Article 4). Article 33, which deals with compensation arrangements in the case
                                        of expropriation for reasons of public utility, refers to a decree issued by the
                                        Council of Ministers. There is also a legal vacuum at this level because the said
                                        decree has not been taken to date.

                                        The law also provides the recognition and protection of customary land rights
                                        formalized through an administrative act called Certificate of Rural Land
                                        Ownership (APFR). Other relevant provisions fall within the framework of the
                                        grievance mechanism and take account of vulnerable groups, namely, the
                                        obligation to attempt conciliation in the case of rural land disputes before
                                        referral to the competent courts, the formulation of specific provisions on land
                                        for the benefit of women and young people.
Law 055-2004/AN of 21                   The Code does not contain provisions directly dealing with the subject of
December 2004 on General Code           compensation for reasons of public utility. However, the administrative bodies
of Territorial Collectivities, set of   that are local authorities are involved in the process of expropriation for reasons
changes                                 of public utility.


Law 006-2013/AN of 2/04/2013            This law establishes in Article 25 the principle according to which the activities
on Code of the Environment in           likely to have significant impacts on the environment are subjected to the
Burkina Faso                            preliminary opinion of the Minister in charge of the environment. The opinion
                                        is based on a Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA), an Environmental
                                        Impact Assessment (EIA) or an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS).

                                        Several implementing decrees are relevant for the protection of the environment
                                        and the rights of individuals. They are:


          BURKINA FASO: Programme pour le Secteur de l’Eau, ESES                         page 40
LAWS AND REGULATIONS                                                APPRAISAL
                                 Decree No. 2008-125/PRES/PM/MECV of 7 March 2008 on the
                                 establishment, roles and responsibilities, organization and operation of
                                 environmental units in the various ministerial departments, administrative
                                 regions and public and private enterprises;
                                 Decree No.2015-1187/PRES-TRANS/ PM/ MERH/ MATD/ MME/ MS/
                                 MARHASA/ MRA/ MICA/ MHU/ MIDT/ MCT of 22 October 2015, laying
                                 down the conditions and procedures for carrying out and validating the strategic
                                 environmental assessment, the study and the environmental and social impact
                                 statement
                                 Decree No.2015- 1203 /PRES-TRANS/PM/ MERH/MATD/MJDHPC on
                                 terms and conditions for organizing and conducting the environmental
                                 inspection
                                 Decree No.2001-185/PRES/PM/MEE of 07 May 2001, setting the pollutant
                                 discharge standard in the air, the water and the soils
                                 Decree No.2015-1205 establishing water discharge standards;
                                 Decrer No.98-322/PRES/PM/MEE/MIHU/MATS/MEF/MEM/MCC/MCIA of
                                 28 July 1998 establishing dangerous, unhealthy and inconvenient establishment
                                 opening conditions
                                 Decree No.2006- 232 PRES/PM/MECV/MFB/MJ/MATD of 30 May 2006
                                 defining the procedures and scales of transactions applicable to infringements of
                                 the Code of the environment in Burkina Faso
Law No.23/94/ADP of 19 May       It deals with the protection of the environment (air and water pollution)
1994 on Public Health Code
Law No. 022-2005/AN on Public    It deals with public health, including access to and protection of drinking water
Healths in Burkina Faso
                                 It regulates working conditions through its relating provisions (Articles 149 and
Law 28-2008/AN of 13 May         153) to the prohibition of discrimination in employment and labor as well as the
2008 on Labor Code in Burkina    worst forms of child labor. Also, according to Article 36 of this same law, the
Faso                             employer is obliged on the site, "to comply with the hygiene and safety
                                 conditions to the standards provided by the regulations in force"
Law 017-2006/AN of 18 May        Respect of the provisions of the law through the Master Plans of Development
2006 on Code of Urban            and Urbanism (SDAU) and Plans of Land Use (POS) in the project intervention
Development and Construction     areas. According to Articles 84 and 85 of this law, in addition to the common
and its implementation Decrees   law procedures that are amicable transfer, exchange, purchase, donations and
                                 legacies, the property in escheat, the modes of land acquisition in view of the
                                 developments provided for by this law are mainly expropriation for public
                                 purposes and the right of pre-emption.
Law 002-2001/AN of 06            The law provides for and refers to decrees, the determination of the terms of
/02/2001 on Law of Orientation   compensation of landowners and other owners of land rights who have suffered
relating to Water Management     a direct, material and certain harm due to the classification of their land among
and its implementation texts     the dependencies of the public domain of water as a result of a change in the
                                 limits of the latter, that such change results from the provisions of this Law or
                                 from an artificial or natural change in water course or regime.
                                 Relevant implementation decrees help to ensure the sustainable management of
                                 water resources:
                                 Decree No.2005-185/PRES/PM/MAHRH/MCE of 04 April 2005 determining
                                 the nomenclature of installations, structures, works, and activities subject to
                                 authorization or declaration (IOTA)
                                 Decree No.2004-581/PRES/PM/MAHRH/MFB of 15/12/2004 on definition and
                                 procedures of delimitation of the perimeters of protection of water intended for
                                 human consumption.
                                 Decree No.2005-188/PRES/PM/MAHRH/MCE of 04 April 2005 laying down
                                 conditions of enactment of the general rules and requirements applicable to
                                 installations, structures, works, and activities subject to authorization or

         BURKINA FASO: Programme pour le Secteur de l’Eau, ESES                  page 41
LAWS AND REGULATIONS                                                APPRAISAL
                                  declaration (IOTA)
                                  Decree No.2005-515/PRES/PM/MAHRH of 06 October 2005 on the
                                  procedures for authorization and declaration of installations, structures, works,
                                  and activities (IOTA)
Law 0036-2011/AN of               Joint Order No. 2009-073/MECV/MAHRH of 27 August 2009 regulating
05/04/2011 on forect Code in      agricultural clearing in Burkina Faso
Burkina Faso                      Order 2004-019/MECV of 07 July 2004 determining the list of forest species
                                  benefiting from special protection measures
Law No. 012-2010/AN of 1st        Promote and ensure the full and equal enjoyment of all human rights and
April 2010, on Protection and     fundamental freedoms for people with disabilities and guarantee respect for
Promotion of Rights of Disabled   their intrinsic dignity.
Persons
 And also :
  Decree No. 2015-1187 /PRES-TRANS/PM/ MERH/MATD/MME/1VIS/MARHASA/MRA/
   MICA/MHU/MIDT/MCT on the conditions and procedures for carrying out and validating the
   strategic environmental assessment, the study and the environmental and social impact statement.
   It is the text par excellence that frames the implementation of environmental assessments in
   Burkina (ESIA, NIES and CGES). It integrates the realization of the PARs in addition to ESIA
   and NIES, when necessary. This decree classifies activities into the following three categories: i)
   Category A: Activities subject to an ESIA with the completion of a public inquiry; (ii) Category
   B: Activities subject to a NIES; (iii) Category C: Activities that are submitted to neither NIES nor
   ESIA; iv) Environmental and Strategic Assessment (SEA) for policies, plans and programs or any
   other upstream initiative of policies, plans and programs that have a significant impact on the
   environment.
  Thus, for each category, the projects are classified taking account of the sectors of activities
   defined by Law No. 010/98 / AN of 21 April 1998, on modes of intervention of the State and
   distribution of competences between the State and development actors.


 .Decree No. 2001-185/PRES/PM/MEE of 07 May 2001 in Burkina Faso, laying down standards for
 the discharge of pollutants into the air, water and soil, makes a number of provisions relating to
 releases that may be harmful to Burkina Faso's water and soil pollution. These provisions regulate and
 punish any offender in order to preserve the quality of the environment in Burkina Faso. In addition,
 this decree stipulates in its Articles 6, 10 and 11, respectively, the standards of fixed emissions
 discharges, the norms of discharge of waste water in surface water, the standards of discharge of
 sewage into the sewers. In its Articles 3 and 15, it specifies standards in Burkina Faso where, by its
 activity, a unit is required to produce substances or substances in the air, in groundwater or in drinking
 water, with or without conveyances in the ground or the basement.
 Decree No.2001-1205/PRES-TRANS/PM/MERH/MEF/MARHASA/MS/MRA /MICA
 /MME/MIDT/MAD of 28 October 2015 laying down standards and conditions for the discharge of
 wastewater. This decree contains a number of provisions on releases that can cause pollution of air,
 water and soil in Burkina Faso. Article 2 of this decree sets standards for ambient air quality. Article 4
 sets emission standards for motor vehicle emissions. The substances mentioned in Article 12 of the
 decree are prohibited from direct discharge into the receiving environment. Other decrees complete
 this legal arsenal:

      o Decree NBo.2015- 1203 /PRES-TRANS/PM/ MERH/MATD/MJDHPC on how to organize
          and conduct the environmental inspection


         BURKINA FASO: Programme pour le Secteur de l’Eau, ESES                   page 42
Decree No. 2008-125/PRES/PM/MECV of 7 March 2008 on establishment, roles and responsibilities,
organization and operating of environmental units in the various ministerial departments,
administrative regions and public and private enterprises

   o




       BURKINA FASO: Programme pour le Secteur de l’Eau, ESES       page 43
Annex 3 : Expropriations and Compensations in Burkina Faso


    a) The Main Laws
In Burkina Faso, expropriation for public purposes is governed by the following laws:
    •   The Constitution of 2 June 1991, revised by Law No. 001-2002 / AN of 22 January 2002:
        being the supreme law, establishes the right to property and compensation in case of
        expropriation. It provides that: "the right of ownership is guaranteed. No one shall be deprived
        of their enjoyment except for reasons of public utility and under the condition of just
        compensation determined in accordance with the law ».
    •   Law No 034-2012 / AN of 02 July 2012 on the Agrarian and Land Reform in Burkina Faso
        and its implementing texts: lays down the general principles, the terms of the expropriation,
        the process of expropriation and compensation and complaint management mechanisms
        through Articles 300 to 312.
    •   Law No. 034-2009 / AN of 16 June 2009 on rural land tenure and its priority implementing
        texts: reaffirms the right of State ownership and expropriation to dispose of rural land for the
        purpose of public interest, and the guarantee of property and enjoyment rights regularly
        established on the land.
    •   Law No. 034-2002 / AN on orientation relating to pastoralism in Burkina Faso of 14
        November 2002 and implementing legislation: provides that pastoralists have the right of
        access to pastoral resources and may be deprived of their right only for reason of public utility.
    •   Law No. 002-2001 / AN on the water management directive of 06 February 2001 and
        implementing legislation: the right to classify land in the public domain of water is
        recognized. And the damage suffered as a result of the expropriation must be compensated.


    b) National Procedures for Expropriation and Compensation
National procedures for expropriation and compensation are defined by the RAF through articles 300
to 331. They are as follows:

• The State notes or declares as of public utility the completion of a project of general interest;

• The expropriating authority makes a declaration of intent to carry out a public utility project with an
indication of its object, purpose, direction, duration, benefits and cost. This declaration is disseminated
for one month through the official channels of communication and by any appropriate means for the
populations concerned by the project. In addition, the declaration mentions the forthcoming opening
of a public utility investigation; it must be posted at the town hall and in any appropriate public place,
in the form of a notice to the public, eight days before the beginning of the inquiry and throughout its
duration;

• one month after the declaration of intent, the inquiry of public utility is opened under the conditions
set by decree of the Council of Ministers or by order of the president of the council of territorial
collectivity after deliberation of said council;

• during the investigation period, the inhabitants of the locality concerned may consult the
expropriation file which will enable them, if any, to contest, either the principle of the operation, its
financial importance or else the place of realization. Observations may be made on the investigation
register or sent as a note to the president of the ad hoc inquiry committee;

• public utility is declared by decree taken in the Council of Ministers or by order of the president of
the council of the territorial collectivity after deliberation of this council. The declaration of public

        BURKINA FASO: Programme pour le Secteur de l’Eau, ESES               page 44
utility sets the period during which the expropriation must be carried out. This period cannot be more
than three years;

• declaration of public utility can be the object of either amicable or contentious appeal;

• failing an amicable agreement, the expropriation is pronounced and the compensations are set by
the judge of the expropriation of the place of situation of the building;

• the expropriating party may, by payment or deposit of the provisional compensation set by
expropriation order, take possession of the immovable immediately after agreement of the
expropriation judge;

• under the resolutive condition of the payment of the final compensation within the period provided
for in Article 321 above, the amicable cession or expropriation judgment extinguishes, on its date, all
the real or personal rights relating to the immovable;

• At the end of the expropriation procedure, the taking of possession can only be made after payment
to the beneficiaries or deposit for their benefit, of a provision representing the possible compensation
of expropriation and corresponding to the estimate decided by the ad hoc committee;

• the amicable transfer of the property concerned is made by administrative act between the
beneficiaries and the department in charge of the State or local authorities domain. If an agreement
cannot be concluded, the expropriating party shall, within one month after taking possession, continue
the expropriation procedure by summoning the parties to appear before the expropriation court. The
expropriation judge shall, where appropriate, award a special compensation to the owners of the rights
struck by the expropriation that justify a prejudice related to the speed of the proceedings.
It should be noted that this procedure remains theoretical. In practice, each experience of expropriation
and compensation is conducted taking into account the standard steps of this procedure and adapting it
to the context of intervention, since all the texts of applications and structures planned to lead the
process are not operational.
About valuation methods for affected property
Assessment methods for affected land and assets depend on their characteristics.
With respect to land, three types have been identified in accordance with the legislation in this policy
framework are: state-owned land; lands belonging to individuals; and lands held under customary
rights. State-owned land is transferred for free (possibly with the exception of processing and
registration fees). Property belonging to private persons should be acquired at their exchange value.
The guiding principle is that anyone occupying land to be acquired by the program receives in
exchange another land of equal size and quality.

About calculating the compensation rate for the land
Compensation includes compensation for: loss of land; the loss of infrastructure and buildings; fruit
trees and other trees; the work of the land; and the loss of the crop. The land compensation will cover
the price of the labor market invested as well as the market price of the lost crop. The amount of
harvest is estimated by weighting the area lost and planted by the average yield per hectare for the
previous three seasons in the region. The unit cost used for land compensation must be discounted to
reflect the values at the time the compensation is paid. All in all, the evaluation commission should
find a calculation scale in relation to the economic and socio-cultural realities of the zone of the
activity financed.
About the compensation of buildings and infrastructures
The compensation covers the replacement of buildings and infrastructure and includes achievements
such as huts, houses, latrines, fences, henhouses, sheepfolds, granaries in banco, cemented or not,
pigsty. All lost infrastructure will be reconstructed on replacement lands acquired, indicated or
granted.

       BURKINA FASO: Programme pour le Secteur de l’Eau, ESES               page 45
Annex 4 : Organizational Chart of the Ministry of the Environment, Green Economy,
and Climate Change
(Source : http://www.environnement.gov.bf)




      BURKINA FASO: Programme pour le Secteur de l’Eau, ESES   page 46
Annex 5 : Examples of main potential hazards associated to the Program


Table A: Urban and Rural DWS Associated Impacts and Hazards


Activities           Environmental Hazard                         Social Hazard
____________________ ____________________________                 ____________________________
In Urban Areas

Production capacity       Loss of vegetation                      Risk of land and income source
building                  Loss of fauna and microfauna Soil       losses
Storage capacity          pollution by accidental hydrocarbon     Risk of physical or economic
building and water        spill                                   displacement of populations
tower building            Dust lift                               Risk of conflict linked not only to
                          Noise                                   the lack of transparency in the
Capacity building, and                                            recruitment of the local workforce
                          Soil pollution by rejected site waste
completion of social                                              but also to the inequalities noted in
                          at sites
connections and                                                   the process of compensation of
                          Deep soil destruction;                  PAPs, failing scales
standpipes
                          Risk of water contamination             Risk of conflicts related to non-
                          Indirect impacts on natural habitats    ownership of the grievance
Completion of drillings   or protected areas (remnants of the     mechanism by PAPs
in new centers            city's greenbelt, either through
                                                                  Traffic disruptions and collision
                          encroachment or indirectly by
                                                                  risks between the population and
                          opening past non-existent access to
                                                                  construction vehicles.
                          natural habitats (e.g, pipe laying,
                          access road construction).              Disturbance of field and commercial
                                                                  activities,
                          Emissions of dust and exhaust
                          fumes                                   Risk of degradaded remains buried
                                                                  in the ground
                           Pollution of soils by discharge of
                          materials (scrap, plastics, etc.) and
                          waste oils from vehicles and
                          construction machinery
                          Risks of soil erosion.
                          Tree felling and vegetation
                          destruction
                          Destruction of wildlife and
                          microfauna habitat –
                          Cuts in roads, road shoulders,
                          crossing structures, stone-walled
                          embankments, gully outlets,
                          gutters, medians, riffles, cycle
                          tracks, old treated water gravity
                          pipes, tracks, etc.

In Rural Areas

Construction and          Occupational accident risks             Economic and/or physical
rehabilitation of water   Noise                                   displacement of populations
supply systems in some                                            Possible loss of fields and land,

       BURKINA FASO: Programme pour le Secteur de l’Eau, ESES             page 47
rural areas                Dust and gas emissions                Triggered latent conflicts,
Construction of Drills     Destruction of plant species          Increasing rivalries among villages,
equipped with manual       Destruction of fauna and              sectors, neighborhoods,
pumps                      microfauna                            Disturbances of field work during a
                                                                 given period;
                                                                 Change in water supply modes,
                                                                 Behavioral change
                                                                 Risks of sexual abuse and
                                                                 harassment of women and
                                                                 transmission of viral diseases (STIs,
                                                                 HIV/AIDS), because of the arrival
                                                                 of foreign workers.



Table B: Urban and Rural Areas Sanitation Associated Risks

        Activities            Environmental Impacts and                     Social Risks
                                       Risks

                                                                 Risks of occurrence of diseases
                                                                 related to the wild dumping of
Construction of                                                  sewage sludge and poor maintenance
household latrines and     Risks of polluted water table;        of structures; various nuisances
community latrines in      Risk of polluted surface water and    (visual, olfactory …) ;
market places, health      soil;
centers and schools                                              Non-observance of regulatory texts
                           Risks of tree destruction
                                                                 by management structures,
                                                                 Risk of proliferation of contagious
                                                                 and infectious diseases
                                                                 Risk of odor nuisance
                                                                 Risk of low gender sensitivity
                                                                 Risk of vandalism
                                                                 Risk of incivism




        BURKINA FASO: Programme pour le Secteur de l’Eau, ESES           page 48
Annex 6 : Simplified Socio-environmental Screening Form
This screening form has been designed to assist in the initial selection of program sub-projects to be carried out
in the field. This fact sheet is completed by MEA / ONAE (environmental and social) backup specialists, with
the support of external technical assistance.

                                    Environmental and Social Selection Form
1 Name of the locality where the project will be carried out
2 Name of contact person
4 Name of Approving Authority
Date:                                     Signatures:




                                                               PART A
                                                Brief Description of Sub-projet
The proposed subproject (area, approximate area of total area to occupy, land status) and consistency of work
(Construction and operation, resources, materials, personnel, etc.)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------
                                                               Pa rt B
Br ief D e sc ri pt io n o f t h e E nv iro nm enta l Sta t us a n d I de nt ifi ca tio n o f E nv iro nm e nta l
Im pa ct o r Ri s k s
1. The Natural Environment
 (a) Describe the soil type, topography, vegetation of the subproject execution site and surrounding vegetation.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------------------------------
(b) Estimate and indicate the vegetation that could be released-
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------
(c) Are there environmentally sensitive areas or species at risk of extinction?--------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2. Ecology of Rivers and Lakes
Is there a possibility that, owing to the implementation of the subproject, the ecology of rivers or lakes will be
negatively affected?
Yes______ No______
If yes, Comments :
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
3. Protected Areas
Is the sub-project site located within or adjacent to any protected areas designated by the Government (national
park, national reserve, world heritage site, sacred site, etc.)?
Yes______ No______
If yes, Comments :
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------
If the execution and commissioning of the activity takes place outside a protected area (or in its vicinity), is it
likely to negatively affect the ecology of the protected area (e. g. interference? migration routes for mammals or
birds)?
Yes______ No______
If yes, Comments :

         BURKINA FASO: Programme pour le Secteur de l’Eau, ESES                                   page 49
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------
4. Geology and Soils
Are there areas of possible geological instability or soil (predisposition to erosion, landslides, subsidence)?
Yes______ No______
If yes, Comments :
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------
5. Landscape/ Aesthetics
Is there a possibility that the works negatively affect the aesthetic aspect of the local landscape? (cutting of trees,
reduction of green spaces, etc.)
Yes______ No______
If yes, Comments :
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6. Historical, Archaeological or Cultural Heritage Site.
Based on available sources, consultations with local authorities, local knowledge and / or observations, could the
sub-project alter historical, archaeological or cultural heritage sites, or should there be excavations nearby?
Yes______ No______
If yes, Comments :
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
7. Air Pollution during Sub-project Execution or Implementation ?
Yes______ No______
If yes, Comments :
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
8. Noise Pollution during Sub-project Execution or Implementation

Will the noise level during the implementation of the project concerned exceed the acceptable noise limits?
Yes______ No______
If yes, Comments :
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------
9. Solid or Liquid Waste
Will the activity concerned generate solid or liquid waste?
Yes______ No______
If yes, Comments :
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------
does the sub-project have a plan for their pickup and evacuation?
Yes______ No______
If yes, Comments

10. Will the sub-project entail risks for human health, safety during and/or after implementation?
Yes______ No______
If yes, Comments :
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
11. Will the sub-project generate changes in the distribution/displacement of persons and/or animals in
the area?
Yes______ No______


         BURKINA FASO: Programme pour le Secteur de l’Eau, ESES                                   page 50
If yes, Comments :
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ----------
12. Does the sub-project require large quantities of building materials (e.g. gravel, stone, water,
firewood)?
Yes______ No______
If yes, Comments :
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------

13. Does the sub-project use polluting products, with resin and potentially toxic or dangerous solvants (for
asthmatics, for example), asbestos and lead?
Yes______ No______
If yes, Comments :
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------

                                                               Pa rt C
Br ief De sc ri pt io n o f t h e So cia l Env iro nm e nt a nd I de nt ifica tio n o f So cia l Im pa ct s
1. Land Acquisition
Will the sub-project result in the denial or restriction of access to land or other economic resources? Yes______
No______
If yes, Comments :
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------
Si Non, Observations--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2. Loss of Land: Will the proposed sub-project cause permanent or temporary loss of land?
Yes______ No______
If yes, Comments : ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Si Non, Observations--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------
--------------------------------------
3. Loss of Infrastructure (housing, related structures, socio-community structures (football pitch, wells, etc.):
Will the sub-project cause permanent or temporary loss of infrastructure? Oui___ Yes______ No______
If yes, Comments : ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Si Non, Observations--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------
--------------------------------------
4. Loss of Income: Will the sub-project cause permanent or temporary loss of income (economic activities,
livelihoods, mode of production, …) ?
Yes______ No______
If yes, Comments : ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Si Non, Observations--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------
--------------------------------------
5. Loss of Crops or Fruit Trees : Will the sub-project cause the temporary or permanent loss of crops,
utilitarian trees (fruit trees, shade trees, ornamental trees, etc.) ? Oui___ Non_____


         BURKINA FASO: Programme pour le Secteur de l’Eau, ESES                                   page 51
     •     If yes, Comments : -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
           -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
           --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------------------------
If No, Comments-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------------------


6. Public Consultation

Are stakeholder consultation and participation sought?
Yes______ No______
If yes, Comments : ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
If no, Comments ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------
                                                                Part D
                                                     Safeguard Instruments

For all « Yes » responses, the appropriate safeguarding instruments must be prepared.

                                                             Part E
                                                        Recommendations
   • Environment
Required Environmental Instrument:

     o    No safeguard instrument

     o    Environmental impact statement
     •    Simplified environmental and social impact study

   • Social
Required Social Instrument

     o    No social work to be done

     o    PAR

Sheet filled out by:
    • Name : ______________________________________________________________
    • Forename : ____________________________________________________________
    • Address : ___________________________________________________________
    • Signature :

                                         Done in ………………………on ……./….…../201…….

Compliance Certification from the Program Environmental Safeguard Specialist

                                                    On ……../……../201…..

Compliance Certification from the Program Social Safeguard Specialist

                                                     On ……../……../201…..

Compliance Certification ABE
                                                    On ……../……../201……


         BURKINA FASO: Programme pour le Secteur de l’Eau, ESES                                    page 52
Annex 7 : Environmental and Social Management Plan and Resettlement Action Plan

1. Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)

An Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) is a document that allows each sub-
project proponent with significant environmental and/or social effects to integrate
environmental and social dimensions into the design, planning, management and
implementation process of activities.
An ESMP establishes procedures and measures relevant to the mitigation of their
environmental and social impacts on the basis of the procedures and mechanisms defined in
the Technical Manual.
An ESMP includes, in particular, the following aspects:
•   Establishment of a complete sub-project sheet
•   Preparation of control/environmental and social review forms
•   Establishment of work supervision mechanisms
•   Documentation of public consultations conducted for ESMP
•   Mise en place d’un système simple et efficace de gestion des requêtes et plaintes
•   Establishment and monitoring of the implementation and assessment of all planned
    mitigation and compensation measures
•   Definition of the environmental and social reporting system
•   Public disclosure of the ESMP for each of selected sub-projects
•   Etc.


2. Resettlement Action Plan

A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) is a document that allows any proponent of sub-project
requiring physical displacement of people, loss of property and assets, land acquisition, and/or
loss of access to natural resources or economic assets, to assess the social impacts associated
with the temporary or permanent resettlement of people and to propose a specific plan for
compensation for losses and support for the restoration of livelihoods, based on the
procedures and mechanisms defined in the Technical Manual, in particular with regard to the
following:
•   Definition and implementation of procedures applicable to involuntary resettlement
•   Documentation of public consultations conducted for RAP
•   Establishment of a simple and effective request and complaint management system
•   Establishment of a system for monitoring possible land acquisition procedures
•   Establishment and monitoring of the implementation and assessment of all planned
    compensation and livelihood restoration measures.




      BURKINA FASO: Programme pour le Secteur de l’Eau, ESES         page 53
Annex 8 : Letter from the Minister in charge of the Environment relating to the
Reclassification of DWS Systems in Urban Areas




      BURKINA FASO: Programme pour le Secteur de l’Eau, ESES   page 54
Annex 9 : List of Main Documents Consulted


   World Bank: Aide-memoire of the Mission for preparing the Program supporting the sector of
   water, sanitation, and water resources management and Mission supporting the Implementation of
   the water sectoral Project in urban areas (PSEU) from 28 November to 21 December 2017

   MEA: National Wastewater and Excreta Sanitation Program 2016-2030, PN-AEUE, Program
   Document (DGAEUE ONEA Draft version)

   MEA: National Drinking Water Supply Program 2030: Strategic Environmental Assessment, Final
   Version (October 2015)

   MEA: National Wastewater and Excreta Sanitation Program 2016-2030, PN-AEUE: Strategic
   Environmental Assessment & Environmental and Social Management Framework (April 2016)

   MEA: National Drinking Water Supply Program by 2030, Final Version (October 2015)

   MEA: National Program for the Integrated Management of Water Resources by 2030

   MEA: Governance Program for the Water and Sanitation Sector

   MEA: Different implementation texts of the law of orientation relating to water

   Organizational Charts of institutions and Ministries (MEA, ONEA, MINEFID, MAAH, Min
   Health, LNSP, BUNEE)




      BURKINA FASO: Programme pour le Secteur de l’Eau, ESES            page 55
Annex 10 : Public Consultations

The first consultations with stakeholders and beneficiaries of the Program took place from 4 to 17
January 2018 in Ouagadougou and Bobo-Dioulasso with meetings by groups of actors
In total, about thirty structures participated in the consultations.
These consultations made it possible to make a presentation of the activities of the Program and to
explain the approach of the Evaluation of the Environmental and Social Management System of
Burkina Faso. On this occasion, preliminary information was collected on the processes for managing
environmental and social safeguards aspects in the different structures. Based on the interview guides,
input on the environmental and social impacts of the Program, mitigation and enhancement measures,
as well as existing grievance management mechanisms were solicited from each structure.
The comments and inputs received from the stakeholders consulted were used to analyze the
environmental and social impacts and risks related to the execution of PforR activities.
The second stage of consultation brought together the representatives of the two (2) implementing
entities of the Program (MEA and ONEA) on 22 January 2018 at the World Bank premises in
Ouagadougou. It allowed for a presentation of the preliminary results and to identify perspectives. It
was also an opportunity to gather information on the operating mode of the environmental unit of
ONEA (Directorate General) which supports the activities of the regional directorates of ONEA and
provides supervision. With respect to the new MEA environmental unit that had just been created on
12 January 2018, it was agreed to focus on strengthening it with human resources competent on
environmental and social safeguards so that it can work efficiently.
Discussions also focused on the classification of certain Program activities such as AEP in urban
centers into category "A" (significant negative impacts) without additional details being provided. The
main recommendation resulting from this consultation was to approach the Ministry of the
Environment through the BUNEE in order to shed light on the inaccuracies found in national
environmental regulations, notably the category of AEP activities.
A third consultation took place on 05 February 2018 by videoconference (VC) at the World Bank to
share the results of consultations between BUNEE and ONEA on the classification of AEP systems in
urban centers. Based on the technical sheets provided by ONEA and describing the consistency of the
work for the AEP, clarifications were provided by the BUNEE on the possibility of classifying the
AEP systems in urban areas into category "B", thus eligible for PfroR. The materialization of these
results was made by taking a final decision at the level of the Minister in charge of the environment
(see Annex)
Following the consultations, a feedback meeting was held on 20 February 2018 by VC at the World
Bank. It brought together the implementing entities of the Program (ONEA and MEA). During the
exchanges, it was established that there was a need to refocus the proposed action plan on priority
actions that could be supported by the Program. ONEA also confirmed DR-ONEA Bobo as the current
administrative entity of the two (2) environmentalists assigned to it.




       BURKINA FASO: Programme pour le Secteur de l’Eau, ESES              page 56
List of Institutions which participated in first consultations



Ministries                                     Structures consulted
Ministry of Water and Sanitation               DGRE, SP-GIRE, DGA, DGEP, DGESS, ONEA
Ministry of Agriculture and Hydraulic          DGFOMR
Developments
Ministry of the Environment, Green Economy,    BUNEE, DGPE, DREVCC, DGESS, DAJ, National
and Climate Change                             Water Analysis Laboratory
Ministry of Economy, Finance, and              DGB, Working Group Compensation Baseline,
Development                                    DGCOOP, DGI
Ministry of Territorial Administration and     DGCT, AMBF, Burkina Regions Association,
Decentralization                               Townhalls of targeted Regions
Ministry of Justice, Human Rights, and Civic   DAJAV
Promotion
Ministry of Woman, National Solidarity and     DGPF, DGPG, Anvironmental Unit
Family
Ministry of Culture, Arts, and Tourism         DGPC
Ministry of Health (National Health            DGS
Laboratory)
Ministry of Urban Development and Housing      General Directorate lf Urban development, Land
                                               Development and Topography
Institutions of Bobo                           ONEA bobo, DREA Bobo, Bobo Townhall,
                                               DREVCC-HB
Associations/NGO                               Ouagadougou City Emptiers Association




       BURKINA FASO: Programme pour le Secteur de l’Eau, ESES                page 57
Annex 11 : Account of the National Public Consultation


Introduction
The national public consultation on the ESSA of the Water Supply and Sanitation Program
was held at the World Bank office in Ouagadougou Burkina Faso on March 27th, 2018, with
the participation of 30 persons representing different state and non-state institutions, including
ministerial departments, national non-governmental organizations, civil society, and the
private sector (see complete list of participants below).
In their introductory remarks, Mr. Seydou Traoré (co-TTL of the Program) and Mr. Hamado
Ouedraogo briefly presented the Program, in general, and the ESSA, in particular. They
highlighted the importance of the national public consultation as it presented the opportunity
to share the draft ESSA with all the stakeholders and collect their remarks and suggestions
before finalizing it.
Mr. Abdoulaye Gadiere, Sr. Environmental Specialist, presented the ESSA document, its
main findings and results, and key recommendations for a comprehensive Action Plan for
environmental and social safeguards. Mrs. Gertrude Coulibaly-Zombre, Sr. Social
Development Specialist, stressed the fact that the ESSA is based on preliminary in-depth
assessments, whose results will be incorporated into the Program Action Plan and the
Program Operation Manual, and will inform the partnership agreement to be signed by the
Program and the BUNEE and the different safeguard instruments to be prepared during
implementation.
General comments and remarks
A number of specific remarks and suggestions were made about the ESSA, as presented
below with the responses provided by the World Bank safeguards specialists.
➢ The General Director of BUNEE highlighted the fact that the MEEVCC letter concerning
  the preparation of the NIES of the different sub-projects is not aimed at reclassifying sub-
  projects, but rather at providing an exceptional authorization on the basis of a range of the
  technical measures of the planned activities. One reason is that the scope of the activities
  are not in line with the issues of the decree n°2015-1187 concerning the conditions and
  procedures of the preparation and validation of the environmental strategic evaluation, of
  the environmental and social study and of the Environmental and Social Impact Statement
  (NIES).
       •   During implementation, BUNEE and ONEA will cooperate in order to identify the
           required safeguard instruments and related measures

➢ The representative of the Ministry of Justice pointed out at the risks of alternative
  interpretations of some legal texts.
       •   There will not be contradictory interpretations of the decree n°2015-1187 . The
           issue is that the decree gives inadequate descriptions of the nature of some specific



      BURKINA FASO: Programme pour le Secteur de l’Eau, ESES          page 58
         activities (such as those related to Water Supply Infrastrcuture in urban areas). A
         revision of the decree seems necessary.
➢ Some health and sanitation-related legal texts should be presented in the main text and not
  only in the annexes (the law of orientation on the water, on protective perimeters, for
  example). The impact of latrines on groundwater should be stressed. Annex 2 should
  include legal texts related to public health and sanitation.
      • The Environmental and Social Impact Statements will take care of protective
         perimeters (the ESSA is not supposed to identify all the potential impacts).
      • The risk of contaminating groundwater is low (the soil has a self-purifying
         potential). Besides, there are specific criteria for drilling boreholes. Adequate
         control measures will ensure water quality during operation.

Specific questions
➢ Safeguard instruments. Question concerning the differences between ESMFs and RAPs
  of previous ME projects and the ESSA/PforR.
   Answer: The ESSA, prepared by the World Bank, is about the general environmental and
   social framework for PforRs. Other safeguard instruments, prepared by the national
   counterpart, will address the environmental and social impacts of specific investment sub-
   projects.
➢ RAPs. Question about the opportunity of preparing RAPs when only a few persons are
  likely to be affected by sub-projects (in line with the national decree n°11-87/2015).
       Answer: The screening process of the different sub-projects will be part of a
       pragmatic, realistic and pro-active interpretation of the decree. However, it is
       commonly admitted that the decree should be revised.
➢ About the Budget. A question concerned the breakdown between grant and loan of the
  300 million dollar budget.
       Answer: The budget is about an IDA grant of US$50 million and US$250 credit from
       the IDA Scaling-up Facility.
➢ About the involvement of regional directorates of Health in the preparation and
  implementation of the PforR
       Answer: At the preparation stage, the General Directorate of Health and the National
       Laboratory for Public Health (LNSP) were consulted. The MEA will continue
       consultations with these institutions and other actors during implementation (the
       technical Manual will be more specific in this regard). While the General Directorate
       identifies health risks, the Regional directorates will define the criteria for selecting
       sub-project sites. The LNSP will provides expertise in health risk assessment.

   ➢ About the role of the Mediateur du Faso (Ombudsman)
     Answer. The Ombudsman will have an important role in the amicable settlement of
     some issues, before the involvement of the justice.


      BURKINA FASO: Programme pour le Secteur de l’Eau, ESES         page 59
   ➢ About additional elements of the Program Action Plan.
     Answer. The technical Manual will more directly address a range of specific issues and
     will identify the different actors involved in implementing different activities

➢ The GD/BUNEE informed the audience that an accreditation process of firms and
  individual consultants for ESIAs / NIEs and RAPs is underway at the MEEVCC level.
       •   The World Bank asked to be associated with the definition of the accreditation
           criteria.

At the end, participants suggested some inputs to specific paragraphs of the ESSA. This will
be done during the forthcoming revision of the document.

A special annex of the ESSA will present the minutes of the public Consultation.

Conclusion
The participants unanimously felt that the process of preparing the PforR is a very useful
exercise and a challenge for the national counterpart. Some gaps and weaknesses of the
national systems were identified and will be filled during implementation.


List of participants of the public Consultation




      BURKINA FASO: Programme pour le Secteur de l’Eau, ESES       page 60
BURKINA FASO: Programme pour le Secteur de l’Eau, ESES   page 61
BURKINA FASO: Programme pour le Secteur de l’Eau, ESES   page 62
BURKINA FASO: Programme pour le Secteur de l’Eau, ESES   page 63
BURKINA FASO: Programme pour le Secteur de l’Eau, ESES   page 64
BURKINA FASO: Programme pour le Secteur de l’Eau, ESES   page 65
BURKINA FASO: Programme pour le Secteur de l’Eau, ESES   page 66
