Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                             Document of
                                                                          The World Bank
                                                                       FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
                                                                                                                 Report No. PAD2738



                                                          INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                 PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

                                                                                 ON A

                                                               PROPOSED SCALE-UP FACILITY CREDIT
                                                             IN THE AMOUNT OF EURO 206.7 MILLION
                                                                  (US$250 MILLION EQUIVALENT)

                                                                                AND A




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                        PROPOSED GRANT
                                                               IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 34.8 MILLION
                                                                   (US$50 MILLION EQUIVALENT)

                                                                                TO
                                                                           BURKINA FASO

                                                                          FOR A
                                                    WATER SUPPLY AND SANITATION PROGRAM-FOR-RESULTS

                                                                             June 5, 2018




Public Disclosure Authorized    Water Global Practice
                                Africa Region

                               This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of
                               their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.
                                  Currency Equivalents
                           (Exchange Rate as of April 30, 2018)

                            Currency Unit   =   XOF (CFA Franc)
                                 US$1.00    =   XOF 542
                                 US$1.00    =   EUR 0.82668540
                                 US$1.00    =   SDR 0.69538182

                                      FISCAL YEAR
                                January 1 – December 31


                            ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AFD       French Development Agency (Agence Française du Développement)
AMOC      Roadmap in Support of the Decentralization of Water Supply and Sanitation
          Services (Assistance à la Maîtrise d'Ouvrage Communale)
ASCE-LC   Superior Control and Anticorruption Authority (Autorité Supérieure de Contrôle
          d’Etat et de Lutte Contre la Corruption)
BUNEE     National Agency in charge of Environmental Assessments (Bureau National des
          Evaluations Environnementales)
CAST      Dedicated Treasury Special Account (Compte d’Affectation Spéciale Ouvert au
          Trésor)
CEMEAU    Centre of Water Businesses of ONEA (Centre des Métiers de l’Eau ONEA)
CFE       Financial Water Contribution (Contribution Financière d’Eau)
DANIDA    Danish International Development Agency
DASS      ONEA's Department of Sanitation (Direction de l’Assainissement)
DGA       General Directorate for Sanitation (Direction Générale de l’Assainissement)
DGCMEF    General Directorate for the Control of Public Tenders and Financial Engagements
          (Direction Générale du Contrôle Des Marchés et des Engagements Financiers)
DGEP      General Directorate for Water Supply (Direction Générale de l’Eau Potable)
DGRE      General Directorate for Water Resources (Direction Générale des Ressources en
          Eau)
DGTCP     General Directorate of the Treasury and Public Accounting (Direction Générale du
          Trésor et de la Comptabilité Publique)
DISE      Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation System (Dispositif Intégré de Suivi Evaluation)
DLI       Disbursement Linked Indicator
DMP       Public Procurement Directorate (Direction des Marchés Publics)
DPAEP     ONEA’s Ouagadougou Works Department (Direction Projec AEP Ouaga)
DPI       ONEA's Department of Planning and Investment (Direction de la Planification et des
          Investissements)
DREA      Regional Directorate for Water and Sanitation (Direction Régionale de l’Eau et de
          l’Assainissement)
DRH       Human Resources Directorate (Direction des Ressources Humaines)
ESMS      Environmental and Social Management System
ESSA      Environmental and Social Systems Assessment
EU        European Union
GIS       Geographic Information System
GoBF      Government of Burkina Faso
GRS       Grievance Redress Service
IDA       International Development Association
IFSA      Integrated Fiduciary Systems Assessment
IGF       General Finance Inspectorate (Inspection Générale des Finances)
ITS       Technical Inspection Services
IVA       Independent Verification Agency
IWRM      Integrated Water Resources Management
M&E       Monitoring and Evaluation
MDG       Millennium Development Goal
MEA       Ministry of Water and Sanitation (Ministère de l’Eau et l’Assainissement)
MINEFID   Ministry of Economy, Finance and Development (Ministère de l'Economie, des
          Finances et du Développement)
MTGES     Technical Manual for Environmental and Social Management (Manuel Technique
          pour la Gestion Environnementale et Sociale)
NGO       Non-goverment organization
NPV       Net Present value
O&M       Operation and Maintenance
ONEA      National Office for Urban Water Supply and Sanitation (Office National de l’Eau et
          de l’Assainissement)
OP/BP     Operations Manual/Bank Procedure
PAGIRE    Action Plan for Water Resource Management (Plan d’Action pour la Gestion
          Intégrée des Ressources en Eau)
PAP       Program Action Plan
PCU       Program Coordination Unit
PDO       Program Development Objective
PforR     Program-for-Results
PGEA      National Governance Program for the Water and Sanitation Sector (Programme
          Gouvernance du Secteur Eau et Assainissement à l'Horizon 2030)
PN-AEP    National Water Supply Program (Programme National d’Approvisionnement en Eau
          Potable à l'Horizon 2030)
PN-AEPA   National Water Supply and Sanitation Program (Programme National
          d'Approvisionnement en Eau Potable et d'Assainissement à l'Horizon 2015)
PN-AEUE   National Sanitation and Wastewater Program (Programme National
          d’Assainissement des Eaux Usées et Excréta à l'Horizon 2030)
PN-AH     National Program for Dam Development (Programme National des Aménagements
          Hydrauliques à l'Horizon 2030)
PNDES     National Economic and Social Development Program (Plan National de
          Développement Economique et Social à l’Horizon 2020)
PN-GIRE   National Program for Integrated Water Resource Management (Programme
          National pour la Gestion Intégrée des Ressources en Eau à l'Horizon 2030)
POM       Program Operations Manual
PPP       Public-private Partnership
PSU       ONEA’s Program Support Unit
RA        Results Area
SCD       Systematic Country Diagnostic
SDG       Sustainable Development Goal
SDR       Special Drawing Rights

                                            ii
SIDA        Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency
SISC        Strategic Implementation Support Consultants
SNIEau      National Water Information System (Système National d’Information sur l’Eau)
SP-GIRE     Permanent Secretariat for Integrated Water Resource Management (Secrétariat
            Permanent de la Gestion Intégrée des Ressources en Eau)
SUF         IDA Scale-up Facility
ToR         Terms of Reference
UNICEF      United Nations Children’s Fund
WAEMU       West African Economic and Monetary Union
WUA         Water Users’ Association (Association d’Usagers de l’Eau)




Regional Vice President:                    Makhtar Diop
Country Director:                           Pierre Frank Laporte
Senior Global Practice Director:            Guang Zhe Chen
Practice Manager:                           Steven N. Schonberger
Task Team Leaders:                          Carolina Dominguez Torres, Seydou Traore




                                            iii
BASIC INFORMATION
Is this a regionally tagged project?            Financing Instrument
No                                              Program-for-Results Financing
Bank/IFC Collaboration                          Does this operation have an IPF component?
No                                              No
Proposed Program Development Objective(s)
The Program Development Objective (PDO) is to improve access to water supply and sanitation
services in targeted areas
Organizations
Borrower:             Burkina Faso
Implementing          Ministry of Water and Sanitation (Ministère de l’Eau et l’Assainissement, MEA)
Agency:               National Office for Urban Water Supply and Sanitation (Office National de l’Eau et
                      de l’Assainissement, ONEA)

COST & FINANCING
SUMMARY (USD Millions)
Total Project Cost                                    365.00
Countepart funding                                    65.00
International Development Association (IDA)
              Grant                                   50.00
              Scale-Up Facility (SUF)                 250.00
Total Program Financing                               365.00
Financing Gap                                         0.00
Financing (USD Millions)
Expected Disbursements (USD Millions)
Fiscal Year              2019           2020          2021          2022           2023          2024
Absolute                 26.1           64.8          86.8           74.3          37.4          10.6
Cumulative               26.1           90.9         177.7          252.0         289.4          300.0
INSTITUTIONAL DATA
Practice Area (Lead)
Water
Contributing Practice Areas


Climate Change and Disaster Screening
Yes

                                                      iv
Private Capital Mobilized
No
Gender Tag
Does the program plan to undertake any of the following?
a. Analysis to identify Project-relevant gaps between males and females, especially in light of country
gaps identified through SCD and CPF: YES
b. Specific action(s) to address the gender gaps identified in (a) and/or to improve women or men's
empowerment: YES
c. Include Indicators in results framework to monitor outcomes from actions identified in (b): YES
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK-RATING TOOL (SORT)
Risk Category                                                Rating
1. Political and Governance                                  Moderate
2. Macroeconomic                                             Moderate
3. Sector Strategies and Policies                            Moderate
4. Technical Design of Project or Program                    Substantial
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and
                                                             Substantial
Sustainability
6. Fiduciary                                                 Substantial
7. Environment and Social                                    Moderate
8. Stakeholders                                              Moderate
9. Other
10. Overall                                                  Substantial
COMPLIANCE
Policy
Does the program depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects?
[ ] Yes [✔] No
Does the program require any waivers of Bank policies?
[ ] Yes [✔] No
Safeguard Policies Triggered
Safeguard Policies                                           Yes                  No
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                    ✔
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                                             ✔




                                                   ii
Legal Covenants
Sections and Description
The Recipient shall (i) establish by no later than 90 days after the Effective Date and thereafter maintain
the Steering Committee (Comite de Revue), chaired by the Secretary General of MEA, and integrated
by functionaries of the Recipient’s entities participating in the Program, with resources, staffing and
terms of reference satisfactory to the Association, for purposes of advising the MEA and the Program
Implementing Entity on matters relative to the carrying out of the Program; and (ii) ensure the Steering
Committee meets at a minimum two times per year in ordinary sessions -and as needed in
extraordinary sessions- for the purposes of (A) reviewing and adopting the Program’s implementation
plan in conformity with the POM; (B) reviewing and adopting the Program’s evaluations; (C) reviewing
and adopting the financial reports; the annual activity, budget, and procurement plans; and carries out
other advisory functions provided for steering committees of development projects and programs by
the Recipient’s Decree 2018-0092/PRES/PM/MINEFID of February 15, 2018 on regulation of
development projects and programs implemented in Burkina Faso.
Sections and Description
The Recipient shall maintain the PCU throughout the implementation of the Program with resources,
staffing and terms of reference satisfactory to the Association.
Sections and Description
The Recipient shall cause the Program Implementing Entity to carry out its Respective Parts of the
Program and coordinate all related Program activities including reporting on the achievements of the
Disbursement Linked Indicators (as defined in Section IV of Schedule 2), with MEA, all in accordance
with the POM.
Sections and Description
The Recipient shall cause the Program Implementing Entity to maintain the PSU throughout the
implementation of the Program with resources, staffing and terms of reference satisfactory to the
Association. The PSU shall report to the PCU.
Sections and Description
The Recipient shall by no later than the date eight months following the Effective Date, recruit, under
terms of reference and in a manner satisfactory to the Association, the Independent Verification Agent
for purposes of carrying out the independent verification of all DLIs and achievement of the DLRs,
pursuant to the criteria and procedures set out in the POM.
Sections and Description
The Recipient shall submit to the Association the corresponding verification reports in a timely manner
and in form and substance satisfactory to the Association.
Sections and Description
To facilitate the carrying out of the Program Implementing Entity’s Respective Parts of the Program,
the Recipient shall make part of the proceeds of the Credit available to the Program Implementing
Entity under a subsidiary agreement between the Recipient and the Program Implementing Entity,
under terms and conditions approved by the Association (“Subsidiary Agreement”).
Sections and Description
In the carrying out of its Respective Parts of the Program, the Recipient, through MEA and the PCU shall
be supported by:


                                                    iii
(i)     the General Directorate for Water Supply and the General Directorate for Sanitation in the
implementation of activities under Parts 1(d) and 2(b), which shall work through the Regional
Directorates for Water and Sanitation to implement Program activities related to rural water supply
and sanitation, in particular to ensure data collection for the verification of results;
(ii)    the Permanent Secretariat for Integrated Water Resource Management in the implementation
of activities under Part 3, working in close collaboration with the General Directorate for Water
Resources; and
(iii)   the Human Resources Directorate in the implementation of activities under Part 4(a).
Sections and Description
The Recipient shall cause the Program Implementing Entity to carry out its Respective Parts of the
Program through the PSU, with the support of:
(i)      the Ouagadougou Works Department in the implementation of the water supply-related
activities in Part 1 related to the city of Ouagadougou;
(ii)     the Department of Planning and Investment in the implementation of the urban water supply-
related activities under Part 1 that are not related to the water supply to the city of Ouagadougou;
(iii)    the Department of Sanitation in the implementation of activities under Part 2(a); and
(iv)     the Human Resources Department implementation of activities under Part 4(b).
Sections and Description
The Recipient shall ensure that the Program excludes any activities which:
A.      in the opinion of the Association, are likely to have significant adverse impacts that are
sensitive, diverse, or unprecedented on the environment and/or affected people, including but not
limited to schemes that involve construction or rehabilitation of dams that are greater or equal to 10
m in height, sludge treatment plans, extensions of the sewerage system, groundwater-based schemes
in overexploited and critical basins that do not integrate source sustainability measures, undertaking
of any activity that uses asbestos, and undertaking of any activity involving major land acquisition; or
B.      involve the procurement of: (1) works, estimated to cost US$75,000,000 equivalent or more
per contract; (2) goods, estimated to cost US$50,000,000 equivalent or more per contract; (3) non-
consulting services, estimated to cost US$50,000,000 equivalent or more per contract; or (4) consulting
services, estimated to cost US$20,000,000 equivalent or more per contract.
Conditions
Type              Description
                  The Financing Agreement for the Credit and Grant has been executed and delivered
                  and all conditions precedent to its effectiveness or to the right of the Recipient to
Effectiveness
                  make withdrawals under it (other than the effectiveness of the Financing Agreement)
                  have been fulfilled.
                  The Recipient has established the PCU in a manner and with composition, functions,
                  and resources satisfactory to the Association, including a Program coordinator, a
Effectiveness     monitoring and evaluation specialist, a procurement specialist, a financial
                  management specialist, an environmental safeguards specialist, a social safeguards
                  specialist, and an internal controller.
                  The Recipient has opened the account referred to in Section 2.02 of the Financing
Effectiveness
                  Agreement.



                                                   iv
                  The Subsidiary Agreement has been executed on behalf of the Recipient and the
Effectiveness
                  Program Implementing Entity.
                  The Program Implementing Entity has established the PSU in a manner and with
                  composition, functions, and resources satisfactory to the Association, including a unit
Effectiveness     coordinator, a monitoring and evaluation specialist, a procurement specialist, a
                  financial management specialist, an environmental safeguards specialist, and a social
                  safeguards specialist.
                  The Recipient and the Program Implementing Entity have adopted the Program
Effectiveness     Operations Manual for their respective Parts in form and substance satisfactory to
                  the Association.
TASK TEAM
Bank Staff
Name                            Role                          Specialization                 Unit
Carolina Dominguez Torres       Team Leader(ADM               Water and Sanitation           GWA07
                                Responsible)
Seydou Traore                   Team Leader                   Water and Sanitation           GWA07
Matar Fall                      Team Member                   Water and Sanitation           GWA07
Mohamed El Hafedh Hendah        Procurement                   Procurement                    GGOPF
                                Specialist(ADM
                                Responsible)
Mamata Tiendrebeogo             Team Member                   Procurement                    GGOPF
Jean Charles Amon Kra           Financial Management          Financial Management           GGOAW
                                Specialist
Gabriel Dedu                    Team Member                   Fraud and Corruption           GGOAW
Abdoulaye Gadiere               Environmental Safeguards      Environmental Safeguards       GEN07
                                Specialist
Gertrude Marie Mathilda         Social Safeguards             Social Safeguards              GSU01
Coulibaly Zombre                Specialist
Jean Vincent Koua               Team Member                                                  GWA07
Bienvenue Helene Karambiri      Team Member                                                  AFMBF
Lilian Pena                     Peer Reviewer                 Water and Sanitation           GWA02
Abedalrazq F. Khalil            Peer Reviewer                 Water Resources                GWA02
                                                              Management
Jane Jamieson                   Peer Reviewer                 PPP                            GTIFP
Susanna Smets                   Peer Reviewer                 Water and Sanitation           GWA03




                                                    v
                                            BURKINA FASO
                            Burkina Faso Water Supply and Sanitation Program

                                                        TABLE OF CONTENTS

I.    STRATEGIC CONTEXT ..................................................................................................................1
       A. Country Context................................................................................................................................ 1
       B. Sectoral and Institutional Context .................................................................................................... 2
       C. Relationship to the CAS/CPF and Rationale for Use of Instrument .................................................. 5
II.   PROGRAM DESCRIPTION.............................................................................................................7
       A. Program Development Objective(s) (PDO) and PDO Level Results Indicators ................................. 7
       B. PforR Program Scope ........................................................................................................................ 8
       C. Disbursement Linked Indicators and Verification Protocols .......................................................... 15
III. PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION .................................................................................................. 18
       A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements .......................................................................... 18
       B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation................................................................................................. 19
       C. Disbursement Arrangements.......................................................................................................... 20
       D. Capacity Building ............................................................................................................................ 21
IV. ASSESSMENT SUMMARY .......................................................................................................... 21
       A. Technical (including program economic evaluation) ..................................................................... 21
       B. Fiduciary.......................................................................................................................................... 24
       C. Environmental and Social ............................................................................................................... 26
       D. Risk Assessment ............................................................................................................................. 29
ANNEX 1. DETAILED PROGRAM DESCRIPTION ................................................................................... 30
ANNEX 2. RESULTS FRAMEWORK MATRIX ........................................................................................ 67
ANNEX 3. DISBURSEMENT LINKED INDICATORS, DISBURSEMENT ARRANGEMENTS AND VERIFICATION
PROTOCOLS ..................................................................................................................................... 75
ANNEX 4. SUMMARY OF TECHNICAL ASSESSMENT ............................................................................ 90
ANNEX 5. SUMMARY OF THE INTEGRATED FIDUCIARY SYSTEMS ASSESSMENT .................................. 93
ANNEX 6. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SYSTEMS ASSESSMENT ............................. 103
ANNEX 7. PROGRAM ACTION PLAN ................................................................................................ 113
ANNEX 8. IMPLEMENTATION SUPPORT PLAN ................................................................................. 116
ANNEX 9. MAP OF THE PROGRAM’S WATER SUPPLY AND SANITATION TARGETED AREAS ............... 118
                                                  I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT

A. Country Context

      1.       Despite strong economic performance, averaging 5.5 percent growth per year over the last 15
      years, Burkina Faso remains one of the poorest countries in the world. Burkina Faso’s economy is heavily
      reliant on agricultural production (especially cotton), with roughly 80 percent of employment linked to
      subsistence farming and contributing to 40 percent of the gross domestic product. More than 40 percent
      (or 7.7 million) of the population lived below the poverty line in 2014, and remain almost completely
      excluded from basic services and from access to infrastructure. Per capita gross national income was
      US$627 in 2016. The country ranked 185 among 188 countries included in the 2015 Human Development
      Index.

      2.      Burkina Faso’s population is growing rapidly, increasing pressure on service delivery and water
      resources. At an annual growth rate of 3.1 percent, the estimated population of 19.5 million in 2017 is
      expected to grow to 29 million in 2030. Furthermore, Burkina Faso experiences one of the fastest
      urbanization rates on the continent, at 5.7 percent per year. This is particularly evident in the capital city
      of Ouagadougou, and the second city of Bobo-Dioulasso, which have annual population growth rates of
      7.2 percent and 11 percent, respectively. Still, 70 percent of the population lives in rural areas where
      access to services, including adequate water and sanitation, are significantly lagging urban areas,
      particularly in the southwest regions where the Program will intervene.

      3.       The sustainability of water resources is a significant concern in Burkina Faso. Water resources
      play a pivotal role for hydropower generation, agriculture, fisheries, domestic water supply, and industry.
      At 852 m3 per year per person, Burkina Faso’s available renewable water resource per capita is well below
      the water scarcity threshold of 1,000 m3 per year per person. This is further aggravated by the hydro-
      geological conditions and flat topography which lead to much of the rainfall becoming unavailable through
      run off, evaporation and deep infiltration, with major impacts on year-round access to water. Whereas
      the country is crossed by five main cross-border rivers,1 only two of them are permanent year-round.
      About 80 percent of the country is located on low-yield, hard-rock aquifers. Rapid population growth,
      environmental degradation, and pollution of water resources2 increase the vulnerability of Burkina Faso’s
      hydrological systems.

      4.       Climate change is expected to have significant impacts on water resource availability in the
      country. Water resources are highly vulnerable to climate change due to their intrinsic relation to rain,
      temperature, and wind patterns. Average temperature increases are projected to be 0.8°C by 2025, and
      1.7°C by 2050; accompanied by a rainfall reduction of 3.4 percent by 2025, and 7.3 percent by 2050, with
      significant inter-annual and seasonal variations3. It is expected that by 2050, there will be significant
      reductions in water volumes in Burkina Faso’s major river basins: Comoe (69 percent), Mouhoun (73
      percent), Nakambe (30 percent), and Niger (42 percent). Evidence-based decision making, including for
      allocating water resources across uses and for climate change mitigation and adaption planning, is
      hampered by insufficient, unreliable, and outdated knowledge of the location and quantity of surface and


      1
        Mouhoun - Black Volta, Nakambé - White Volta, Nazinon - Red Volta, Comoé, and Niger River.
      2
        Water resources are increasingly polluted due to mining and industrial activities, agricultural production (pesticides
      and herbicides for cotton), and urban sewage.
      3
        National Plan for Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation.
      groundwater resources; by outdated and dilapidated observation networks; and by the lack of a
      repository for water-related information.

B. Sectoral and Institutional Context

      5.       Since the mid-1990s the Government of Burkina Faso (GoBF) has built a comprehensive and
      well-defined legal and institutional framework for water supply, sanitation and integrated water
      resources management (IWRM). The Ministry of Water and Sanitation (Ministère de l’Eau et
      l’Assainissement, MEA), created in 2016, is responsible for determining priorities, setting policies and
      standards for water development, managing and regulating water resources, and regulating water and
      sanitation services. The National Office for Urban Water Supply and Sanitation (Office National de l’Eau
      et de l’Assainissement, ONEA), an autonomous publicly owned utility, is responsible for the provision of
      water supply, on-site sanitation, and sewerage services in 57 urban centers in Burkina Faso. Since 2009,
      as part of the decentralization process, the municipalities are responsible for planning, developing, and
      delivering water supply and sanitation services in rural areas. However, transfer of responsibilities to
      municipalities has not been accompanied by adequate financial and human resources. Significant policy
      reforms have taken place, including: the commercialization and modernization of ONEA; the delegation
      of water supply operations in rural areas to water user associations (Association d’Usagers de l’Eau,
      WUAs), non-government organizations (NGOs), and private operators; and, the adoption of IWRM
      principles in national policies and plans.

      6.      GoBF has developed a program approach focused on improving water supply and sanitation
      services and IWRM. In 2003, GoBF adopted the Action Plan for IWRM (Plan d’Action pour la Gestion
      Intégrée des Ressources en Eau, PAGIRE, 2003–2015), under which five river basin organizations were
      created and two adopted master plans for water management and water sources’ protection. However,
      the river basin organizations are not fully operational and are understaffed. In 2006, the GoBF adopted
      the National Water Supply and Sanitation Program (Programme National d'Approvisionnement en Eau
      Potable et d' Assainissement 2015, PN-AEPA 2006-2015). The PN-AEPA encompassed a US$1 billion
      investment program for achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) in urban and rural areas4,
      within a framework of IWRM. Under the PN-AEPA access to water and sanitation services was improved,
      though in rural areas the results were below expectations. Also, improvements in institutional
      arrengements, programming, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and better harmonization of the
      reporting system were achieved. Finally, in 2016 a dedicated line ministry (the MEA) was created.

      7.      More recently, GoBF adopted a second generation of sectoral programs for 2016–2030. Based
      on the National Development Economic and Social Development Plan Program (Programme National de
      Développement Économique et Social, PNDES, 2016–2020), the National Water Policy for 2016–2030, and
      in the context of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs),5 GoBF adopted: (a) the National Water
      Supply Program (Programme National d’Approvisionnement en Eau Potable 2016–2030, PN-AEP); (b) the
      National Sanitation and Wastewater Program (Programme National d’Assainissement des Eaux Usées et
      Excreta 2016–2030, PN-AEUE); (c) the National Program for IWRM (Programme National pour la Gestion
      Intégrée des Ressources en Eau 2016–2030, PN-GIRE); (d) the National Water and Sanitation Governance
      Program (Programme Gouvernance du Secteur Eau et Assainissement 2016–2030, PGEA); and (e) the



      4
        The aim of the MDGs was to halve, by 2015, the proportion of people without adequate access to drinking water
      and sanitation as compared to 2005.
      5
        For the sector, SDG 6 provides for universal access to water supply and end to open defecation by 2030.


                                                            2
National Plan for Dam Development (Programme National des Aménagements Hydrauliques 2016–2030,
PN-AH). These five programs reflect GoBF's response to sectoral issues and challenges.

8.      In urban areas, ONEA’s institutional transformation program coupled with capital investments,
resulted in a significant increase in access to improved water in urban areas - from 37 percent to 91
percent - between 1990 and 2016. Key measures taken included the recruitment of dedicated and
experienced management, the increase in water supply by the construction of the Ziga Dam, a service
contract with a private operator, and the introduction of block rates. However, the urban water sector
faces a major sustainability challenge associated with increasing water demand, driven by strong urban
population growth, in particular in Ouagadougou (ONEA’s largest center).

9.      Despite its strong operational performance, ONEA’s financial equilibrium is fragile. ONEA is a
well-performing utility, with 2.8 staff per 1,000 connections and 18 percent of non-revenue water
(compared to median values of 11.0 and 35 percent region-wide). In the last few years ONEA has been
able to cover operation and maintenance (O&M) costs, debt service, and make a partial contribution to
capital expenditures. Yet, ONEA’s financial viability is threatened by: (a) the lack of regular tariff
adjustments to reflect pass-through changes to increasing operational costs such as energy, chemicals
and labor; (b) a tariff structure that heavily relies on industrial and commercial customers to cross-
subsidize the lifeline tariff; (c) the significant change in the customer profile, whereby new customers are
generally limiting consumption at the level of the highly subsidized lifeline tariff below 8 m3 per month;
(d) rapid, spatially extensive growth in peri-urban areas - in particular in Ouagadougou and Bobo-
Dioulasso - requiring significant investments in network expansion; and, (e) the addition of fast growing
towns, with poorly developed infrastructure, to ONEA’s coverage area.

10.     Progress in rural areas has been accompanied by a major service delivery reform. Between 1990
and 2016, access to an improved water source increased from only 10 percent to 65 percent in rural areas,
though significant disparities remained, with lower rates in the southwestern regions. In 2000, GoBF
introduced a substantial reform whereby boreholes equipped with hand pumps were to be managed by
WUAs through a delegation agreement signed between the municipality and the WUA. Pump
maintenance and repair are ensured by an operator based on a contract signed with the municipality.
Water supply systems are to be managed by a third party (private operator, NGO, or ONEA), recruited by
the municipality based on competitive bidding.

11.     The successful implementation of the rural water reform is demonstrated by remarkable
functionality rates of 88.6 percent for the hand pumps, and 84.3 percent for the rural water systems. In
2014, GoBF undertook several initiatives to address the challenge of securing provisions for O&M and
extending rural water supply systems, such as adopting the Roadmap in Support of the Decentralization
of Water Supply and Sanitation Services (Assistance à la Maîtrise d'Ouvrage Communale, or AMOC),
developing a tariff study for rural water; and developing a public-private partnership (PPP) strategy for
the water sector. Currently, 6,834 WUAs have signed a delegation agreement with the municipality (84.8
percent out of 8,059 recognized WUAs); 155 out of 623 recognized private providers have signed a
contract for O&M; and 12 operators have been delegated the management of 445 water supply systems
(57 percent of the existing 780 systems), of which 22 are operated by ONEA and 267 by private operators
(mainly local). However, major challenges remain, including: professionalizing private sector operators;
improving water supply systems management; strengthening municipal technical services for the
delegation and supervision of water supply systems; improving cost recovery; and ensuring equal access.




                                                     3
12.     Expanding access to improved sanitation has been much more challenging. Only one out of five
people has access to improved sanitation facilities overall, and even in urban areas, only 38 percent of the
population has access to improved sanitation services6. Despite the close-to-universal reliance on on-site
sanitation facilities, sludge emptying is informal and only four sludge treatment plants exist in
Ouagadougou and Bobo-Dioulasso with a combined treatment capacity of less than 1,000 m3/day of
sludge. There is no strategy in place for sludge treatment management. Sewerage networks only exist in
the Ouagadougou business district, and serve less than 1 percent of Ouagadougou’s population.
Sanitation fees are insufficient, varying between US$0.03 and US$0.10 per m3 of water consumed,
depending on the type of sanitation facility.

13.       In rural areas, only 12 percent of the population have access to improved sanitation facilities
and around 75 percent of rural households still practice open defecation. Substantial awareness,
education and behavioral change campaigns are needed to increase demand for improved sanitation
facilities and their use, as past experience has shown that the population does not understand, or is not
convinced of, the beneficial effects of latrines. Local capacity for building latrines in rural areas is also a
limitation.

14.     Public latrines in schools, health centers and public places in urban and rural areas are insufficient,
often poorly built and without permanent handwashing facilities. In addition, the existing ones are often
poorly managed and insufficiently maintained.

15.      World Bank engagement in the sector. Over the last two decades, the World Bank has been one
of Burkina Faso’s leading partners in the development of the water and sanitation sector. Through the
World Bank financed Ouagadougou Water Supply Project (P000306, 2001–2007), new water storage
capacity (the Ziga Dam) and a primary transmission network were developed, in addition to secondary
and tertiary water distribution networks, and social connections (household and standpipes) to low-
income households. The World Bank support was key for the successful turnaround of ONEA, by
promoting efficiency in urban water supply operations and contracting out ONEA's commercial, financial,
and accounting functions. Under the ongoing Urban Water Sector Project (P106909, 2008–2018), a
significant increase in access to improved water and sanitation services has been achieved through the
provision of social connections, household latrines, and school latrines in main urban areas
(Ouagadougou, Bobo-Dioulasso, Koudougou, and Dedougou); and ONEA’s financial equilibrium and
performance has been maintained. Through the World Bank-financed pilot project for the delegation of
the management of water supply systems to private operators in peri-urban settlements in Ouagadougou,
in 2015, more than 107,000 people gained access to improved water services. On the rural front, under
the World Bank-financed Community-Based Rural Development Project (P035673, 2001–2013), about 1.4
million people in rural areas gained access to clean water. Furthermore, the World Bank has supported
rural water supply development through the Water and Sanitation Program for more than a decade,
including the development of a private sector strategy for rural water systems and a pro-poor water tariff
study. In June 2017, in response to the Government’s request, the World Bank completed an assessment
of IWRM) in the country,7 providing a detailed road map to improve IWRM, including strengthening the
knowledge of water resources in the country.




6
  The country did not achieve the urban sanitation MDG target of 57 percent of the urban population served by an
improved sanitation facility in 2015.
7
  Based on the priorities identified established by the PN-GIRE 2016–2030.


                                                       4
      16.     Vision and priorities of GoBF. GoBF’s vision is that by 2030, the country's water resources are
      defined and effectively managed to achieve universal access to improved water and sanitation services to
      contribute to sustainable development, in line with the SDG 6. Accordingly, the National Water Policy
      includes the following priorities: (a) ensuring universal access to water and sanitation with a major
      emphasis on the poorest and most vulnerable populations; (b) improving the knowledge and
      management of water resources in the country through research and human capital strengthening; (c)
      promoting the long-term sustainability of the sector including increasingly engaging the private sector in
      the management of water supply systems, giving priority to maintenance of existing investments,
      mobilizing internal resources for the sustainable financing of the sector; and (d) promoting regional and
      international cooperation in the management of shared water resources.

C. Relationship to the CAS/CPF and Rationale for Use of Instrument

      17.     The Program is aligned with the World Bank’s twin goals of ending extreme poverty and
      boosting shared prosperity, and with GoBF’s priority to improve Burkina Faso’s human, physical,
      natural, and institutional capital8. The Program will contribute to reducing poverty, foster inclusion and
      shared prosperity in Burkina Faso through improvements in water supply and sanitation services in
      underserved areas (peri-urban areas, secondary towns, and rural areas). By strengthening water
      resources information and monitoring, the Program will allow for evidence-based decision making and
      planning when it comes to allocation of water resources across sectors, contributing to mitigating the
      impacts of climate change. Also, the Program will have a strong focus on reducing the bias against women,
      by providing adequate water and sanitation services and supporting opportunities for women through
      human capital strengthening activities. Finally, the Program is aligned with the upcoming Country
      Partnership Framework (FY18-FY23) objective 2.4 of expanding access to water and sanitation services to
      the poor.

      18.     The Program will contribute towards the achievement of SDG 6 which calls for universal and
      equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water, sanitation and hygiene for all by 2030. In particular,
      the Program will contribute to SDG target 6.1 “By 2030, achieve universal and equitable access to safe and
      affordable drinking water for all”; SDG target 6.2 “By 2030, achieve access to adequate and equitable
      sanitation and hygiene for all and end open defecation, paying special attention to the needs of women
      and girls and those in vulnerable situations”; and SDG target 6.5 “By 2030, implement IWRM at all levels,
      including through transboundary cooperation as appropriate”.

      19.       Human capital strengthening. The Program will support the Government’s efforts to strengthen
      the sector’s human capital for provision of water supply and sanitation services and water resource
      monitoring and management at the national and municipal levels. Focus will be placed on developing win-
      win partnerships between government agencies, municipalities, and selected universities and research
      centers and support applied research and technical and vocational training (bachelor, master, and
      doctorate levels) to provide MEA, ONEA, and municipal technical services with qualified staff in key
      disciplines where skills are most needed. A strong focus will be placed on benefiting women with the
      training opportunities financed by the Program, in particular to increase the number of qualified female
      staff in technical positions in MEA, ONEA, and municipal technical services. Finally, there will be a strong
      emphasis on the strengthening of human resources linked to IWRM as a means to ensure the use of the




      8
          SCD Report No. 114393, March 2017.


                                                            5
knowledge developed under the Program and the sustainability of the decision-support model for the
management of the aquifers.

20.      Citizen engagement. Citizen engagement is at the core of the institutional reform process
whereby water will be delivered with increased accountability, transparency, and local-level grievance
mechanisms. Communities and municipalities in the Program areas will be involved in identifying priority
investments in their respective areas, through public consultations and meetings. Female beneficiaries
and women’s groups will be actively engaged to reflect women’s voices in identifying investments of
significance to them. The communities will also be involved in monitoring the quality of civil works through
community monitoring processes.

21.      Climate change. The Program was screened for climate change and disaster risk using the World
Bank screening tool and concluded that the Program risk to climate change and disaster is moderate based
on Burkina Faso’s exposure to climate and geophysical hazards, including droughts, floods, and extreme
temperatures. The capacity of GoBF to cope with climate change impacts still needs to be developed. Data
availability is limited due to inadequate forecast and monitoring systems, which limits the capacity to
make reliable forecasts on extreme weather events, and therefore affects the quality of decision making
at the central, departmental, and municipal levels. The Program aims at building resilience against some
of these risks. The Program will include a dedicated results area (RA) to enhance water resource
knowledge and monitoring, which in turn will contribute toward climate change mitigation and adaptation
knowledge gaps.

22.     IDA Scale-Up Facility (SUF). SUF financing has been mobilized for the Program in view of its strong,
transformative development impact in terms of rapidly accelerating access to basic water and sanitation
services while laying the basis for increased private participation in service delivery. Specifically: (a) more
than 1.1 million people will benefit from improved water supply and 1.3 million people from improved
sanitation services; and (b) improvements in the sustainability of service delivery, including on O&M of
assets and cost-recovery, will provide the basis for mobilizing private sector financing. By improving
ONEA’s operational efficiency, establishing an effective asset management approach for rural water
supply and sanitation, updating the financial modeling and revising the tariff structures in urban and rural
areas, and delegating rural water supply and sanitation services to private operators, the Program will
create the enabling environment to attract private capital on a nation-wide basis either for direct financing
and operation of larger scale assets, such as water or sludge treatment facilities, or through the private,
delegated operators who will have some rehabilitation and network extension responsibilities as is
already occurring with peri-urban operators.

Rationale for Using the Program-for-Results (PforR) instrument

23.      The PforR is the most appropriate instrument for supporting GoBF’s program approach for the
sector. The PforR instrument will enhance the impact of the World Bank’s financial and technical support
and strengthen the overall results orientation of GoBF. In doing so, it will contribute to:

    x   Program ownership. The highest levels of GoBF are committed to achieve the objectives of the
        PN-AEP, the PN-AEUE, and the PN-GIRE programs, which are under implementation since 2017.
        The PforR instrument will support the GoBF program approach to improve water supply,
        sanitation, and IWRM.
    x   Improvements in implementation of government programs. The Program provides an
        opportunity to support and strengthen the implementation of government programs and



                                                      6
                  improves the institutional framework and stakeholder capacity for the management of water and
                  sanitation services and water resources. The World Bank’s technical assessment of the quality of
                  the Program, including the Results Framework, expenditure framework, and supporting systems,
                  is satisfactory and the Program systems meet the World Bank policy requirements (OP/BP 9.00).
                  Although the Program will support specific interventions, the World Bank’s contribution is
                  anticipated to foster improvements in terms of effectiveness and efficiency in the overall water
                  supply and sanitation sector over the next 13 years (the implementation period for the PN-AEP,
                  the PN-AEUE, and the PN-GIRE is 2016–2030).
              x   Improvements in national systems and procedures. The Program builds upon the country’s
                  fiduciary and environmental and social management systems (ESMS), which were evaluated as
                  adequate for Program implementation. Through the Program Action Plan (PAP) the Program will
                  continue to provide support to strengthen country fiduciary systems related to audits, budgeting
                  and planning, and compliance with procurement deadlines. Also, the PAP includes actions related
                  to the strengthening of the ESMS related to the environmental and social management of the
                  Program investments and environmental and social management capacity of MEA and ONEA.
              x   Results orientation. The choice of the PforR instrument responds to GoBF’s commitment to
                  programmatic approaches focused on results, rather than donor-focused investment execution
                  as reflected in the Matrix of Sector Performance Indicators for 2017–2020.9 The use of the PforR
                  instrument will establish clear links between IDA disbursements and the delivery of results, as
                  demonstrated by the inclusion of seven disbursement link indicators (DLIs). In doing so, the PforR
                  instrument reinforces GoBF’s shared results orientation.
              x   Coordination with other development partners. The PforR instrument facilitates coordination
                  between development partners and the Government. The Program builds upon the past
                  experience of the country in implementing result based sectoral budget support programs for
                  water and sanitation, financed by the European Union (EU), the Danish International
                  Development Agency (DANIDA), and the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency
                  (Sida) over the past 10 years.

                                                 II. PROGRAM DESCRIPTION
A. Program Development Objective(s) (PDO) and PDO Level Results Indicators

        24.       The PDO is to improve access to water supply and sanitation services in targeted areas.

        25.      Two PDO level indicators will be used to monitor progress towards the achievement of the PDO:
        (a) People provided with access to an improved water source under the Program (number, disaggregated
        by female, urban, rural); and (b) People provided with access to improved sanitation facilities under the
        Program (number, disaggregated by female, urban, rural). A set of intermediate results indicators will be
        used to measure and track intermediate steps toward achieving the PDO. Details, including indicator
        definitions and targets, are provided in Annex 2.




        9
         Matrice des Indicateurs de Performances 2017–2020 du Secteur Eau et Assainissement that clearly identifies specific
        actions, and corresponding indicators, to be undertaken under each of the five sectoral programs.


                                                                 7
B. PforR Program Scope

      Government Programs

      26.     The Program will support key objectives of the PN-AEP and the PN-AEUE in targeted areas, and
      the PN-GIRE. These three programs aim at providing universal access to water supply and sanitation
      services, in the context of the SDG 6, and strengthen IWRM. Specifically, the Program will support the
      following objectives10: (a) for the PN-AEP: ensure sustainable access to improved water supply services in
      urban and rural areas, sustainable manage water supply infrastructure, and improve capacity for water
      supply management; (b) for the PN-AEUE: ensure sustainable access to improved sanitation services in
      urban and rural areas, eradicate open defecation by promoting behavioral change, optimize wastewater
      and sludge management, develop research in the field of wastewater treatment and on-site sanitation,
      and build capacity for subsector financing, management and steering; and, (c) for the PN-GIRE: improve
      water resources information for decision making, and develop reliable decision-making support tools.

      27.     The estimated cost of these three national programs (PN-AEP, PN-AEUE, and PN-GIRE) for the
      2016-2030 period is estimated at US$5 billion. The required financial resources for the next five years
      equal US$1.1 billion. The Water Supply and Sanitation Program consists of three RAs that are mapped to
      the national PN-AEP, PN-AEUE and PN-GIRE programs11.

      World Bank-Financed Program-for-Results - ‘The Program’

      28.     The Program supported by the World Bank focuses on results aimed at: (a) increasing access,
      sustainability, effectiveness, and responsibility for the delivery of water supply and sanitation services in
      urban and rural areas; (b) strengthening the knowledge base for IWRM; and (c) boosting human capital
      for sustainable service delivery. The duration of the Program will be five years, with targeted completion
      in December 2023.

                                           Table 1. Geographical Scope of Activities
              Results Area (RA)                               Urban                                     Rural
       RA 1. Improved access to water    11 centers of ONEA: Ouagadougou, Kaya, Korsimoro,   Selected communities of 64
       supply                            Boussouma, Yako, Gourcy, Boussé, Gon-Boussougou,    municipalities of four
                                         Mogtédo, Béguédo, and Tiébélé                       targeted regions (Hauts-
       RA 2. Improved access to          The 11 centers indicated above plus Dédougou,       Bassins, Boucle du Mouhoun,
       sanitation                        Nouna, and Bobo-Dioulasso                           Cascades, and the Southwest)
       RA 3. Improved access to
       reliable information on water                                        Nationwide
       resources
       Cross-cutting. Human capital
       strengthening                                                        Nationwide



      29.     Scope of the Program. Given the broad coverage of the PN-AEP, the PN-AEUE, and the PN-GIRE,
      and the limited resources available through the Program, a selective approach to supporting the PN-AEP,

      10
         The Program supports the objectives of these programs as follows: (a) for the PN-AEP, the objectives defined in
      Table 16 of Section 3.6. of the PN-AEP; (b) for the PN-AEUE, the objectives defined in Section 2.1.2 of the PN-AEP;
      and (c) for the PN-GIRE, the objectives No. 5 and 6 defined in Table 3 of Section 6 of the PN-GIRE.
      11
         See Annex 1 for more details, in particular Table A1.2 that presents the specific objectives of each of the three
      national programs supported by the Program.


                                                               8
the PN-AEUE, and the PN-GIRE has been adopted. The Program supports the objectives of the PN-AEP and
the PN-AEUE in targeted areas for investments related to increasing access to water supply and sanitation;
and selected objectives of the PN-GIRE related to strengthening the knowledge and monitoring of water
resources (Table 1). The Program further supports sectoral reforms and human capital strengthening to
improve the performance of the sectors covered by the Program.

30.      In urban areas, the Program will intervene in a total of 14 urban centers. In 11 urban centers, the
interventions will include water supply and sanitation, while in three urban centers, the Program will
intervene only in delivering sanitation services12 (Table 1 and Annex 9). Activities include strengthening of
existing systems, creating new water supply systems, and boosting access rates to improved water and
sanitation facilities. About 69 percent of the total urban population resides in the cities of Ouagadougou,
Bobo-Dioulasso, Kaya, Gourcy, Yako, Dédougou, Nouna, Gon-Boussougou, Tiébélé, Korsimoro, Béguédo,
Boussé, Boussouma, Mogtédo. These cities are characterized by rapid population growth. The selection
of urban areas also considers the low level of production and pumping capacity in the Kaya and Yako, the
reinforcement of which will be the basis to improve services to neighboring centers (Korsimoro,
Boussouma, Gourcy, and Boussé). Finally, the Program will intervene in four new centers where the
current access to improved water supply is below 30 percent.

31.     In rural areas, the Program will intervene in four targeted regions: Hauts-Bassins, Boucle du
Mouhoun, Cascades, and Southwest. These regions were selected based on the low rates of access to
improved water supply (less than 70 percent), which are among the lowest rates of the country; and, the
low rates of access to improved sanitation facilities (less than 12 percent), also among the lowest in the
country. The selection also considered the on-going support provided by other developing partners like
the French Development Agency (Agence Française du Développement, AFD), the EU, United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF), and other donors in the remaining nine regions.

32.     The Program will intervene in selected beneficiary communities within 64 municipalities
distributed among the four targeted regions as follows: 24 of the 47 municipalities in the Boucle de
Mouhoun Region; 10 of the 17 municipalities in the Cascades Region; 16 of the 33 municipalities in the
Hauts-Bassins Region; and 14 of the 28 municipalities in the Southwest Region. The selected beneficiary
communities are expected to gain access to improved water supply at the household level or at the
communal level, and access to improved sanitation at the household level by means of improved latrines.
The selection of the beneficiary communities will be based on a number of criteria, of which the most
important will be: (a) availability of water sources, developed by other projects or by this program, so that
people in the community can gain access to improved water supply; (b) completion of sanitation, hygiene
and behavioral change campaigns; (c) commitment of the municipal authority towards latrine campaigns
and reduction of open defecation; and (d) level of commitment of the households in the community to
build the superstructure of the latrines with their own resources. Whereas household commitment is
expected to be 100 percent, a minimum of 80 percent will be required. This will ensure that the Program
brings about a robust solution to water and sanitation challenges and maximizes the impact of IDA
support.

33.    On the IWRM front, the Program supports two key strategic actions of the PN-GIRE: (a) improving
knowledge on water resources; and (b) operationalizing the National Water Information System (Système
National d’Information sur l’Eau, SNIEau). The support for these two actions responds to the


12
  For Dédougou, Nouna, and Bobo-Dioulasso the Program will intervene only for sanitation as DANIDA on-going
program is being implemented in these three urban centers on water supply.


                                                     9
Government’s request to strengthen the knowledge base on water resources and its accessibility to allow
for adequate decision making, including the allocation of water to different sectors and uses.

34.     Through the human capital strengthening activities, the Program seeks to support the objectives
of the PN-AEP, PN-AEUE and PN-GIRE programs related to boosting the capacity for service delivery.

Program Activities

35.      The Program’s three RAs are: RA 1. Improved access to water supply; RA 2. Improved access to
sanitation; and, RA 3. Improved access to reliable information on water resources. Annex 1 provides a
detailed Program description. In addition, the Program includes a cross cutting area aiming at human
capital strengthening.

RA 1. Improved access to water supply

36.     For urban water, the Program will support the development of priority infrastructure to improve
urban water supply service delivery through: (a) the expansion of access to improved water supply
through installation of approximately 81,885 new metered household connections and approximately 333
standposts; (b) the expansion of water production capacity, pumping and storage facilities in selected
urban centers; (c) the development of water master plans for the city of Ouagadougou for the period
following year 2030; and (d) the development of pre-feasibility studies for selected urban centers.

37.    The Program supports improvements in the operational efficiency of ONEA through: (a) improving
the geographic information system (GIS); (b) sectorization of the water supply network of the city of
Ouagadougou to identify and reduce water losses; and (c) strengthening the capacity of its operational
and management staff by means of technical courses and training, and the hiring of key specialists through
the human capital strengthening programs supported by the Program.

38.      The Program will also strengthen ONEA’s financial equilibrium through: (a) adjusting the existing
urban water supply tariff; (b) carrying out of urban water supply tariff structure studies13 and adoption of
new water supply tariff structure; and (c) developing tools and applications to improve customer support
and monitor service performance, including optimizing production costs (improve energy efficiencies
during operational management and strengthen the capacities of staff in the management of water
losses).

39.      For rural water the Program will support: (a) the installation of approximately 1,100 boreholes
equipped with hand pumps, including approximately 400 in health centers and schools selected in
accordance with criteria set out in the Program Operations Manual (POM); (b) the construction of 90 new
water supply systems in locations selected in accordance with criteria set out in the POM; (c) the
rehabilitation of 60 existing water supply systems selected in accordance with criteria set out in the POM;
(d) the development of 10 feasibility studies for clustered water supply systems; (e) the adoption by the
Recipient of a new rural water tariff; and (f) scale-up the Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation System
(Dispositif Intégré de Suivi Evaluation, DISE) to the regions of Hauts-Bassins, Boucle du Mouhoun,



13
  A tariff study will be conducted and take into account the affordability, efficiency and required investments to
achieve the targets of SDG 6. This tariff study will lead to a new tariff model and tariff structure.



                                                       10
Cascades, and Southwest. To optimize water service provision costs the Program will promote solar
pumping14.

40.     Asset management will be aligned with the policies for water supply in rural areas in Burkina Faso.
Stand-alone boreholes equipped with hand pumps will be managed by WUAs. The operation and
management of water supply system will be delegated to a third party, such as an NGO, a private operator,
or ONEA. The management of a rural water supply system will follow the provisions of the tariff study,
the PPP strategy and the AMOC. The service contracts for the management of a water supply system will
be for a renewable contract period of 15 years and at least 20 supply systems will be assigned per
operator. The rehabilitation of 60 existing systems may be carried out by an operator, which after
completion of the works will be responsible for the management of the systems and mobilize the financial
resources to enable system expansion.

41.     Long-term financial sustainability of water supply. Through the DLIs, the Program encourages
measures that will allow for more efficient and accountable water supply service delivery. This includes,
among others, adjustments of the existing urban water supply tariff; adoption of a new tariff in urban and
rural areas, which would enable financial equilibrium while maintaining affordability for low income
people; support for the delegation of rural water systems to independent operators; strengthening of the
M&E function; and implementation of a substantial human capital strengthening program, which includes
the hiring of staff for the MEA, ONEA, and/or municipal technical services. These measures are critical
elements for the long-term sustainability of the sector, and will have positive impacts on service delivery.

42.      Potential climate change mitigation co-benefits. In urban areas, in particular in the Ouagadougou
system, the Program seeks to incentivize reductions in water losses, increase energy and water use
efficiency and reduce energy costs, thus potentially bringing climate change mitigation co-benefits. The
increased adoption of solar pumping for rural water supply schemes, away from diesel dependence, also
contributes to climate change mitigations. The construction and rehabilitation of new rural water supply
schemes will result in more climate change-resilient water supply infrastructure that are potentially
relevant for climate change adaptation co-benefits.

RA 2. Improved access to sanitation

43.      This RA supports the priorities of GoBF established in the PNDES and the PN-AEUE by means of:
(a) awareness and behavioral change campaigns aiming at improving hygiene practices and promoting the
use of latrines; (b) provision of partial subsidies for household latrines, provided that sufficient demand is
generated and the household is committed to complete the latrine superstructure; and (c) provision of
sanitation cabins in schools, health centers and public places in blocks equipped with permanent
handwashing facilities, including developing management arrangements to ensure that sanitation cabins
are operational and adequately maintained.


14
   This is the intention of the PN-AEP. The option to power the water supply systems by solar energy will be
considered a priority. Since the 1990s, Burkina Faso has accumulated considerable experience in the use of solar
energy for water supply systems, including the Regional Project Phase Solar I (PRS-I) and Phase II (PRS-II). The
electrical network of the SONABEL or other producers of electricity should supplement/complement the solar energy
where this is needed. The use of thermal generators should be considered as a last resort and only in combination
with the solar systems. Thermal generators should only be considered in areas without electricity network and when
water production does not cover the daily needs of the locality with the operation time of the only source of solar
energy.


                                                        11
44.      For urban sanitation, the Program will support: (a) the construction of approximately 42,500 new
household latrines (ventilated improved pit or flush toilet types only) and rehabilitation of 42,500
household latrines; (b) the construction of approximately 1,050 new sanitation cabins with male, female,
and handicapped compartments, provided with water and permanent hand-washing facilities, at schools,
health centers and public places selected in accordance with criteria set out in the POM; (c) the
development of sanitation plans in eight urban centers included in the Program; (d) the implementation
of awareness and behavioral change campaigns aiming at improving hygiene practices and promoting the
use of latrines; and (e) the development of a fecal sludge management strategy.

45.      These activities will be in line with the operational implementation strategy of ONEA, focused on
generating demand by means of awareness and behavioral change campaigns, and based on the principles
of local stakeholder involvement. Information, education, and awareness campaigns will promote the
development of local actors, such as artisans and small businesses, to participate in the delivery of latrines
by manufacturing their components and building the latrines. These latrines will be built in areas and to
households that, following sensitization campaigns, have a demand for latrines and are committed to pay
for or build its superstructure, and to operate and maintain the latrine and follow adequate hygiene
practices.

46.      For rural sanitation, in the selected rural municipalities of the four targeted regions, the Program
will support: (a) the construction of approximately 50,000 new household latrines (type ventilated
improved pit only); (b) the construction of approximately 10,200 sanitation cabins with male, female, and
handicapped compartments, provided with water and permanent hand-washing facilities, to be located
at schools, health centers, and public places selected in accordance with criteria set out in the POM; (c)
the implementation of awareness and behavioral change campaigns aiming at improving hygiene
practices and promoting the use of latrines; (d) the development of key research in the sanitation field;
and (e) the development of strategies for adequate management and sustainability of public latrines.

47.     In rural areas, the construction of latrines, except for its superstructure, will be executed by
construction companies that will be accompanied and supervised at all times (before, during, and post
construction) by a social engineering company. The capacity of MEA, the General Directorate for
Sanitation (Direction Générale de l’Assainissement, DGA), and municipal technical services will be
strengthened by providing technical support, tracking progress, and ensuring a continued social
mobilization in the area of sanitation and water supply at the municipal level.

RA 3. Improved access to reliable information on water resources

48.     This RA supports the priorities of GoBF established in the PN-GIRE. The Program aims at
strengthening IWRM by: (a) strengthening surface water knowledge and monitoring; (b) strengthening
groundwater knowledge and monitoring; and (c) operationalizing the SNIEau.

49.     Strengthened surface water knowledge and monitoring. Under this RA, the Program will support
the strengthening of the surface water knowledge and monitoring network nationwide through: (a)
carrying out a study for and implementing the optimization of the existing hydrometric network, acquiring
and installing necessary equipment and software to modernize a maximum of 20 hydrometric stations,
and equipping and training the staff of the units in charge of data collection at the MEA15; and (b)


15
   Water Data Collection and Disemonation Information Units (Unités de Collecte et de Diffusion de l’Information sur
l’Eau, UCDIEau).


                                                        12
supporting the optimization of the surface water quality network through undertaking an optimization
study and semi-annual sampling campaigns.

50.      Strengthened groundwater knowledge and monitoring. Under this RA, the Program will support
the strengthening of groundwater knowledge and monitoring network nationwide through: (a)
undertaking a study for the optimization of the existing piezometric network; (b) the organization and
update of existing data on groundwater resources; (c) the development of Productive Boreholes in the
hard rock aquifer by undertaking a multicriteria analysis for the identification of 50 favorable zones for
productive boreholes and the drilling of 50 productive boreholes; and (d) the development of a model for
the management of aquifers of the western sedimentary basin by undertaking geophysical seismic and
electric campaigns, the drilling of 16 deep recognition wells equipped with 14 piezometers, reports on
water withdrawals, and calibrated geological and hydrogeological models.

51.      Operationalization of the SNIEau. Under this RA, the Program will support the operationalizing of
the SNIEau 3 through: (a) providing support for the development of the SNIEau web-platform to be used
for data dissemination; (b) preparing a draft decree to institutionalize the SNIEau; (c) establishing data
exchange protocols between SNIEau and its partners; and (d) publicizing the water data repository. All the
water resource information developed under RA 3 should be made available through the SNIEau. The data
obtained from the DISE system will be available through the SNIEau, as well as all the process and results
for the technical and training programs financed under the Program. Emphasis will be placed on improving
quality of and access to water information, and on expanding public access beyond data to analytical
results (trends, water balance, among others).

52.     Potential climate change mitigation co-benefits. The activities included in RA 3 are relevant to
climate change adaptation and could be potentially included in the calculation of adaptation co-benefits.

Cross cutting area. Human capital strengthening

53.      Based on the objectives of the PN-AEP, PN-AEUE and PN-GIRE programs, a key element of the
Program is the significant focus on human capital strengthening for service delivery, which is incentivized
by the financial incentives included in DLI 7, and actively encouraging participation of women. The human
resources base for water supply, sanitation, and IWRM is limited in terms of number of staff and skills set.
Women represent a small share of the total staff of MEA and ONEA, and even a lower share of the
technical staff. Within MEA only 29 percent of all staff are women; and the percentage drops to 21 percent
when considering the share of women in technical positions. In ONEA, women represent only 19 percent
of the total labor force; and women represent only 3.7 percent of the technical staff.

54.       Human resource capacity of MEA. Most of MEA’s staff are within the management and finance
discipline, including large numbers of supporting staff (administrative and secretary functions). The
technical staff are limited and MEA faces a barrier in hiring due to market constrains, in particular in regard
to IWRM. Only 44 percent of MEA staff are experts, mainly specialized in rural development and
engineering, with a major challenge in the field of surface water and ground water resources. MEA is
particularly understaffed of technicians16 in the field of hydraulic structures and rural works. It is estimated
that a total of 340 specialists are additionally required (of which 70 in the field of IWRM and 270 in the
field of rural water and sanitation) to enable MEA to fulfill its mission.


16
   The number of technicians should be more than doubled for handling the implementation of all planned
structures.


                                                      13
55.     Human resource capacity of ONEA. At ONEA, 57 percent of total employees are technical staff.
ONEA is expanding its services into new centers and these will require more technical staff. Also, as ONEA
is advancing in expanding its sludge treatment capacity, waste water capacity, and extension of sewerage,
additional staff trained in these areas is required.

56.      Human resource capacity of municipal technical services. In the four regions where the Program
will intervene for rural water supply and sanitation activities, technical municipal services are currently
understaffed or are not staffed at all, limiting their ability to fulfill their mandate as part of the
decentralization process. Municipal services are expected to be staffed by at least one technical expert
on water supply and sanitation, but this is often not the case. AMOC foresees significant support for
staffing of technical services with qualified staff by providing financial resources from MEA to the hiring
of the technical staff.

57.     The Program will strongly incentivize the strengthening of the human capital base of the MEA,
ONEA and municipal technical services. To strength the skills of existing staff of MEA and ONEA, and
municipal actors in accordance with criteria set out in the POM in critical areas of services delivery, with
particular emphasis on IWRM through financing of beneficiaries’ tuition and other related costs to
participate in four types of programs: (a) technical and training programs; (b) specialization programs; (c)
doctoral programs; and (d) short-term training; and the integration of individuals having completed the
technical and training programs into the MEA, ONEA or municipal technical services selected in
accordance with criteria set out in the POM. Indeed, to increase the number of staff in MEA, ONEA and
municipal technical services, which currently are severely constrained, after completion of technical and
training programs, the Program seeks to incentivize that a number of graduates of these programs be
integrated into the MEA, ONEA, and/or the municipal technical services. Therefore, it is expected that the
Program provides a solid foundation for the sustainability of results by strengthening the skill base and
increasing the current levels of staff within MEA, ONEA and municipal technical services.

58.      The Program will seek to actively encourage women to apply to the scholarships for technical and
training programs provided through the Program, and to benefit MEA and ONEA female staff of the
opportunities provided through specialization, doctoral and short-term training. The Program would
encourage women to participate by intense communication campaigns in public media (including
television, radio, newspapers, and social media) to reach potential female candidates, and publishing
opportunities in MEA’s and ONEA’s websites.

Financing and Program costs

59.     The total Program financing is US$365 million. This includes: (a) the household contribution of
US$34 million (in-kind for the completion of the latrine super-structure in urban and rural areas); GoBF
contribution of US$31 million (including the contribution from MEA and ONEA), which will be made
available for the Program through the Program Dedicated Treasury Special Account (Compte d’Affectation
Spéciale ouvert au Trésor, CAST); and (c) IDA contribution for US$300 million, of which US$50 million in
the form of a grant and US$250 million as a credit from the IDA-18 SUF (Table 2).




                                                    14
                                          Table 2. Program Financing (US$ million)
                                                                    Amount
                Source                                                                      % of total
                                                                  (US$ million)
                Household in-kind contribution                         34                       9
                GoBF                                                   31                       8
                IDA
                  Grant                                                50                      14
                  IDA SUF                                             250                      68
                Total Program financing                               365                      100

      60.     Program exclusions. The Program will exclude activities that are likely to have significant adverse
      impacts on the environment and/or affect people, including but not limited to schemes that involve
      construction or rehabilitation of dams that are greater or equal to 10 m in height, sludge treatment plans,
      extensions of the sewerage system, groundwater-based schemes in overexploited and critical basins that
      do not integrate source sustainability measures, undertaking of any activity that uses asbestos, and
      undertaking of any activity involving major land acquisition. It is envisaged that there is no high-value
      contract exceeding Operations Procurement Review Committee threshold17 value that qualifies for
      procurement exclusions.

      61.     Maximizing finance for development. The Program will contribute significantly to GoBF’s efforts
      to mobilize private finance for the water supply and sanitation sectors trough the incentives provided in
      the DLIs and activities included in the RA 1 and RA 2. It is expected that private finance will be mobilized
      not later than three years following Program completion. Under RA 1, the Program provides incentives to
      strengthen ONEA’s financial sustainability (by improving its operation and technical performance, and
      adopting a new tariff structure), which is a key element to mobilize private finance in the medium to long-
      term. Also, under RA 1, the Program seeks to strengthen service delivery in rural areas (by boosting the
      capacity of municipal service providers and private operations) and incentivize the delegation of rural
      water systems to private operators, with a view that in the medium term private operations could also
      mobilize private finance for needed capital investments. Under RA 2, the Program will enable private
      finance in the development of a sludge management strategy, whereby the investments of the private
      sector will be key to expand the existing limited sludge treatment capacity and contribute to the operation
      of new plants, as well as participate in the collection/transportation of sludge. Also, under RA 2, the
      Program will provide opportunities for private participation the management of latrines in public places.

C. Disbursement Linked Indicators and Verification Protocols

      62.     The disbursement model consists of seven DLIs. The DLIs have been selected based on the
      following criteria: (a) importance for successful implementation; (b) potential to incentivize
      improvements within GoBF’s programs; (c) practicality and cost-effectiveness of verification; and (d)
      GoBF’s capacity to achieve the DLI during the Program implementation period. The DLIs intend to
      incentivize the achievement of tangible outputs and outcomes, and strengthen the institutions involved
      in water supply, sanitation, and IWRM. The DLIs are presented in Figure 1. The underlying definitions used
      in the DLIs are presented in Annex 3.


      17
        Operations Procurement Review Committee threshold value is as follows: (a) works (including turnkey, supply and
      installation of plant and equipment, PPPs), estimated to cost US$75,000,000 equivalent or more per contract; (b)
      goods, information technology, and non-consulting services, estimated to cost US$50,000,000 equivalent or more
      per contract; (c) consultant services, estimated to cost US20,000,000 equivalent or more per contract.


                                                             15
63.     DLI 1 seeks to provide financial incentives for increasing access to water supply to people living in
urban and rural areas, supporting the achievement of the SDG No. 6, in targeted areas where there are
major challenges for the expansion of sustainable water supply services. Access will be provided by means
of household water connections, standposts and boreholes equipped with handpumps.

                           Figure 1. RAs and Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs)




64.      DLI 2 will support the construction of surface and groundwater water production facilities that
are essential to increase access to improved water services in secondary urban centers and rural areas.
The Program seeks to incentivize water production expansion in urban and rural centers where there is a
significant deficit of water production and therefore provision of adequate water supply services are
severely constrained.

65.      DLI 3 will provide incentives for strengthening the financial sustainability of water supply service
provision. In the first year, the DLI provides strong financial incentives for (a) the adoption by the Council
of Ministers of the rural water supply tariff structure; and (b) the adjustment of the lifeline tariff (0 to 8
m3) charged by ONEA in urban centers. From year 2 onwards, DLI 3 seeks to incentivize the undertaking
of a study and adoption of a new urban tariff structure that responds to the objectives of: providing
affordable access to urban population according to their socio-economic levels, and ensuring the
necessary economic and financial equilibrium in the provision of water services. It will also incentivize the
validation of the new tariff structure by means of public hearings, and its adoption and implementation.

66.      DLI 4 encompasses strong incentives for the provision of improved sanitation to people living in
urban and rural areas by means of improved household latrines, supporting the achievement of the SDG
No. 6. Targeted areas will be subject to information, education and behavioral change campaigns prior to
the commencement of any construction to secure high demand for sanitation and appropriate O&M of
the facilities. Pit excavation and the provision and installation of the slab will be done at no cost for the
beneficiaries, provided that beneficiary households make a commitment to build the superstructure and



                                                     16
maintain the facility with their own resources. Therefore, the DLI will incentivize the Government to
ensure that the household is committed towards the investments and mobilizes the adequate financing
to build the super-structure, which in turn is a significant step towards ensuring its use and maintenance.

67.      DLI 5 seeks to incentivize the strengthened institutional sanitation, by means of providing new
sanitation cabins in schools, health centers and public places in urban and rural areas, in blocks of latrines
equipped with permanent handwashing facilities, and incentivize their O&M. To ensure an efficient
management and the sustainability of the facilities, which has been a common problem in the past,
adequate management arrangements will be defined. As for the facilities in public places, management
will be delegated to a third party, under municipal oversight, which will be responsible for the O&M of
the facilities and will charge a user fee to the public. In addition, DLI 5 provides financial incentives to
promote good O&M of the facilities.

68.     DLI 6 seeks to provide incentives for the development of a decision-support model for the
management of the aquifers (in the sedimentary and hard-rock basin) that will allow for a better allocation
of water resources. The DLI incentivizes the development of a geological and hydrogeological model in
the western sedimentary aquifer, which is the largest and most productive and has a strategic relevance
as a buffer for economic and social planning. Also, the DLI provides financial incentives for the planning
of water resources abstraction, in particular for water supply uses, in the hard-rock basin by developing a
multicriteria analysis leading to the identification and drilling of 50 productive boreholes.

69.      DLI 7 seeks to provide incentives for the strengthening of human capital at the central and
municipal level for the provision of water and sanitation services, and for IWRM, which is a key element
for the sustainability of results achieved by the Program. Therefore, financial incentives will be provided
to strengthen the capacity of professionals internal and external to sector institutions by means of:
technical and training programs, specialization, doctoral programs, and continuous education courses.
Attention will be given to addressing long standing gender imbalances at senior levels of sector decision
making, by addressing aspects of equity, and equal training opportunities for women. Given the scarcity
of specialized personnel at various sector institutions, the Program will provide incentives to entice
external beneficiaries of technical and training programs to be absorbed by MEA, ONEA, and/or municipal
technical services.

70.     Disbursements will be made according to the achievements under the Program. Funds will be
used to finance the activities included in the Program. It will be the responsibility of MEA and ONEA to
prepare annual activity, procurement plans, and budgets. As part of the PAP, MEA and ONEA should adopt
annual procurement plans and disbursement estimates two months following the inclusion in the Finance
Law of the Program’s annual budget.

71.      Verification Protocol. All DLIs will be independently verified by an independent verification agent
(IVA). The verification protocol uses data from civil works supervision reports, household surveys,
progress reports from the PCU and ONEA’s Program Support Unit (PSU), consolidated results reports
submitted by the PCU to the MEA, and random physical verification. The IVA will prepare a Results
Verification Report, which will be shared with the Program PCU and the World Bank. A key use of the
Results Verification Report will be to determine the amount of the eligible disbursement to be made based
on the results achieved. If the World Bank finds that the disbursement request meets the terms of the
Financing Agreement, the World Bank will disburse the corresponding funds to Ministry of Economy,
Finance and Development (Ministère de l'Economie, des Finances et du Développement, MINEFID).




                                                     17
                                         III. PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

      72.     A Steering Committee (Comité de Revue), chaired by the General Secretary of MEA, will provide
      oversight of the Program and ensure that the Program is on track to meet the Program objectives. The
      Steering Committee will meet twice per year (ordinary sessions), with the purpose of: (a) reviewing and
      adopting the Program implementation plan; (b) reviewing and adopting the Program evaluations; and (c)
      reviewing and adopting the financial reports; the annual activity, budget, and procurement plans; among
      other function established in the Decree 2018-0092 of 2018. The Program will have two implementing
      agencies: MEA and ONEA.

      73.     A Program Coordination Unit (PCU) will be established within MEA. The PCU will act as the
      interlocutor with the World Bank on behalf of GoBF. The PCU will ensure that the Program is implemented
      according to the POM, and will be responsible for the coordination, day-to-day management of the
      Program activities, monitoring results, and generating performance and financial reports on Program
      implementation. The PCU will be responsible for providing relevant information to the IVA for the
      independent verification of results. The PCU will be responsible for preparing the consolidated interim
      financial reports and the consolidated annual financial statements. The PCU will be at least staffed with:
      A Program Coordinator, an M&E specialist, a procurement specialist, a financial management specialist,
      an accountant, an environmental safeguard specialist, a social safeguard specialist, and an internal
      controller. The PCU Program Coordinator, M&E specialist, procurement specialist, and financial
      management specialist will be recruited on a competitive basis. Furthermore, a full time, dedicated
      financial and public procurement controller will be appointed by MINEFID and assigned to the PCU to
      speed up processing of transactions and payments.

      74.      ONEA will establish a Program Support Unit (PSU) dedicated exclusively to support the
      implementation of Program activities under ONEA’s responsibility, and report on results achieved by
      ONEA. The PSU will be at least staffed with: a PSU Coordinator, an M&E specialist, a procurement
      specialist, a financial management specialist, an environmental safeguard specialist, and a social
      safeguard specialist. The PSU Coordinator, M&E specialist, procurement specialist, environmental
      safeguards, and social safeguards specialist will be recruited on a competitive basis. The internal control
      will be done by ONEA’s Internal Control Department. ONEA PSU will report to the PCU.

      75.   Program activities will be implemented by MEA’s directorates and ONEA departments. Formal
      implementation responsibility has been established as follows:

          x   Within MEA, the General Directorate for Water Supply (Direction Générale de l’Eau Potable,
              DGEP) and the DGA will implement the Program activities related to rural water supply and rural
              sanitation included in RA 1 and RA 2. The DGA and DGEP will work through the Regional
              Directorates for Water and Sanitation (Direction Régionale de l’Eau et de l’Assainissement, DREAs)
              to implement Program activities related to rural water supply and sanitation, in particular to
              ensure data collection for the verification of results. The Permanent Secretariat for Integrated
              Water Resource Management (Secrétariat Permanent de la Gestion Intégrée des Ressources en
              Eau, SP-GIRE) will implement the activities under RA 3, working in close collaboration with the
              General Directorate for Water Resources (Direction Générale des Ressources en Eau, DGRE). The
              Human Resources Directorate (Direction des Ressources Humaines, DRH) will be in charge of the




                                                          18
              management of the programs for human capital strengthening supported by the Program related
              to MEA and the municipal technical services.
          x   Within ONEA, the Ouagadougou Works Department (Direction Projec AEP Ouaga, DPAEP) will
              implement the Ouagadougou water supply-related activities included in RA 1. The Department of
              Planning and Investment (Direction de la Planification et des Investissements, DPI) will implement
              the urban water supply-related activities in the remaining 10 urban centers where the Program
              will intervene for urban water supply. ONEA's Department of Sanitation (Direction de
              l’Assainissement, DASS) will implement all the sanitation-related activities included in RA 2 in the
              fourteen targeted urban centers. ONEA’s DRH will be in charge of the management of the
              programs for human capital strengthening supported by the Program related to ONEA.

      76.     MINEFID plays a central role in achieving the Program results. The MINEFID will be responsible for
      the execution of the Program budget (ensuring fund flows) and setting standards and processes for the
      financial management of the Program.

      77.     Given the complex and multidimensional nature of the program, and in view of its implementation
      challenges, DGA, DGEP, SP-GIRE and ONEA departments will be assisted by strategic implementation
      support consultants (SISC) in technical aspects, including providing technical inputs into: (a) terms of
      references (ToRs), feasibility level and detailed design studies; (b) tendering and procurement processes;
      and (c) quality control of main deliverables of studies conducted under the Program. The SISC will be
      competitively selected with relevant national and international experience. SISC will provide support and
      guidance and provide the opportunity for implementing agencies’ staff to learn on the job. It is important
      that the ToR for the SISC give adequate emphasis to this capacity development role.

      78.     Given GoBF’s desire to initiate Program implementation immediately after declaration of
      effectiveness, it has been agreed that conditional to the extension of the closing date of the on-going
      Urban Water Sector Project (currently December 31, 2018), remaining Project funds will be available for
      financing the PCU, the PSU, and SISC, and the Government will shortly initiate the process of recruiting
      the PCU and PSU staff and hiring the SISC.

B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation

      79.     Program M&E. The Results Framework (Annex 2) is the basis of monitoring Program results. It
      consists of PDO indicators and intermediate-level indicators, some of which are DLIs. Monitoring of the
      indicators in the Results Framework will be conducted semi-annually during the program implementation
      period. This will ensure effective tracking of progress so that corrective measures can be taken to ensure
      the achievement of the PDO. The Program will require several of the results indicators to be disaggregated
      by gender (Annex 2). This will facilitate gender-related planning and management of the Program.

      80.      The M&E function will be assumed by the PCU, which has the overall coordination and
      responsibility for M&E for the Program. The PSU will be in charge of monitoring of activities under ONEA’s
      responsibility, and will provide needed inputs to the PCU for the consolidation of Program results. M&E
      specialists will be hired for the PCU and PSU to ensure the M&E function.

      81.     Progress reviews. To facilitate knowledge sharing and problem solving, semi-annual meetings will
      be held at the management level to review progress, identify and propose remedies for any weaknesses,
      and identify and propose modalities for scaling up successes beyond the Program. In addition to regular




                                                          19
     implementation support missions, semi-annual reviews will be critical for early identification of problems
     and opportunities with the Program.

     82.      Midterm review. The midterm review will be an opportunity to review the Program framework
     and potentially adjust the DLIs. This includes the options of reallocation of disbursement amounts
     between the DLIs or cancellation of DLIs. The review will also assess the quality and impact of the human
     capital strengthening activities supported by the PforR.

     83.      DISE Scale-up. The DISE is a consolidated M&E system under pilot phase for three national
     programs (PGEA, PN-AEP, and PN-AEUE),18 and thus at present it only covers water supply and sanitation-
     related information. The DISE is expected to be the unique M&E system for the sector, covering all the 13
     regions of Burkina Faso—including urban and rural areas. The Program will support the scale-up of the
     implementation of the DISE to the four targeted regions included in the Program.

C. Disbursement Arrangements

     84.      A Dedicated Treasury Special Account (CAST) will be opened at the Treasury to avoid cash
     rationing and streamline the payment process of the Program. The CAST will enable resources to be
     directly linked to spending, in contrast to the general budget where resources cannot be allocated to
     specific expenditure. The creation of CASTs is provided for in the Public Finance Organic Law. The National
     Assembly is responsible for approving the establishment of CASTs and their expenditure ceilings. CASTs
     facilitate: (a) the monitoring of resources and their related expenditures in the national budget; (b) the
     carrying forward of unused but committed budgetary allocations, which is an exception to the principle
     of the annual budgetary system; (c) the management of transactions directly through the Integrated
     Financial Management System for budget monitoring; and (d) separate reporting on implementation and
     an independent audit since CAST transactions can be extracted from the CID and the IT application for
     accounting.

     85.      The CAST will be replenished with World Bank/IDA disbursements and Governments’ contribution
     to the Program (including MEA’s and ONEA’s contributions). The World Bank will transfer the eligible
     disbursements based on the Results Verification Report submitted by IVA to the PCU and World Bank.
     Disbursement requests will be submitted to the World Bank using the World Bank’s standard
     disbursement forms through the e-disbursement functionality in the World Bank’s Client Connection
     system. The funds for the Program will be spent by MEA and ONEA and are not expected to be transferred
     further to the communities. All payments of expenditures incurred by MEA and ONEA will be paid through
     the CAST under the direct responsibility of the General Directorate of the Treasury and Public Accounting
     (Direction Générale du Trésor et de la Comptabilité Publique, DGTCP).

     86.     For ONEA, the yearly allocated budget under the Program will be facilitated through the ‘capital
     transfer’ mechanism that will follow the country public expenditure chain with some flexibilities to avoid
     delays. ONEA will follow its financial management procedures to execute the budget and report to MEA.
     The administrative control bodies will reserve the right to verify the expenditures ex-post.

     87.      Advance payment. An advance of 25 percent of the eligible PforR Program amount (US$75
     million) will be disbursed following the effectiveness of the Financial Agreement. When the DLI(s) against
     which an advance has been disbursed are achieved, the amount of the advance will be deducted


     18
          At a later stage, the DISE is expected to also cover the PN-GIRE and the PN-AH.


                                                                20
       (recovered) from the total amount due to be disbursed under such DLI(s). The advance amount recovered
       by the World Bank is then available for additional advances (‘revolving advance’). The World Bank requires
       that the Borrower refund any advances (or portion of advances) if the DLIs have not been met (or have
       been only partially met) by the closing date, promptly upon notice thereof by the World Bank.

       88.     Consolidated financial statements. The PCU shall prepare Program consolidated financial
       statements annually. The Program report will include consolidated financial statements that will cover all
       Program activities, expenditures and sources of funds. The Court of Accounts (Supreme Audit Institution)
       will audit the consolidated Program financial statements. The Program Audit Report and audited
       consolidated Program financial statements shall be submitted to the World Bank within nine (9) months
       after the end of the financial year.

       89.      Program reconciliation. If the World Bank establishes after the closing date that the withdrawn
       financing balance exceeds the total amount paid for Program expenditures, exclusive of any such amounts
       financed by any other financier or by the World Bank under any other loan, credit or grant, the Borrower
       shall, promptly upon notice from the World Bank, refund to the World Bank such excess amount of the
       withdrawn financing balance. The World Bank shall then cancel the refunded amount of the withdrawn
       financing balance.

D. Capacity Building

       90.      The Program provides incentives for significant capacity buiding, as demonstrated by the inclusion
       of a cross cutting area: human capital srtregtening (described above). In addition to the four types of
       programs financed by the PforR, the Program includes several capacity building activities for stakeholders
       in the sector, including the private sector, that will also contribute to strengthening the human capital
       base for water supply and sanitation, including training on contract management, accountability, gender,
       citizen engagement, hygiene behavior change, reporting, new tariff structure, PPP strategy for rural water
       system for water supply operators, among others.

                                             IV. ASSESSMENT SUMMARY
A. Technical (including program economic evaluation)

       91.     As part of the Program preparation, a Technical Assessment of the Program was carried out. The
       assessment concluded that the Program is strategically relevant and technically sound. A number of
       weaknesses have been identified. These will be addressed through the adoption of key measures included
       in the PAP. The Annex 4 provides a detailed summary of the Program’s Technical Assessment.

       92.     The Program is strategically relevant. In Burkina Faso, low levels of investments—in particular, in
       sanitation—have resulted in poor development outcomes. The Program is at the heart of the
       Government’s efforts to increase access to water and sanitation and improve IWRM. As a reflection of its
       strategic importance, GoBF has adopted the National Water Policy in 2016 and five operational programs,
       which aimed at achieving the SDG 6 for water, sanitation and IWRM by 2030.

       93.     The Program will contribute to fund a substantial portion of GoBF’s national programs to deliver
       universal access to water and sanitation services. It will support the establishment of institutional,
       contractual and financial arrangements that will enable GoBF to achieve its strategic priorities to provide
       universal access to water and sanitation services, and strengthen sector governance. The Program will
       provide incentives to expand access to water supply for 1.1 million people, and to improved sanitation for


                                                           21
1.3 million people. It will support core actions included in the PN-AEP and the PN-AEUE, which consists of
extending existing and constructing new piped waters supply systems in urban and rural areas, to expand
access to improved household sanitation facilities, and improved water supply and sanitation services in
schools, health centers and public places.

94.     Based on the recently completed Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) for Burkina Faso, which is
the basis for the development of the upcoming Country Partnership Framework (CPF), the Program is
aligned with the country priorities on improving the management of natural resources (including water
resources), promoting skills development, and reducing gender bias.

95.     The Program is technically sound. It will allow addressing a number of identified weaknesses in
the water supply, sanitation and IWRM sectors in Burkina Faso, through an emphasis on greater service
standardization, increasing the scale of service delivery, education and communication campaigns to
boost latrine demand, maintenance of latrines and sanitation cabins, expanding the knowledge of the
western aquifer, and locating new water supply sources in the hard-rock aquifer.

96.     The Program approach to deliver access through a mix of household connections, standposts and
boreholes is in line with an ongoing shift in customers’ preferences towards household connections, whilst
recognizing the fact that boreholes and standpost supplies provide a good first step and will be needed
for some time, particularly in the poorest areas. A key strength of the Program’s technical design is linked
to the overlapping of water supply and sanitation investments in targeted areas so as to maximize the
Program impacts.

97.      The Program builds upon the programmatic approach adopted by GoBF, which has been a catalyst
for the mobilization of resources for the sector, as well as lessons learnt from the implementation of the
first generation of government programs and a number of projects funded by development partners,
including the World Bank, and lessons learned from similar reforms in Sub-Saharan Africa. The World
Bank’s longstanding engagement on water supply and sanitation in Burkina Faso has provided the
motivation for the Program.

98.        The Program’s institutional arrangements are sound and well-aligned with GoBF’s programs
and ongoing reforms. Having a main counterpart for Program implementation through the establishment
of the PCU within MEA will provide clarity of focus and leadership for implementation of the Program, as
it is aligned with the Decree 2018-0092 of 2018, which prescribes the general regulations for Program and
Project operations in Burkina Faso. Also, establishing a dedicated PSU within ONEA will ensure the
adequate attention to Program implementation, in particular concerning strong coordination of ONEA
Program activities, M&E, financial and safeguards aspects. The establishment of the PCU and PSU and
staffing are key elements of the PAP.

99.      Program’s expenditure framework. The Program will be mostly financed by the IDA (US$300
million). The overall cost of the supported Program (US$365 million), including the portion financed by
the World Bank, will be included in the multi-year expenditure programming documents. Underlying unit
costs were assessed to be in line with comparable regional benchmarks. The Program’s expenditure
framework will be anchored in the national budget programming process.

100. Economic analysis. The Program will benefit approximately 1.1 million people who will receive
improved water supply services and 1.3 million people who will have access to improved sanitation
facilities. Beneficiaries will spend less time fetching water and will benefit from higher drinking water
quality. They will be able to access greater water volumes and will suffer from less service interruptions


                                                    22
due to technical breakdowns. Particular attention will be paid to ensuring that women and girls can
benefit from improved access, so that they can in turn benefit from greater economic opportunities
(including from being involved in water service delivery) and educational opportunities. In addition, the
Program will generate local jobs in the area of water supply and sanitation delivery and will reduce
pressure on the use of local groundwater resources (through stronger monitoring and management of
these resources) and of energy sources (through an emphasis on connecting piped rural water supply
systems to the grid or relying on solar energy).

101. On the sanitation side, one of the major benefits of the Program is savings in health expenditure.
The Program, supported by strong information, education, and communication campaigns, will contribute
to reducing the sanitation related diseases by improving sanitation and hygiene practices at the household
level and in schools, health centers, and public places.

102. An economic analysis was conducted to compare costs and benefits with and without the
Program. Costs and benefit streams were projected over 30 years and discounted at a social discount rate
of 6 percent based on the World Bank guidance for preparation of Economic Analysis. Costs included
Program costs associated to delivery of water supply and sanitation services, and operating and
maintenance costs and households’ contributions to finance the latrine superstructure.

103. The analysis yielded a benefit-cost ratio of 5.7, which is in line with international estimates of
similar investments in areas with limited access to water supply. The net present value (NPV) of costs and
benefits is US$1.5 billion when a 6 percent discount rate is used. A sensitivity analysis was conducted on
a number of parameters, including the discount rate, the value of time and the impact of the investments
on diarrheal illness reduction, and operating costs. The NPV remained positive under all these scenarios.

104. Climate change mitigation, adaptation, and potential co-benefits. The adaptation co-benefits
are based on specific activities supported by the RAs, due to water supply infrastructure being designed
to be climate resilient and the activities linked to water resource knowledge strengthening. The
improvement in schemes would result in more climate change resilient water supply infrastructure and
the adoption of solar pumping technology that potentially carry climate adaptation co-benefits. Prudent
O&M activities would reduce losses, increase efficiency, and reduce energy costs. The drop in both energy
consumption and the use of diesel pump sets will lead to a reduction in fossil fuel usage, which will have
a climate change mitigation effect. The increased knowledge of location, quantity, and quality of
groundwater resources will contribute toward climate adaption by providing critical information for
development and investment planning, including, but not limited to, water allocations across sectors and
sources of water supply for domestic use.

105. Program Action Plan (PAP). The PAP includes legally binding actions that are considered crucial
for advancing water and sanitation service delivery in Burkina Faso, strengthening knowledge on water
resources, and improving human capital for service delivery and were identified as potential constraints
in the three assessments (Technical, Fiduciary, and Environmental and Social). The PAP will be monitored
through regular supervision missions and will be reported on annually by the PCU. The actions will be
executed through instructions contained in the POM.19 The POM sets forth GoBF regulations and laws


19
  The POM includes the following sections: Introduction to the Program, Objectives and Guiding Principles,
Organization and implementation, PAP, Water Supply and Safety, Sanitation and Hygiene, Capacity Building and
Policy Support, Procurement, Financial Management, Governance and Anti-corruption, Environment Management,
Social Aspects, Annual Program Plans and Program Reports, Monitoring and Evaluation, Verification, and Definitions.


                                                        23
      that will govern the various aspects of the Program and the supplemental provisions necessary to address
      the gaps identified in the PAP. The list of the actions agreed upon is provided in Annex 7.

B. Fiduciary

      106. As part of Program preparation, the World Bank carried out an Integrated Fiduciary Systems
      Assessment (IFSA). The IFSA concludes that the Program’s Integrated Fiduciary Systems have the
      capabilities to provide reasonable assurance that the grant and credit proceeds will be used for intended
      purposes with the objective of supporting the achievement of the Program objectives. The Annex 5
      provides a detailed summary of the Program’s IFSA.

      107. The IFSA concluded that the legislative and institutional framework for procurement, financial
      management, governance and anti-corruption in place in Burkina Faso is acceptable. The framework is in
      line with international standards. The national institutions in charge of internal and external controls have
      generally demonstrated their ability to fulfill their legal mandate, despite financial and human resources
      constraints. MEA’s and ONEA’s fiduciary procedures, tools and staffing arrangements are deemed
      acceptable. The IFSA identified a number of weaknesses and risks in the overall fiduciary, governance and
      anticorruption systems warranting the design of specific actions to mitigate them in the Program context.

      Program Financial Management Systems

      108. The design of the Program relies on the existing financial management systems and institutions
      in Burkina Faso. In addition to the two implementing agencies (MEA and ONEA), MINEFID has a central
      role to play in achieving the Program results in terms of budget execution and release of funds and
      elaborating the standards and processes for program financial management. The systems maintained by
      the MINEFID provide a guarantee in terms of fiduciary risks.

      109. Planning and budgeting. Planning and budgeting related to the Program will follow the national
      procedures. The overall cost of the supported Program is included in the multi-year expenditure
      programming documents. The PAP requires the inclusion in the Annual Finance Law of the Program’s
      annual budget.

      110. Accounting and financial reporting. The existing public expenditure chain will be used in the
      Program. The PCU within MEA will be responsible for preparing consolidated interim financial reports and
      annual financial statements of the Program. The interim financial reports will be submitted to the World
      Bank not later than 45 days following the end of the semester.

      111. Internal controls and external audit. The Technical Inspection Services within MEA, the General
      Finance Inspectorate (Inspection Générale des Finances, IGF) within MINEFID, the Court of Accounts and
      the Superior Control and Anticorruption Authority (Autorité Supérieure de Contrôle d’Etat et de Lutte
      Contre la Corruption, ASCE-LC) are involved in the implementation of the Program to carry out the
      functions of internal and external audits. Contracts under the Program will be subject to ex-post control.
      Semi-annual internal audits and reviews covering operational, technical, procurement, and financial
      aspects of the Program will be conducted.

      112. The annual audited financial statements of the Program, inclusive of the transactions in the CAST,
      will be the basis for the annual financial assurance required by the World Bank. External audits of the
      Program’s consolidated annual financial statements prepared by the PCU will be done by the Court of
      Accounts for the activities implemented both by MEA and ONEA.


                                                           24
113. Flow of funds. The CAST for the Program will be opened at the Central Bank of the West African
States, which will be replenished with IDA disbursements and GoBF’s contribution to the Program. All
payments under the Program will be made through the CAST. ONEA will not open a separate bank account
to make payments of expenditures incurred under the Program.

Program Procurement Systems

114. The national procedures for award, execution and settlement of public contracts and public
service delegations20 will apply to the Program. In the context of the Program aspects of the existing
procurement process, publication of notices, international tendering and capacity for contract
administration should be improved.

115. Procurement capacity. The procurement experience of the staff of MEA and ONEA General
Directorate for Procurement (Direction Générale des Marchés Publics, DMP) is limited, which will
potentially generate procurement and disbursement delays. To mitigate this risk, the PAP includes
measures seeking to reinforce the capacity of MEA DMP and technical services and ONEA DMP and
technical services by providing training on procurement and acquiring needed equipment. Furthermore,
implementation arrangements include the recruitment of a full-time procurement specialist dedicated to
the Program in the PCU to provide the day to day support to the SP-GIRE, the DGEP, the DGA, and the
DRH and recruitment of a full-time procurement specialist dedicated to the Program in the PSU to support
the implementation of ONEA’s activities under the Program.

116. Internal procurement controls. The IFSA found that there is limited internal procurement controls
to verify internal compliance with the procurement rules in place before moving forward in the
procurement process and signing contracts. To mitigate this risk, within the POM detailed procurement
procedures defining the role and skills of each stakeholder in the public procurement chain within MEA
and ONEA, with a focus on control, will be included. To reinforce procurement controls for the contracts
related to activities financed under the Program, implementation arrangements included the
appointment of an internal controller as part of the PCU.

117. Procurement delays. To reduce delays in procurement process, the PAP will request the adoption
of annual procurement plans and disbursement estimates based on the annual approved budget of the
Program. The Program will monitor delays in the procurement process of contracts funded by the
Program.

118. International tendering and international publication. To successfully achieved the Program
results, a number of contracts will require international tendering and international publication to ensure
sufficient competition and technical skills. The POM will define thresholds above which the procurement
process should be open internationally. Also, the advertising of notices of contracts procured by MEA and
ONEA in the context of the Program will be done in an international publication.

Program governance and anti-corruption systems

119. The Program will prioritize an effective governance oversight through increased accountability of
the sector to citizens; increased monitoring and auditing; and greater disclosure and transparency. The


20
 Described in the Law No. 039-2016 / AN on the General Regulation of Public Contracts and detailed in the Decree
No2017-0049 / PRES / PM / MINEFID of February 1, 2017.


                                                      25
      MEA and ONEA should prepare bi-annual reports on fraud and corruption cases related to activities under
      the Program.

      120. GoBF has agreed to follow the World Bank’s Anti-Corruption Guidelines that apply to all PforR
      lending operations. Key arrangements for the implementation of these guidelines will be included in the
      POM. This will set out the steps that GoBF will take to: (a) report on allegations of fraud and corruption in
      the Program and how they are handled; (b) apply the World Bank’s debarment list to the Program; and
      (c) assist any World Bank investigation under the Anti-Corruption Guidelines by ensuring cooperation from
      those involved in the Program, including ensuring that these participants will be obligated to cooperate
      with the World Bank. The World Bank will monitor the arrangements for the implementation of the Anti-
      Corruption Guidelines, considering the experience of the existing PforR operation in Burkina Faso, and
      consider updates to the POM as appropriate.

      121. Complaints Handling and Grievance Redress. Citizens’ complaints and grievances pertaining to
      the Program will be coordinated and addressed by the Ombudsman (Médiateur du Faso) and the ASCE-
      LC, using the grievance redress systems and administrative structures of these institutions. A
      memorandum of understanding should be signed between the Mediateur and ASCE-LC to promote
      collaboration between the two focal institutions in handling complaints and mismanagement of the
      Program funds.

C. Environmental and Social

      122. As part of Program preparation, the World Bank carried out an Environmental and Social System
      Assessment (ESSA), in close collaboration with GoBF, to identify potential environmental and social
      impacts under the Program. In accordance with the requirements of the World Bank’s policy on PforR, the
      ESSA assessed the national systems with respect to institutional capacity and performance, policy and
      regulatory bases, consultation mechanisms and grievance management to mitigate the impacts. The
      Program’s activities were analyzed to identify expected environmental and social risks and impacts. The
      Annex 6 provides a detailed summary of the Program’s ESSA.

      123. A National Public Consultation to disseminate the findings of the ESSA was held on March 27,
      2018. Representatives from all stakeholders, development partners, civil society organizations and the
      private sector participated in the consultations. Comments from the workshop were incorporated into
      the final version of the ESSA. The ESSA report was dislosed on April 21, 2018 and is publicly available in
      the World Bank's external website.

      124. The ESSA concludes that the Program ESMS is adequate for PforR financing and that the activities
      to be funded under the Program should by their nature, characteristics and size, generate low-to-
      moderate environmental and social impacts and generally bring beneficial and positive environmental
      and social impacts. The national project screening system in place provides adequate mitigation measures
      of infrastructure and rehabilitation activities. The ESSA further concludes that overall the ESMS is
      appropriately equipped with the necessary tools and processes to identify, mitigate, and report on
      possible environmental and social impacts of Program activities. Accordingly, it finds that the risk of
      negative environmental and social impacts is addressed through the relevant ESMS provisions and
      operational procedures.

      125. Environmental and social impacts of the Program. The Program’s supported activities are
      expected to have an overall positive impact, which will be maintained over the long term, including:



                                                           26
significant improvements in access to improved water supply sources and improved sanitation facilities;
reduction of reliance on open defecation; reduction of the incidence of waterborne disease; improvement
of hygiene practices; strengthening of the institutional capacities of stakeholders at national, regional,
and local levels; and enhancements in the O&M of sanitation cabins in schools, health centers and public
places.

126. Adverse social impacts are anticipated to be low to moderate and easy to mitigate. Investments
may include some forms, more or less temporary, of involuntary resettlement of residential or business
households, acquisition of private lands or restrictions on access to local social and economic
infrastructure. In addition, there is a potential risks of work related accidents, both for the constructions
workers and the nearby populations, due to poor signage. Most of negative social impacts will be time-
bounded and spatially restricted (due to the relatively low land requirements of the various investments
planned under the Program and the use of state-owned land). As part of the preparation of Environment
and Social Impact Assessment and the Implementation of Environmental and Social Management Plans,
mitigation measures for the potential risk related to gender-based violence, labor influx and child labor
will be taken into consideration.

127. Adverse environmental impacts are anticipated to be low to moderate and easy to mitigate.
Environmental impacts are expected to be typical construction impacts, site-specific, and generally limited
to air or water pollution, production and management of waste, use and disposal of hazardous materials.
Other non-construction works could have some adverse environmental impacts or risks (on water uptake,
water contamination, among others). Adequate mitigation measures will be taken during the preparation
and implementation of infrastructure works.

128. ESMS. The ESSA analyzed the strengths, gaps, risks and opportunities of the country’s ESMS
against the core principles and key planning elements intended to ensure that PforR operations are
designed and implemented to maximize the potential environmental and social benefits, while avoiding,
minimizing, or otherwise mitigating adverse environmental or social impacts. Overall, Burkina Faso’s ESMS
is comprehensive and consistent with the core principles of World Bank’s PforR policy. Burkina Faso’s legal
framework and related action plans are conducive to environmental protection and social development.
However, there are a number of constraints in the ESMS including: (a) whereas most institutions are in
place and their mandate has been defined, there is a limited coordination among them, and limited
human and financial resources; (b) coordination between central and regional levels are weak; (c)
administrative procedures are slow, constraining timely decision-making; and (d) public inquiries do not
result in proper public consultation. The PAP will support specific measures to improve the conditions for
the performance of the ESMS in the implementation and monitoring of the Program activities, as follows:

129. Preparation of a Technical Manual for Environmental and Social Management (Manuel Technique
pour la Gestion Environnementale et Sociale, MTGES) of the Program investments, which will be an
integral part of the POM. A training program will be developed for the implementation of the MTGES for
all the different stakeholders involved in the implementation of the Program.

130. Adoption of an interinstitutional convention between MEA and ONEA, on the one hand, and
preparation and enforcement of an interinstitutional cooperation agreement between MEA and the
National Agency in charge of Environmental Assessments (Bureau National des Evaluations
Environnementales – BUNEE), on the other hand. The content of this agreement will establish the
conditions for collaboration (awareness raising; information and training; rapid review and certification
of sub-projects; environmental and social control and monitoring; among others).



                                                     27
131. Appointment of dedicated environmental specialists and social management specialists within
the PCU and the PSU, who will be employed full-time throughout the implementation of the Program.

132. Specialized training in monitoring and control of environmental and social mitigation and
reporting measures. This more in-depth training in monitoring and control of environmental and social
mitigation and reporting measures will be provided to representatives of all local, regional and national
institutions involved in collecting, processing and analyzing information regarding the implementation of
mitigation measures.

133. Developing citizen engagement guidelines. MEA and ONEA will jointly develop guidelines to
ensure the effective participation of and consultation with local people, targeted beneficiary community,
and vulnerable groups. The guidelines will ensure adequate gender-sensitive consultations in selection of
interventions, management of WUAs, and in implementation of all the components of the Program.

134. Based on the climate and disaster risk screening, there is no potential negative impact of the
Program activities. In view of the risks identified by the ESSA, the environmental and social risk rating of
the Program is assessed to be moderate.

135. Gender assessment. A gender assessment conducted as part of the Program’s preparation
identified gaps between men and women’s voice and participation at all levels of decision making. The
assessment found that female staff are underrepresented in technical and leadership positions. According
to the assessment, women make up 21 percent of technical staff in MEA and only 3.7 percent of technical
staff in ONEA. It also highlighted the gender differences reflected in how much time is spent by women
collecting household water as compared to men, and the extent to which women’s specific sanitation
needs were met in schools, health centers, bus stops and market places.

136. The findings of the gender assessment informed the Program design, in particular the human
capital strengthening activities and the need to develop a gender action plan, which is a key action
included in the PAP. To address the low number of female employees in technical positions of MEA and
ONEA, the Program will use communication campaigns and outreach to encourage women to apply for
scholarships for technical and training programs, and participate in other training programs offered under
the Program. Technical and training programs last between two to three years and are intended to
compensate the current under-representation of certain professions within MEA and ONEA in the fields
of water supply and sanitation and IWRM. The number of female participants in these programs will be
monitored in the results framework. The gender action plan will aim at, but not be limited to,
institutionalizing gender and creating an enabling environment for gender in management and in
operations under the Program. The gender action plan could include, among other elements, actively
promoting female water technicians and engineers, training on sanitation and hygiene to promote their
active participation, training on mechanism to prevent gender-based violence and mitigation measures,
continuous sensitization of all sectors on social and cultural discriminatory practices and norms
underpinning gender inequalities and discrimination against women, and the participation of women in
governance and WUAs.

137. WB’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS). Communities and individuals who believe that they are
adversely affected because of a Bank supported PforR operation, as defined by the applicable policy and
procedures, may submit complaints to the existing Program grievance redress mechanism or the WB’s
GRS. The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed to address pertinent concerns.
Affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the WB’s independent Inspection



                                                    28
         Panel which determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, because of WB non-compliance with its
         policies and procedures. Complaints may be submitted at any time after concerns have been brought
         directly to the World Bank’s attention, and Bank Management has been given an opportunity to respond.
         For information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank’s corporate GRS, please visit
         http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank
         Inspection Panel, please visit www.inspectionpanel.org.

    D. Risk Assessment

         138. The risk assessment is informed by the results of the technical, fiduciary, and ESMS assessments.
         The overall risk rating of the operation is Substantial.

         139. The political and governance risk is rated as Moderate. On the political side, there is a cautious
         optimism that has prevailed after peaceful elections in November 2015. However, the tenuous security
         situation is posing a risk to stability. The overall governance environment in Burkina Faso is conducive for
         reforms and the water supply, sanitation, and IWRM sectors are ahead of many sectors in the reform
         process, though the decentralization of water supply and sanitation services is not yet fully implemented
         posing a risk for the sustainability of Program results.

         140. The technical design risk has been assessed as Substantial. Some of the activities under RA 3 are
         part of the current work plan of the SP-GIRE (observation networks), but others are new in the context of
         Burkina Faso and hence require the strong support of SISC. The proposed interventions for water and
         sanitation are not complex, but for rural activities the implementation of Program activities requires
         strong coordination between MEA and its decentralized offices (DREAs). Also, sanitation activities require
         strong information, education and communication campaigns to create the demand for latrines and
         ensure the household contribution for the completion of the superstructure.

         141. The risk associated with institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability is assessed
         as Substantial. Whereas ONEA has demonstrated strong capacity for project implementation in the
         ongoing Urban Water Sector Project (P106909), the technical departments of MEA are at a different level
         in particular, SP-GIRE. The Program implementation arrangement place significant emphasis on improving
         institutional capacity to address MEA’s capacity constraints. SISC will be hired early during Program
         implementation to ensure adequate technical support, in particular with regard to water resources
         activities. With the aim of strengthening the financial sustainability of water service delivery in urban and
         rural areas, the Program includes DLI 3 which refers to the adoption of cost-recovery tariff structures. In
         addition, a PCU within MEA and a PSU within ONEA will be staffed with dedicated coordinators and full-
         time specialists to ensure adequate coordination, and sufficient support during Program implementation,
         in particular in regard to M&E, fiduciary and safeguards aspects. The World Bank team will ensure close
         implementation support during the first year of implementation.

         142. The fiduciary risk is assessed as Substantial, as explained under “Section B. Fiduciary”. The
         environmental and social risk is assessed as Moderate, as explained under “Section C. Environmental
         and Social”.
.




                                                              29
                                 Annex 1. Detailed Program description

A. Scope of the Program

1.     The Water Supply and Sanitation Program aims at supporting GoBF’s (GoBF) national plans for
improving water supply and sanitation services and IWRM by incentivizing infrastructure investments and
reforms in water and sanitation sector within targeted urban and rural areas, strengthening the water
resources knowledge base, and promoting institutional strengthening through human capital building.

2.      Since the mid-1990s, Burkina Faso has made significant strides to build a comprehensive legal and
well-defined institutional framework to improve water supply and sanitation and IWRM. The MEA is
responsible for determining priorities, setting policies and standards for water development, and
managing and regulating water resources, including water and sanitation services. The National Office for
Urban Water Supply and Sanitation (Office National de l’Eau et de l’Assainissement, ONEA), an
autonomous publicly owned utility, is responsible for water supply, on-site sanitation, and sewerage
provision in 57 urban centers in Burkina Faso. Significant policy reforms included the commercialization
and modernization of ONEA; the delegation of water supply operations in rural areas to water user
association, NGOs, and private operators; and, the adoption of IWRM principles in national policies and
plans.

3.      Since 2009, as part of the decentralization process, the municipalities are responsible for planning,
developing, and managing water supply and sanitation services in rural areas. Despite the early
foundations laid in the Constitution of 1991 and the decentralization of water supply and sanitation
services initiated in 2006, the actual transfer of responsibilities accompanied with financial and human
resources only started in 2009 and is yet to be fully achieved. In 2014, GoBF adopted AMOC, whereby
MEA plays a central role in building the capacity of the municipalities and local actors for sustainable
service delivery. The AMOC includes a human resources plan that provides financial resources of MEA
during a period of ten years to strengthen municipal water supply and sanitation technical services. The
support of MEA is to be gradually phased out as local capacities are strengthened. However, today a
number of municipalities lack the necessary financial and human resources to undertake the planning,
developing, and delivery of water supply and sanitation services in rural areas.

B. The Government’s programs

4.      Since the early 2000’s Burkina Faso adopted a program approach for improving water supply and
sanitation services and IWRM, consisting on two generation of programs: from 2003-2015 and from 2016-
2030.

5.      First generation of programs: 2003-2015. The first generation of programs included the Action
Plan for IWRM, (Plan d’Action pour la Gestion Intégrée des Ressources en Eau, PAGIRE, 2003–2015) and
the National Program for Water Supply and Sanitation (Programme National d'Approvisionnement en Eau
Potable et d' Assainissement, PN-AEPA, 2007-2015).

6.      In 2003, the PAGIRE (2003–2015) was adopted by GoBF and five river basin organizations
established. Two of these river basin organizations have developed a River Basin Master Plan for Water
Management (Schéma directeur d’aménagement et de gestion des eaux) and implemented a plan to
protect water sources in terms of quantity and quality. Also, the CFE, which finance water resource



                                                     30
management actions including Water Agencies, started to be collected, though as of 2015 it amounted to
only US$1.1 million.

7.      In 2006, the PN-AEPA (2007-2015) was adopted by GoBF, leading to US$1 billion investments for
achieving the MDGs in urban and rural areas21 within a framework of IWRM. The PN-AEPA significantly
contributed to improve access to water and sanitation services. Other improvements include
strengthened planning, M&E, and the creation of a more uniform reporting system. MEA was established
in 2016 as a line ministry.

8.      Second generation of programs: 2016-2030. GoBF has adopted a second generation of programs
in the water, sanitation and IWRM sector, based on the following National Water Policy Guiding Principles:

9.      Ensure the right of universal access to improved water and sanitation, on the basis of the human
rights-based approach, with particular attention to the poorest and most vulnerable populations. This
Guiding Principle is to be developed through the following implementation strategies:

     x   Implement whenever possible the “clustered-village” approach to satisfactorily providing rural
         water service
     x   For water supply and sanitation apply a “service approach” rather than an “asset approach”. In
         the specific case of the water supply, this strategy will consist of the promotion of private
         connections and the densification of standposts in rural areas.
     x   Promote the use of Information and Communication Technologies (ICT)

10.      Improve knowledge and management of the country's water resources through the development
of research and capacity building to ensure better management. Effective water resources management
needs to focus on the issues of concern: (i) pollution resulting from the development of agricultural and
mining activities; (ii) overexploitation of water resources; (ii) degradation and silting of waterways; and
(iv) the recovery of the financial resources necessary for the sustainable management of the country's
water resources.

11.     Promote Sustainable Development to ensure the sustainability of actions undertaken in the water
and sanitation sector, which meets the conditions of economic efficiency, environmental sustainability
and social equity. The requirement of sustainability requires among others:

     x   Partner with the private sector (PPP approach) for water supply and irrigation, in view of the
         decline in public aid to development, and the need to ensure the sustainability of investments
     x   Give priority to rehabilitation, consolidation of infrastructure, considering the large number of
         hydraulic structures to be rehabilitated (dams, hydro-agricultural development, water supply
         systems, etc.), granting high priority to the maintenance of existing investments
     x   Increase the mobilization of internal resources for sustainable financing of the water sector
     x   Promote regional and international cooperation in the management of shared water resources.

12.     GoBF has adopted a second generation of programs, comprising five national sectoral programs
for the 2016–2030 period, based on the National Program for Economic and Social Development


21
  The aim of the MDG related to WSS was halving the proportion of people that in 2005 had no adequate access to
drinking water and sanitation by 2015.



                                                      31
(Programme national de développement économique et social, PNDES, 2016–2020), the National Water
Policy (2016–2030) and the SDG 622, as follows:

      x      The National Water Supply Program (Programme national d’approvisionnement en eau potable,
             PN-AEP, 2016–2030), adopted by Arrete No. 2016-15/MEA/CAB/ of June 9, 2016;
      x      The National Sanitation and Wastewater Program (Programme National d’Assainissement des
             Eaux Usées et Excréta, PN-AEUE, 2016–2030), adopted by Arrete 2017-041/MEA/CAB of March
             28, 2017.
      x      The National Program for Integrated Water Resource Management (Programme National pour la
             Gestion Intégrée des Ressources en Eau, PN-GIRE, 2016–2030), adopted by Arrete
             2016/MEA/CAB, of June 9, 2016.
      x      The National Water and Sanitation Governance Program (Programme Gouvernance du secteur
             Eau et Assainissement, PGEA, 2016–2030); and
      x      The National Program for Dam Development (Programme National des Aménagements
             Hydrauliques, PN-AH, 2016–2030).

13.     These five operational programs reflect the government's response to sector issues and
challenges, but they require continuity in the effort to mobilize financial resources, good governance, a
focus on the outcomes and impacts of investments, and a strong and reliable sector framework including
an administration with the capacity to make good decisions, as well as a stable legal framework known to
users, businesses and investors. The 2016-2020 action plans were adopted in 2018.

14.      The PN-AEP, PN-AUE and PN-GIRE national programs are implemented through five-year action
plans, the first of which covers the period 2016-2020 with a projected overall budget of US$ 1088 million,
of which 62 percent for the PN-AEP, 35 percent for the PN-AUE, and 4 percent for the PN-GIRE. The total
requirements to fund the three programs from 2016 to 2030 is US$4212 million (Table A1.1).

                  Table A1.1. Estimated budget for the PN-AEP, PN-AEUE, and PN-GIRE (US$ million)

     National Program            2016-2020                2021-2025                2026-2030               Total
     PN-AEP                      671                      706                      903                     2280
     PN-AEUE                     377                      777                      674                     1828
     PN-GIRE                     40                       33                       31                      104
     Total                       1088                     1516                     1607                    4212
Source: PN-AEP 2016-2030, PN-AEUE 2016-2030, and PN-GIRE 2016-2030,

15.     The Program is integrated with GoBF's priorities to provide universal access to water and
sanitation services, and to strengthen water resource management. On the basis of the objectives and
actions proposed in the government sector programs, the Program will fund a subset of investments
included in the PN-AEP and the PN-AEUE in targeted geographical areas, and some key actions included
in the PN-GIRE Table A1.2). The Program builds upon GoBF’s policy priorities and will support the
objectives articulated within the PN-AEP, PN-AUE and PN-GIRE in selected urban and rural areas23.


22
  For the WSS sector, SDG 6 provides for universal and equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water,
sanitation and hygiene, and end to open defecation by 2030.
23 The Program supports the objectives of these programs as follows: (a) for the PN-AEP, the objectives defined in Table 16 of

Section 3.6. of the PN-AEP; (b) for the PN-AEUE, the objectives defined in Section 2.1.2 of the PN-AEP; and (c) for the PN-GIRE,




                                                              32
                      Table A1.2. Objectives and Actions of the PN-AEP, PN-AEUE, and PN-GIRE
 Government        Specific Objective of the Government            Actions Included in the government           PforR
 Program           Program 24                                      Program                                      Program
                                                                                                                Supported
 National          Ensure sustainable access to improved           Implementing sustainable access to           Yes
 Water Supply      water supply services                           drinking water
 Program (PN-      Sustainable manage water supply                 Managing water supply services               Yes
 AEP)              infrastructure
                   Improve capacity for water supply               Strengthening the institutional framework    Yes
                   management                                      and management tools
 National          Ensure sustainable access to improved           Implementing sustainable access to           Yes
 Sanitation and    sanitation services                             sanitation
 Wastewater        Eradicate open defecation by promoting          Eradicating open defecation and              Yes
 Program (PN–      behavioral change                               promoting adequate hygiene and
 AEUE)                                                             sanitation practices in rural and urban
                                                                   areas
                   Optimize wastewater and sludge                  Optimizing management and collection of      Yes
                   management                                      wastewater and sludge
                   Develop research in the field of wastewater     Undertaking research in the field of         Yes
                   treatment and on-site sanitation                sanitation
                   Build capacity for subsector financing,         Providing capacity building for sector       Yes
                   management and steering                         financing, management, and steering
 National          Improve water resources information for         Improving information on water resources     Yes
 Program for       decision making
 Integrated        Develop reliable decision-making support      Operationalizing the National Water            Yes
 Water             tools                                         Information System (SNIEau)
 Resource          Increase capacity and efficiency of river     Adopting and implementing river basin          No [1]
 Management        basin organizations                           management plans
 (PN-GIRE)         Increase the financial water contribution     Defining and implementing a strategy to        No [1]
                   for the protection of water resources         increase the financial water contribution
                   Sustainably preserve the quality of the       Protecting water sources for different         No [1]
                   water resources for the various uses          water uses
                   Protect water sources                         Defining and implementing an action plan       No [1]
                                                                 for preventing invasion of water plants
                    Incorporate transversal or cross sectoral    Strengthening technical capacities for the     Yes
                    issues within water management               monitoring of cross sectoral issues
                    Change stakeholders’ behavior regarding      Adopting communication campaigns in this       No [1]
                    the protection and uses of water             domain
                    Reduce regulatory offenses in water          Enforcing IWRM regulations                     No [1]
Note: [1] These actions of the PN-GIRE are supported by EU, DANIDA and Sida on-going programs.

The PN-AEP 2016-2030

16.     The strategic objective of PN-AEP 2016-2030 is to sustainably meet water supply needs of the
population in quantity and quality and thus contribute to the achievement of the SDG 6. The strategic
axes selected for the PN-AEP are:

    x    Axis 1. Knowledge of the water sector:
             o To develop action research for water supply service delivery


the objectives No. 5 and 6 defined in Table 3 of Section 6 of the PN-GIRE.
24 The Program supports the objectives of these programs as follows: (a) for the PN-AEP, the objectives defined in Table 16 of

Section 3.6. of the PN-AEP; (b) for the PN-AEUE, the objectives defined in Section 2.1.2 of the PN-AEP; and (c) for the PN-GIRE,
the objectives No. 5 and 6 defined in Table 3 of Section 6 of the PN-GIRE.


                                                              33
            o    Strengthen capacity for knowledge, monitoring and evaluation of water resources for
                 water supply
            o Promote the acquisition, use, and dissemination of water data for use with water supply
                 system
            o Reduce water-related risks by better understanding these risks and implementing
                 preventive measures
    x   Axis 2. Mobilization of water resources:
            o Promote the “water service approach” rather than an “asset approach”
            o Increase investments for the mobilization (production, treatment, transport, distribution
                 and marketing) of groundwater and surface water resources for drinking water, with a
                 view to achieving universal access to water while targeting priority villages / localities /
                 neighborhoods without access to improved water
    x   Axis 3. Management of water supply service:
            o Pursue the implementation of the reform of water supply management system in rural
                 and semi-urban areas, while ensuring that the state and the local authorities ensure that
                 the poorest people have access to the infrastructure. water, through the establishment
                 of appropriate mechanisms that ensure equity and sustainability
            o In urban areas, improve the efficiency and effectiveness of water service delivery while
                 taking appropriate measures to maintain the financial equilibrium of the urban water
                 supply sub-sector
            o Promote the development of PPPs in infrastructure management and public water service
    x   Axis 4. Management of the water sector:
            o Ensure better management of the sector by putting in place an effective institutional
                 mechanism, a unified intervention framework and efficient management and control
                 tools.
            o Implement a human resources development plan for the sector

17.     The expected results linked to the urban component of the PN-AEP 2016-2030 are: (a) to increase
the access rate to improved water supply from 91 to 100 percent, with the increase of the number of
people served from 3.3 million at the end of 2016 to around 8 million by the end of 2030; and, (b) the
creation of 20 new centers, increasing the number of existing urban centers served by ONEA from 57 to
77 urban centers.

18.     The expected results linked to the rural component of the PN-AEP 2016-2030 are: (a) to increase
the access rate to improved water supply from 65 to 100 percent by (i) increasing the population served
by standposts from 7 percent in 2014 to 24 percent in 2030 and (ii) increasing the population served by
private connections from 0.3 percent in 2014 to 56 percent in 2030. By 2030 about 20 percent of the rural
population (about 3.5 million people) will still be served by boreholes equipped with manual operated
pumps.




                                                    34
                           Table A1.3. Objectives PN-AEP Rural Component (2015-2030)
                 Rural water systems                                  Boreholes equipped with      Water
                                              Connections (#)
                         (#)                                         manual operated pumps (#)  distribution
Period
                                                        Private                                    mains
                 New       Rehabilitated Standposts                     New       Rehabilitated
                                                      Connections                                  (Kms)
2015 - 2020       100          225         4,854        104,004        5,406         3,899         3,883
2020 - 2025       136          86          3,008        289,093        3,900         2,795         4,395
2025 - 2030       222          86           734         603,823        2,323         2,911         4,253
Total
                  458          397         8,596        996,920        11,629          9,605       12,531
(2015 – 2030)
Source: PN-AEP 2016-2030

The 2016-2030 PN-AEUE

19.      The overall objective of PN-AEUE 2016-2030 is to ensure sustainable access to sanitation services
(including on-site and network services), and achieve the SDG 6 concerning sanitation. The strategic axes
selected for the PN-AEUE are:

    x    Axis 1. Ensure universal access to sanitation. This strategic axis aims to ensure the right of
         universal access to sanitation on the basis of the human rights-based approach, taking into
         account the concerns of the poorest and most vulnerable population. This includes:
             o End open defecation through community-based approaches such as community/leader
                  led total sanitation
             o Ensure adequate and sustainable sanitation services in all institutions and public places
             o In rural areas, the strategy is to improve the rate of access to a sustainable sanitation
                  service by stimulating self-realization and setting up a diversified technological offer
             o In urban areas, in addition to self-realization and the establishment of service delivery
                  options, it will also proceed to rehabilitate and develop sanitation networks in the main
                  urban areas to increase the rate of access to a sustainable sanitation service
    x    Axis 2: Ensure sustainable financing of the sanitation sub-sector
             o Large-scale promotion of Leader Led Total Sanitation
             o The development of the PPPs for sanitation
             o The development of new endogenous financing mechanisms
             o The development of mechanisms to encourage self-realization
    x    Axis 3: Promote communication for behavioral change. The communication strategy will focus on
         advocacy, outreach and mass communication:
             o Community-based communication will rely on community relays that will be trained
                  beforehand and equipped with communication tools adapted to each community and
                  based on participatory approaches
             o Mass communication will be done through radio, television, print press, public
                  entertainment, theaters forums and other innovative tools
             o School-based hygiene education to induce changes across children (school governments,
                  school health clubs) and through community-based training (with village or community
                  health committees)

20.     In terms of the urban component, the expected results are (a) the coverage of the intervention
area from 57 to 77 centers, (b) the progression of access to improvd sanitation from 38 to 100 percent by
2030 (Table A1.4).



                                                      35
                       Table A1.4. Projected number of urban latrines under the PN-AEUE
                                                             Targeted access
  Program          Estimated urban     Population to be                            # of       # of latrines
                                                            rate to improved
  Phase               population           served                               households     to be built
                                                              sanitation (%)
  2016-2020           7,008,229           3,854,526                55%            727,269       249,899
  2021-2025           8,991,033           7,192,802                80%           1,357,132      326,900
  2026-2030           11,340,300          11,340,300              100%           2,139,679      395,476
Source : PN-AEUE 2016-2030

21.     As for the rural component of the 2016-2030 PN-AEUE the expected results are (a) ending open
defecation in 100 percent of rural municipalities and (b) changing the rate of access to sanitation from 13.
4 percent in 2016 to 100 percent in 2030 (Table A1.5).

                       Table A1.5. Projected number of rural latrines under the PN-AEUE

                                                             Targeted access
  Program          Estimated rural    Population to be                             # of       # of latrines
                                                            rate to improved
  Phase              population           served                                households     to be built
                                                              sanitation (%)
  2016-2020          14,480,929           3,620,232               25%             517,176       210,342
  2021-2025          16,043,904          12,032,928               75%            1,718,990      992,951
  2026-2030          17,331,400          17,331,400              100%            2,475,914      740,189
Source : PN-AEUE 2016-2030

The 2016-2030 PN-GIRE

22.    The strategic objective of the 2016-2030 PN-GIRE is to sustainably contribute to the meet the
needs of users and aquatic ecosystems for freshwater. The strategic approaches of the PN-GIRE are:

    x   Engage all stakeholders in carrying out concrete actions to protect water resources in the field
    x   Develop and consolidate the river basin organizations
    x   Strengthen the water police
    x   Advance in the implementation of the CFE
    x   Develop and sustain the national water information system
    x   Develop the interactions between IWRM and decentralization processes
    x   Continue the development of regional and international cooperation
    x   Integrate gender, poverty, growth, human rights and climate change aspects in the planning
        implementation of actions and their monitoring and evaluation in the field of water resources

23.     The main expected results are: (a) the reduction of water-related offenses, (b) the improvement
of the recovery of the CFE from 55 percent in 2015 to 100 percent in 2030, (c) the adoption of all Water
Development and Management Master Plans (SDAGE) as well as multi-year intervention programs, (d)
increasing the density of measurement networks, (e) improving the knowledge and management of water
resources.




                                                       36
Rationale for Using the Program-for-Results (Program) Instrument

24.      The PforR is the most appropriate instrument for supporting GoBF’s program approach for the
sector, which has been implemented since 2003 through two generations of sector programs25. These
programs have led to significant investments, and supported important progress in access to water supply
and sanitation services and IWRM. The PforR instrument will enhance the impact of the World Bank’s
financial and technical support and strengthen the overall results orientation of GoBF. In doing so it will
facilitate the following:

     x   Program ownership. The highest levels of GoBF are committed to achieve the objectives of the
         PN-AEP, the PN-AEUE, and the PN-GIRE programs, which are under implementation since 2017.
         The PforR instrument will support the GoBF program approach for the water supply, sanitation,
         and IWRM sectors.
     x   Improvements in implementation of government programs. The Program provides an
         opportunity to support and strengthen the implementation of government programs and
         improves the institutional framework and stakeholder capacity for the management of water and
         sanitation services and water resources. The World Bank’s assessment of the quality of the
         Program, including the Results Framework, expenditure framework, and supporting systems, is
         satisfactory and the Program systems meets the OP/BP 9.00 requirements. Although the Program
         will support specific interventions, the World Bank’s contribution is anticipated to foster
         improvements in terms of effectiveness and efficiency in the overall program over the next 13
         years (the implementation period for the PN-AEP, the PN-AEUE, and the PN-GIRE is 2017–2030).
         Linkages between the different programs (PN-AEP, PN-AEUE and PN-GIRE), the sectoral reform
         strategies and the use of the country’s existing systems were established.
     x   Improvements in national systems and procedures. The Program builds upon the country’s
         fiduciary and ESMS. Burkina Faso has made significant progress in public financial management
         and procurement reforms. An assessment of the program fiduciary arrangements (IFSA) was
         conducted to evaluate the Program systems and to determine whether they provide reasonable
         assurance that the Program funds will be used for their intended purposes, with due attention to
         the principles of economy, efficiency, effectiveness, transparency and accountability. The
         Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) was undertaken to have a thorough
         understanding of the environmental and social risks, benefits, impacts and opportunities linked
         to the Program. Through the PAP the Program will continue to provide support to strengthen
         country fiduciary systems related to audits, budgeting and planning, and compliance of
         procurement timeframe. Also, the PAP includes actions related to the strengthening of the ESMS
         related to the environmental and social management of the Program investments and
         environmental and social management capacity of MEA and ONEA.
     x   Results orientation. The choice of the PforR instrument responds to GoBF’s focus toward results
         rather than investment execution as reflected in the Matrix of Sector Performance Indicators for
         2017–2020.26 The use of the PforR instrument will establish clear links between IDA
         disbursements (disbursement link indicators, DLIs) and the delivery of results. In doing so, the



25
   The first generation of programs was implemented between 2003 and 2016 and includes the PN-AEP 2007–2015
and the PAGIRE 2003–2015. The second generation of sectoral programs, adopted in 2016, is under implementation
since 2017, and includes five national programs for 2016–2030.
26
   Matrice des Indicateurs de Performances 2017–2020 du Secteur Eau et Assainissement that clearly identifies
specific actions, and corresponding indicators, to be undertaken under each of the five sectoral programs.


                                                     37
        Program instrument reinforces GoBF results orientation. The Program is linked to a set of simple
        and measurable indicators.
    x   Coordination with other development partners. The PforR facilitates coordination between GoBF
        and development partners. The Program builds upon the past experience of the country in
        implementing result based sectoral budget support programs for water, sanitation, and IWRM
        financed by the EU, the DANIDA, and Sida over the past 10 years.

25.     Program financing and duration. The Program will be implemented during a period of five years,
with targeted completion in December 2023.

26.     The estimated cost of the three national programs (PN-AEP, PN-AEUE, and PN-GIRE) for the 2016-
2030 period is estimated at US$5 billion. The required financial resources for the next five years equal
US$1.1 billion. Several donors, in particular EU, the AFD, DANIDA, and Sida have mobilized resources to
finance parts of the three government programs.

27.     The total Program financing, as defined in the PAD, is US$365 million. This includes: (a) the
household contribution for US$34 million (in-kind for the completion of the latrine super-structure in
urban and rural areas); GoBF contribution for US$31 million (including the contribution from MEA and
ONEA), which will be made available for the Program through the Program CAST; and (c) IDA contribution
for US$300 million, of which US$50 million in the form of a grant and US$250 million as a credit from the
IDA SUF (Table A1.6).

28.      SUF financing has been mobilized for the Program in view of its strong, potentially transformative
development impact, as follows: (a) more than 1.1 people will benefit from improved water supply and
1.3 million people from improved sanitation services; (b) accent on sustainability of service delivery,
including on O&M of assets and cost-recovery, will contribute to crowd in third party resources and
experience; (c) in-depth knowledge of the sedimentary and hard-rock aquifers will enable adequate
allocation of water resources, contributing to reducing the impacts of water shocks and climate variability,
and strengthening resilience; and (d) emphasis on the development of the human capital for water supply,
sanitation, and IWRM – including strengthening women’s voice and participation - will enhance
sustainability of Program results. By improving ONEA’s operational efficiency, establishing an effective
asset management approach for rural water supply and sanitation, updating the financial modeling and
revising the tariff structures in urban and rural areas, and delegating rural water supply and sanitation
services to private operators, the Program will create the enabling environment to attract private capital
on a nation-wide basis either for direct financing and operation of larger scale assets, such as water or
sludge treatment facilities, or through the private, delegated operators who will have some rehabilitation
and network extension responsibilities as is already occurring with peri-urban operators.

                                 Table A1.6. Program Financing (US$ million)
          Source                                   Amount (US$ million)           % of total
          Household in-kind contribution                   34                         9
          GoBF                                             31                         8
          IDA
            Grant                                            50                      14
            IDA SUF                                         250                      68
          Total Program financing                           365                      100




                                                     38
World Bank and donor engagements

29.     The Program will complement and build upon the on-going World Bank financed in Urban Water
Supply and Sanitation Project (P106909), and of other development partners and NGOs programs and
projects, in particular EU, DANIDA, Sida and AFD.

30.      World Bank engagement in the sector. Over the last two decades, the World Bank has been a
leading partner in the development of the water and sanitation sector.27 Through the World Bank financed
Ouagadougou Water Supply Project (P000306, 2001–2007), new water storage capacity (the Ziga Dam)
and a main delivery network were developed, in addition to secondary and tertiary water distribution
networks, private connections, and water standposts to low-income households. The World Bank support
was key for the successful turnaround of ONEA, by promoting efficiency in urban water supply operations
and contracting out ONEA's commercial, financial, and accounting functions. Under the ongoing US$160
million Urban Water Sector Project (P106909, 2008–2018), a significant increase in the access to improved
water and sanitation has been achieved through the provision of social connections, household latrines,
and school latrines in main urban areas (Ouagadougou, Bobo-Dioulasso, Koudougou, and Dedougou); and
ONEA’s financial equilibrium and performance has been maintained. Through the World Bank-financed
pilot project for the delegation of the management of water supply systems in peri-urban settlements in
Ouagadougou, in 2015, more than 107,000 people gained access to improved water services. On the rural
front, under the World Bank-financed Community-Based Rural Development Project (P035673, 2001–
2013), about 1.4 million people in rural areas gained access to clean water. Furthermore, the World Bank
has supported rural water supply development through the Water and Sanitation Program for more than
a decade, including the development of a private sector strategy for rural water systems and a pro-poor
water tariff study. In June 2017, in response to the Government’s request, the World Bank completed an
assessment of water resources in the country,28 which provides a detailed road map to improve IWRM,
including strengthening the knowledge of water resources in the country, aiming at enhanced IWRM.

31.      The EU provides budget sector support and technical assistance to the water supply and sanitation
sectors. EU priority areas of support are the improvement of the sector governance by promoting an
effective decentralization of the water and sanitation services, strengthening the role and participation of
civil society, improving M&E systems for the sector and support increased access to improved water
supply and sanitation services with particular attention to reducing geographical inequalities. Also, EU
provides budget support for the operationalization of IWRM, including providing support to the river basin
organizations, implementation of the CFE and enforcing IWRM regulations. Through technical assistance,
the EU finances the development of sanitation facilities in rural areas, accompanied by information,
education, and communication campaigns and support to the AMOC.

32.     DANIDA provides budget support and technical assistance to the municipalities to improve their
planning capacity and implementation and management of water supply systems in the regions of Boucle
du Mouhoun, Hauts-Bassins and Cascades. A strong engagement for improving access to drinking water
supply is ongoing: plans to expand water production capacities in sedimentary aquifers, create multi-
village water supply schemes in the municipalities of Bama, Fô and Padema (province of Houet) and
enhance local capacities for the management of these schemes, expand the existing water supply network
of ONEA towards neighboring centers such as Dori/Gorom-Gorom, Nouna/Dédougou and Ouahigouya,


27
   More than US$266 million have been mobilized for World Bank operations and technical assistance covering water
supply and sanitation projects in urban and rural areas, and IWRM.
28
   Based on the priorities identified established by the PN-GIRE 2016–2030.


                                                       39
conduct research to identify potential high yield drilling boreholes to create new multi-village schemes,
and develop regional water supply plans in addition to the municipal development plans.

33.      DANIDA, in collaboration with Sida, supports IWRM by providing support to reduce existing water
conflicts and improve the knowledge of water resources by strengthening the capacities of river basin
organizations (through the development of River Basin Management Plans and assessment of the CFE),
promoting participation of all water users (through water committees) and the protection of water
sources (control of waste water disposal). Finally, DANIDA also intervenes by strengthening human
resources for water resource management by providing scholarships for technical and training programs.

34.      AFD provides project support for water supply and sanitation in selected urban centers and
intervenes in rural areas of the Sahel region. In Ouagadougou, AFD is currently providing funding for the
expansion of the production capacity from the Ziga Dam, the expansion of the distribution network, the
installation of social connections, technical assistance for the reduction of water losses, expanding the
sewerage network by 30 kilometers, and finance a sludge treatment plan. In Bobo-Dialousso the AFD
intervenes to improve the operational and technical performance of the system, in particular by reducing
energy costs through solar energy use. In the Sahel region, AFD supports the development of 30 rural
water systems and the delegation of water systems to the private sector, and provides support to the
AMOC.

Vision and priorities for GoBF

35.     GoBF’s vision is that by 2030 the country's water resource is known and effectively managed to
achieve universal access to improved water and sanitation services to contribute to sustainable
development. Accordingly, the National Water Policy includes the following priorities. First, ensuring
universal access to water and sanitation with a major emphasis on the poorest and most vulnerable
populations. Second, improving the knowledge and management of water resources in the country
through research and capacity strengthening of the actors in the water supply, sanitation, and IWRM
sector. The effective management of water resources should focus on (a) the overexploitation of water
resources; (b) the degradation of water banks and the silting of waterways; (c) the pollution resulting from
the development of farming and mining activity; and (d) the increase of financial resources necessary for
the sustainable management of water resources in the country. Third, promoting the long-term
sustainability of the sector including increasingly engaging the private sector in the management of water
supply systems, giving priority to maintenance of existing investments, mobilizing internal resources for
the sustainable financing of the sector, and promoting regional and international cooperation in the
management of shared water resources.

Lessons from past programs and projects

36.     The programmatic approach adopted in the last 15 years has been a catalyst for the mobilization
of resources for the sector, in particular the mobilization of external funding and own national resources.
The support provided by technical and financial cooperation in terms of human resources to the various
implementation entities, both at central and decentralized level (technical assistance and project
management) has been a decisive factor that furthers the impact of the Program approach.

37.     Steering committees, dedicated program coordination/implementation units, and strategic
support are key for successful implementation. The existence of program steering and dialogue
frameworks has made it possible to address significant obstacles to the progress of the programs and the
sector as a whole. The creation of an independent program implementation unit (Ziga Contracting


                                                    40
Authority and an urban unit for the PN-AEPA), staffed with full-time, dedicated, and experienced
specialists was essential for the achievement of the expected of results. Also, the stability of the staff
involved in the activities was crucial to ensure the programs’ performance. The availability of technical
assistance has been important to guarantee the technical quality of the design, procurement documents,
and deliverables.

38.     DREAs play a central role in achieving the results of the sector's investment programs. The
municipality adopts, with the support of the DREAs, the municipal water and sanitation development plan,
which is a key programming instrument. The existence of updated plans at the start of the programs is
one of the keys to success of the intervention strategy.

39.      The approaches to the construction of sanitation facilities have encouraged a consensus in terms
of an intervention strategy that consists of supporting households through a partial subsidy of materials
(cement and iron for the slab, ventilation chimneys, fly screens, and placing the sub-structure combined
with the contribution of households for the super-structure and reinforced by strong implementation of
the information, education and communication campaigns. Choosing a competent information, education
and communication entity for each region is key for the achievement of results.

40.   Periodic audits have been important to review quality and performance of program
implementation.

C. Program development objective, geographical scope and results areas

41.      The PDO is to improve access to water supply and sanitation services in targeted areas. Two PDO
level indicators will be used to monitor progress towards the achievement of the Program PDO: 1) People
provided with access to an improved water source (number, disaggregated by female, urban, rurar) -
Corporate Results Indicator; and 2) People provided with access to improved sanitation services (number,
disaggregated by female, urban, rural) - Corporate Results Indicator.

42.    The Water Supply and Sanitation Program consists of three RAs that are mapped to the national
PN-AEP, PN-AUE and PN-GIRE programs, in addition to a cross cutting area (human capital strengthening).
The geographical scope of the planned activities under the different result areas is presented in Table A1.7
and Map in Annex 9.

                                 Table A1.7. Geographical Scope of Activities
          Results Area                           Urban                                  Rural
 RA 1. Improved access to        11 centers of ONEA: Ouagadougou,       Selected communities of 64
 water supply                    Kaya, Korsimoro, Boussouma, Yako,      municipalities of four targeted
                                 Gourcy, Boussé; Gon-Boussougou,        regions: Hauts-Bassins, Boucle du
                                 Mogtédo, Béguédo, and Tiébélé          Mouhoun, Cascades, and the
 RA 2. Improved access to        The 11 centers above plus Dédougou,    Southwest
 sanitation                      Nouna, and Bobo-Dioulasso
 RA 3. Improved access to                                       Nationwide
 reliable information on water
 resources
 Cross-cutting. Human capital                                     Nationwide
 strengthening




                                                     41
43.     In urban areas the Program will intervene in a total of 14 urban centers. In 11 urban centers the
interventions will include water supply and sanitation, while in three urban centers the Program will
intervene only for delivery of sanitation services29. Activities include strengthening of the already existing
systems, creating new water supply systems following GoBF strategy for urban water, and boosting access
rates to improved sanitation facilities. About 69 percent of the total urban population (or 3,664,745
inhabitants in 2017) resides in the cities of Ouagadougou, Bobo-Dioulasso, Kaya, Gourcy, Yako, Dédougou,
Nouna, Gon-Boussougou, Tiébélé, Korsimoro, Béguédo, Boussé, Boussouma, Mogtédo. These cities are
characterized by rapid and uncontrolled growth and strong urbanization driven by rural migration.
Ouagadougou and Bobo-Dioulasso had an average growth rate of 7 percent per year between 1996 and
2006. Newcomers often settle in areas that are not covered or recognized by official urban planning. The
selection of urban areas also considers the low level of production and pumping capacity in the Kaya and
Yako, the reinforcement of which will be the basis to improve services to satellite towns of Korsimoro-
Boussouma, Gourcy, and Boussé. Finally, the Program will intervene in four new centers where the current
access to improve water supply is below 30 percent.

44.     In rural areas the Program will intervene in four targeted regions: Hauts-Bassins, Boucle du
Mouhoun, Cascades, and Southwest. These regions were selected based on the low rates of access to
improved water supply (less than 70 percent), which are among the lowest rates of the country; and, the
low rates of access to improved sanitation facilities (less than 12 percent), also among the lowest in the
country. The selection also considered the on-going support provided by other developing partners like
the AFD, the EU, UNICEF, and other donors in the remaining nine regions.

45.     The Program will intervene in selected beneficiary communities within 64 municipalities
distributed among the four targeted regions as follows: 24 of the 47 municipalities in the Boucle de
Mouhoun Region; 10 of the 17 municipalities in the Cascades Region; 16 of the 33 municipalities in the
Hauts-Bassins Region; and 14 of the 28 municipalities in the Southwest Region. The selected beneficiary
communities are expected to gain access to improved water supply at the household level or at the
communal level, and access to improved sanitation at the household level by means of improved latrines.
The selection of the beneficiary communities will be based on a number of criteria, of which the most
important will be: (a) availability of water sources, developed by other projects or by this program, so that
people in the community can gain access to improved water supply; (b) completion of sanitation, hygiene
and behavioral change campaigns; (c) commitment of the municipal authority towards latrine campaigns
and reduction of open defecation; and (d) level of commitment of the households in the community to
build the superstructure of the latrines with their own resources. Whereas household commitment is
expected to be 100 percent, a minimum of 80 percent will be required. This will ensure that the Program
brings about a robust solution to water and sanitation challenges and maximizes the impact of IDA
support. The Program will intervene in selected beneficiary municipalities at the household level and at
the communal level to the possible extend.

46.     On the IWRM front, the Program supports two key strategic actions of the PN-GIRE: (a) improving
knowledge on surface and groundwater resources, including its location, quantity and quality; and (b)
operationalizing the National Water Information System (Système National d’Information sur l’Eau,
SNIEau). The Program’s support for these two actions responds to the Government’s request to




29
  For Dédougou, Nouna, and Bobo-Dioulasso the Program will intervene only for sanitation as DANIDA is currently
intervening in these three urban centers on water supply.


                                                      42
strengthen the knowledge base on water resources and its accessibility to allow for adequate decision
making, including the allocation of water to different sectors and uses.

47.     Through the human capital strengthening activities, the Program seeks to support the objectives
of the PN-AEP, PN-AEUE and PN-GIRE programs related to boosting the capacity for service delivery.

RA 1. Improved access to water supply

Context

48.     On the urban water front major policy reforms of the water sector, coupled with a utility
transformation program30 and important capital investments, led to a significant increase in access to
improved water in urban areas from 37 percent to 91 percent between 1990 and 2016 (Table A1.8). Today
ONEA is considered one of the best-performing water utilities in Sub-Saharan Africa, with 2.8 staff per
1,000 connections, 18.6 percent of NRW, and 91 percent of the urban population provided with access to
improved water.

                      Table A1.8. Access to urban drinking water by regions within ONEA centers
          Region             Population       Household         Standposts        Population       Access rate
                                             connections                            served
                                (#)              (#)               (#)                (#)              (%)
     Ouagadougou             2,560,049         248,647            1,885           2,544,568             99
     Bobo-Dioulasso          1,154,970         75,176              905            1,018,322             88
     North West               749,054          44,192              890             618,208              83
     North East               677,413          32,446              639             505,611              75
     Total                   5,199,859         400,461            4,319           4,686,709             91
Source: ONEA 2016 Annual Report

49.     Looking forward, the sustainability of the urban water sector faces two major challenges
associated with the low water availability and weak financial viability. An increased demand for water
resources is driven by strong population growth and urbanization, which is aggravated by an uncontrolled
expansion of the urban space. In some regions, addressing increased demand is challenging in view of the
low availability of groundwater resources in the hard rock aquifers that cover 80 percent of the territory.31

50.       ONEA has been able to maintain its financial equilibrium as it is able to fully cover O&M costs and
debt service, and even make a partial contribution to capital investments, with the revenues collected
from its operations. However, ONEA’s financial viability is threatened by: (a) the lack of regular tariff
adjustments to reflect pass-through changes to operational expenditures such as energy, chemicals and
labor; (b) a tariff structure that heavily relies on industrial and commercial customers to subsidize the
lifeline tariff, which applies to every customer regardless of income level; (c) the significant change in the
customer profile, whereby increasingly more customers fall under the highly subsidized lifeline tariff
below 8 m3 per month; (d) rapid urbanization, in particular of Ouagadougou and Bobo-Dioulasso peri-



30
   Key measures taken include the recruitment of dedicated and experienced management staff, the increase in
water supply by the construction of the Ziga Dam, a service contract with a private operator, and the introduction
of cross-subsidy tariffs and block rates.
31
   High yield sedimentary aquifers cover 20 percent of the territory and are mainly located in the South West.
Sedimentary aquifers in the North and South East of the territory are small.


                                                         43
urban areas that require significant investments to expand the services; and (e) fast growing centers
where the existing water infrastructure is limited.

51.      ONEA’s financial equilibrium is largely sustained by one main center: Ouagadougou. 60 percent
of ONEA’s revenue is derived from water supply connections within the city of Ouagadougou alone, hence
cross-subsidizing services to secondary and smaller centers. Although non-revenue water in the
Ouagadougou system can be considered acceptable by international standards, it has increased during
the last three years from 17 percent to 18.3 percent and 18.7 percent due to increased physical losses in
the distribution network.

52.      The Program provides incentives to ONEA to address the threats to its financial viability by means
of: a new tariff structure that better allocates costs while remaining affordable to low income people; the
sectorization of the Ouagadougou water distribution network, combined with a leak detection program;
improved customer management services; and an energy audit to reduce energy costs. All these planned
activities should significantly improve the financial performance of ONEA.

53.    On the rural water front progress has been accompanied by a major service delivery reform.
Between 1990 and 2016 access to an improved water sources increased from only 10 percent to 65
percent, though significant disparities remained with the southwestern regions mostly lagging (Figure
A1.1).

54.      In 2000, GoBF introduced a substantial reform for the service provision in rural water supply.
Stand-alone boreholes equipped with hand pumps needed to be managed by WUAs through a delegation
agreement signed between the municipality and the WUA. Furthermore, in 2009 GoBF transferred the
responsibility of the provision of water supply and sanitation services to municipalities, except for those
under the responsibility of ONEA. Measures have been implemented to revitalize the WUAs. The technical
agent and president of the municipal council play an important role as representatives of the
municipalities in these agreements. The maintenance and repair of the pumps is ensured by a private
provider based on a contract signed with the municipality. Rural water supply systems are to be managed
by a third party (private operators, NGOs, or ONEA) recruited by the municipality based on public bidding.

                          Figure A1.1 Rural access rate to improved water supply, by region

         100     88.5
          90            82.9   79.4
          80                          74.7    72.7   71.2   70.8   67.8    65
          70                                                                      62.5
                                                                                         55.5   54.3   51.4
          60                                                                                                   49
          50
          40
          30
          20
          10
           0




Notes: [1] Column in yellow denotates the average of the 13 regions for access to rural water supply; [2] Columns in orange
indicates the four targeted regions included in the Program
Source: Balance Report of the PN-AEPA 2015.



                                                              44
55.     The successful implementation of the reform is demonstrated by a remarkable functionality rate:
88.6 percent for the hand pumps and 84.3 percent of the rural water systems. Currently, 6,834 WUAs of
8,059 recognized WUAs had signed a delegation agreement with the municipality (84.8 percent); 155 of
623 recognized private providers had signed a contract for O&M; and 12 operators had been delegated
the management of 445 water supply systems (60 percent of the existing 780 systems), of which 22 are
operated by ONEA and 267 by private operators (mainly local). In 2014, GoBF undertook several initiatives
to address the challenge of securing provisions for O&M and extend rural water supply systems such as
adopting the AMOC, developing a tariff study for rural water; and developing a PPP strategy for the water
sector.

56.     To further progress in rural areas, the sector needs to increase water production capacities in low
yield hard rock aquifers, which cover 80 percent of the territory. Other challenges include
professionalizing private sector operations, improving the management of water supply systems,
strengthening local capacities for the management of water supply systems, and ensuring equal access to
water supply and sanitation services across regions.

Description of activities

57.      For urban water this RA supports the priorities of GoBF established in the PNDES and the PN-AEP.
For urban water, the Program will incentivize the development of priority infrastructure to improve urban
water supply service delivery through: (a) the expansion of access to improved water supply through
installation of approximately 81,885 new metered household connections and approximately 333
standposts; (b) the expansion of water production capacity, pumping and storage facilities in selected
urban centers; (c) the development of water master plans for the city of Ouagadougou for the period
following year 2030; and, (d) the development of pre-feasibility studies for selected urban centers.

58.     In Ouagadougou, the Program will support: (a) the increase in the storage capacity of 8,000 m3,
(b) the extension of the network of 725 km; (c) the installation of 70,000 social connections and the
construction of 100 standposts, including in two informal neighborhoods of the city; and (d) a
comprehensive study that identifies alternative sources of water to ensure water supply to the city
beyond 2030.

59.     In secondary centers, the Program will support significant water supply system enhancements. In
response to the increasing water demand in the centers of Yako, Gourcy and Boussé, the Program will
increase the water production capacity (with 500 m3/h), expand distribution (163 km of network) and
increase connections (2,575 connections and 50 standposts). Similarly, the Program will support the
extension of the Kaya system to include the Korsimoro and Boussouma secondary centers and adding
production capacity (200 m3/h), the increase in the storage capacity of 2,600 m3, the extension of the
network of 125 km, and the installation of 3,100 social connections and 60 standposts. Finally, the
Program will support the creation of four stand-alone water supply systems in Gon-Boussougou,
Mogtédo, Béguédo, and Tiébélé with a total combined production capacity of 6,330 m3 per day; a storage
capacity of 1,200 m3; and the installation of 92 km of network, 6,210 social connections, and 123
standposts. In addition to infrastructure works, the Program will support the development of master plans
based on the priorities established by the PN-AEP.

60.      The Program seeks to incentivize improvements in the operational efficiency of ONEA through:
(a) improving the GIS; (b) the sectorization of the water supply network of the city of Ouagadougou to
identify and reduce water losses; and (c) strengthening the capacity of its operational and management



                                                    45
staff by means of technical courses and training, and the hiring of key specialists through the human
capital strengthening programs supported by the Program.

61.     The Program also seeks to incentivize the strengthening of ONEA’s financial equilibrium through:
(a) adjusting the existing urban water supply tariff; (b) carrying out of urban water supply tariff structure
studies32 and adoption of new water supply tariff structure; and (c) developing tools and applications to
improve customer support and monitor service performance, including optimizing production costs
(improve energy efficiencies during operational management and strengthen the capacities of staff in the
management of water losses).

62.      For rural water, the Program will support: (a) the installation of approximately 1,100 boreholes
equipped with hand pumps, including approximately 400 in health centers and schools selected in
accordance with criteria set out in the POM; (b) the construction of 90 new water supply systems in
locations selected in accordance with criteria set out in the POM; (c) the rehabilitation of 60 existing water
supply systems selected in accordance with criteria set out in the POM; (d) the development of 10
feasibility studies for clustered water supply systems; (e) the adoption by the Recipient of a new rural
water tariff; and (f) the scale-up the DISE to the regions of Hauts-Bassins, Boucle du Mouhoun, Cascades,
and Southwest. To optimize water service provision costs the Program will promote solar pumping33.

63.     The Program will incentivize the strengthening of its human capital by providing training
opportunities to staff at ONEA, the DGEP, DREAs, and municipal technical services, and the hiring of
selected specialists, in particular at the municipal level in support of the AMOC.

64.     Asset management will be aligned with the policies for water supply in Burkina Faso. Stand-alone
boreholes equipped with hand pumps will be managed by WUA. The operation and management of water
supply system will be delegated to a third party, such as an NGO, a private operator, or ONEA. The
management of the water supply system by the partner follows the prescriptions of the tariff study, the
PPP strategy and the AMOC. The service contracts for the management of the water supply system will
be for a renewable contract period of 15 years and at least 20 supply systems will be assigned per
operator. The rehabilitation of 60 existing systems may be carried out by a private partner that will be
responsible for the management of the works and will also mobilize the financial resources to enable an
expansion of the network that responds to the water demands until 2030.

65.     The indicative number of household connections, standpoints and boreholes by year, by rural and
urban areas, is presented in Table A1.9. The results included in the table above will be monitored as part
of the Program Implementation Plan. For that end, the POM will include the indicators presented in Table




32
   A tariff study will be conducted and take into account the affordability, efficiency and required investments to
achieve the targets of SDG 6. This tariff study will lead to a new tariff model and tariff structure.
33
   This is the intention of the PN-AEP. The option to power the water supply systems by solar energy will be
considered a priority. Since the 1990s, Burkina Faso has accumulated considerable experience in the use of solar
energy for water supply systems, including the Regional Project Phase Solar I (PRS-I) and Phase II (PRS-II). The
electrical network of the SONABEL or other producers of electricity should supplement/complement the solar energy
where this is needed. The use of thermal generators should be considered as a last resort and only in combination
with the solar systems. Thermal generators should only be considered in areas without electricity network and when
water production does not cover the daily needs of the locality with the operation time of the only source of solar
energy.


                                                        46
A1.9. The norms regarding the number of people served per type of water source are presented in Table
A1.10.

                              Table A1.9. Indicative Schedule of Connections Per Year [1]
               Type of                  POM Indicator [3]
 Targeted
               improved water                                    YR 1         YR 2        YR 3       YR 4       YR 5       Total
 Area
               source
  Urban        Household          Number of new household 18,000             20,500     20,500      20,500      2,385     81,885
               connection         connections built under the
                                  Program in target urban
                                  areas
               Standposts         Number of new standpost         50          150         100         33          0         333
                                  built under the Program in
                                  targeted urban areas
  Rural        Household          Number of household new         392         504         304          0          0        1,200
               connection         connections built under the
                                  Program in target rural
                                  areas
               Standposts         Number of new standpost         315         401         254          0          0         970
                                  built under the Program in
                                  targeted rural areas
               Boreholes          Number of new boreholes         192         443          65          0          0         700
               equipped with      equipped with manual
               manual             operated pumps for
               operated pumps household use built under
               for household      the Program in targeted
               use [2]            rural areas
  Total        Household          Number of household new 18,392             21,004     20,804      20,500      2,385     83,085
               connection         connections built under the
                                  Program
               Standposts         Number of new standpost
                                  build under the Program      365          551        354         33         -           1,303
               Borehole for       Number of new boreholes
               household use equipped with manual
               [2]                operated pumps for
                                  household use built under
                                  the Program                  192          443        65          -          -           700
Notes: [1] Figures per year (not cumulative); [2] The total number of boreholes financed by the Program is 1,100 (all in rural
areas), of which 700 will be installed for household use and 400 in institutions such as schools and health centers; [3] The POM
will included the indicators presented in the table.


                          Table A1.10. Norms Applicable for the Calculation of Beneficiaries
                                                          Number of People per Type of Connection/Facility
 Type of Connection/Facility                                          Urban
                                                                                                     Rural
                                                        Ouagadougou        Other urban centers
 Household connection                                        6                      7                   10
 Standpost                                                  300                    400                 500
 Borehole equipped with hand pumps                                Not applicable                       300

66.      Long-term water supply sustainability. Through the DLIs, the Program encourages measures that
will allow for more efficient and accountable water supply service delivery. This includes, among others,
adjustments of the existing urban water supply tariff; adoption of new tariff in urban and rural areas,
which would enable financial equilibrium while maintaining affordability to low income people; support



                                                               47
for the delegation of rural water systems to independent operators; strengthened the M&E function; and
implementation of a substantial human capital strengthening program, which includes the hiring of staff
for the MEA, ONEA, and/or municipal technical services. These measures are critical elements for the
long-term sustainability of the sector, and will have positive impacts on service delivery.

67.     The development of citizen engagement guidelines will ensure the effective participation of and
consultation with local people, targeted beneficiary community, and vulnerable groups, and will include
adequate gender-sensitive consultations in selection of interventions, management of WUAs, and in
implementation of all the components of the Program.

68.      Potential climate co-benefits. In urban areas, in particular in the Ouagadougou system, the
Program seek to incentivize reductions in physical losses, increase energy and water use efficiency and
reduce energy costs, thus potentially carry climate change mitigation co-benefits. The increased adoption
of solar photovoltaic pumping technology for rural water supply schemes, away from diesel dependence,
also potentially qualifies for climate mitigation co-benefits. The rehabilitation and building on new rural
water supply schemes will result in more climate change-resilient water supply infrastructure that are
potentially relevant for climate change adaptation co-benefits.

RA 2. Improved access to sanitation

Context

69.     In urban areas, only 38 percent of the population has access to adequate sanitation services
(Table A1.11), with about 12.8 percent of the urban population still practicing open defecation. Among
those that use latrines, 12.9 percent of households have improved latrines, while 87.1 percent of
households continue to use inadequate facilities (non-hygienic traditional latrines). Despite the close-to-
universal reliance on on-site sanitation facilities, sludge emptying is informal and only four sludge
treatment plants exist in Ouagadougou and Bobo-Dioulasso with a combined treatment capacity of less
than 1,000 m3/day of sludge. Sewerage networks only exist in Ouagadougou business district and serve
less than 1 percent of Ouagadougou’s population. Sanitation fees are insufficient, varying between
US$0.03 and US$0.10 per m3 of water consumed, depending on the type of sanitation facility.

                    Table A1.11. Access to sanitation services by regions within ONEA centers.
          ONEA’s Region          Population     Household       Sewer          Population        Access rate
                                                 facilities   connections        served
                                     (#)            (#)           (#)              (#)              (%)
   Ouagadougou                    2,594,465      124,996         1,105         1,261,009             49
   Bobo-Dioulasso                 1,167,868       37,899          274           381,730              3
   North West                      755,366        19,474           -            194,737              6
   North East                      682,161        15,524           -            155,236              23
   Total                          5,199,859      197,892         1,379         1,992,712             38

70.      In rural areas, only 12 percent of the population have access to improved sanitation facilities and
around 75 percent of the rural households still practice open defecation (Figure A1.2). Awareness
campaigns and education and behavioral change programs are needed to increase access to sanitation in
Burkina Faso, since part of the population does not understand or is not convinced of the beneficial effects
of latrines.




                                                       48
                               Figure A1.2 Rural access rate to improved sanitation, by region

          30
                24.3
          25
                        19.7
          20
                                 15.4   14.7
          15                                   12.2   12.1   12     11.9   11.9
                                                                                   9.6    9.5    9.2
          10                                                                                             7.8
                                                                                                                5.6
           5
           0




Notes: [1] Column in yellow denotates the average of the 13 regions for access to improved sanitation in rural areas; [2]
Columns in orange indicates the four regions of the Program support for improved sanitation in rural areas
Source: Balance Report of the PN-AEPA 2015.

71.     Latrines in schools, health centers and public places in both urban and rural areas, are insufficient
and often poorly built and without permanent handwashing facilities. In addition, the existing ones are
often poorly managed and insufficiently maintained leading to the latrines not being utilized or
abandoned.

72.      Adequate planning, managing and monitoring of sanitation services require the participation and
involvement of many stakeholders (ranging from central to regional and local level government
institutions, sanitation specialists, NGOs, private operators, masons, sanitation committees and people in
general). The Program will support and provide incentives for addressing current issues in targeted areas,
which GoBF could scale up to the rest of the country, and for strengthening human capital at national,
regional and local levels.

Description of activities

73.      This RA supports the priorities of GoBF established in the PNDES (2016–2020) and the PN-AEUE.
The Program will support and incentivize increasing access to sanitation services, by means of: (a)
awareness and behavioral change campaigns aiming at improving hygiene practices and promoting the
use of latrines; (b) provision of partial subsidies for household latrines, provided that sufficient demand is
generated and the household is committed to complete the latrine superstructure; and (c) provision of
sanitation cabins in schools, health centers and public places in blocks equipped with permanent
handwashing facilities, including developing management arrangements to ensure that latrines are
operational and adequately maintained.

74.       For urban sanitation, the Program will support: (a) the construction of approximately 42,500 new
household latrines (ventilated improved pit or flush toilet types only) and rehabilitation of 42,500
household latrines (Table A1.12); (b) the construction of approximately 1,050 new sanitation cabins with
male, female, and handicapped compartments, provided with water and permanent hand-washing
facilities, at schools, health centers and public places selected in accordance with criteria set out in the
POM; (c) the development of sanitation plans in eight urban centers included in the Program; (d) the



                                                               49
implementation of awareness and behavioral change campaigns aiming at improving hygiene practices
and promoting the use of latrines; and (e) the development of a fecal sludge management strategy.

             Table A1.12. Distribution of household latrines and sanitation cabins, by ONEA center
  ONEA Center            Number of household                         Number of sanitation cabins
                               latrines               Schools       Health centers     Public        Total
                            (VIP or TCM)                                               Places
  Ouagadougou                   50,000                  195               36             99           330
  Bobo-Dioulasso                20,000                  135               24             66           225
  Kaya                          3,000                    21               9              15            45
  Dedougou                      2,000                    21               6              18            45
  Gourcy                        2,000                    21               6              18            45
  Nouna                         1,500                    18               6              18            42
  Yako                          1,250                    15               6              18            39
  Gombousgou                     500                     15               3              21            39
  Mogtedo                       1,000                    15               6              21            42
  Beguedo                       1,000                    15               3              21            39
  Tiebele                        625                     15               3              21            39
  Bousse                        1,000                    15               6              21            42
  Korsimoro                      750                     15               3              21            39
  Boussouma                      375                     15               3              21            39
  Total                         85,000                  531              120            399          1,050

75.      These activities will be in line with the operational implementation strategy of ONEA, focused on
generating demand by means of awareness and behavioral change campaigns, and based on the principles
of local stakeholder involvement. Information and awareness campaigns will promote the development
of local actors, such as artisans and small businesses, to participate in the delivery of latrines by
manufacturing their components and building the latrines. These latrines will be built in areas and to
households that, following sensitization campaigns, have a demand for latrines and are committed to pay
for or build its superstructure, and to operate and maintain the latrine and follow adequate hygiene
practices.

76.       For rural sanitation, in the selected rural municipalities of the four targeted regions, the Program
will support: (a) the construction of approximately 50,000 new household latrines (type ventilated
improved pit only) (Table A1.13); (b) the construction of approximately 10,200 sanitation cabins with
male, female, and handicapped compartments, provided with water and permanent hand-washing
facilities, to be located at schools, health centers, and public places selected in accordance with criteria
set out in the POM; (c) the implementation of awareness and behavioral change campaigns aiming at
improving hygiene practices and promoting the use of latrines; (d) the development of key research in the
sanitation field; and (e) the development of strategies for adequate management and sustainability of
public latrines.

                    Table A1.13. Distribution of VIP household latrines, by targeted region
 Targeted region              Year 1         Year 2        Year 3        Year 4         Year 5        Total
 Boucle du Mouhoun              0            5,850         5,850         5,850          1,950        19,500
 Cascades                       0            2,700         2,700         2,700           900         9,000
 Hauts-Bassins                  0            4,200         4,200         4,200          1,400        14,000
 Sud-Ouest                      0            2,250         2,250         2,250           750         7,500
 Total                          0            15,000        15,000        15,000         5,000        50,000


                                                      50
77.     The capacity of MEA, the DGA, and municipal technical services will be strengthened by providing
technical support, tracking progress, and ensuring a continued social mobilization in the area of sanitation
and water supply at the municipal level.

78.     In view of the low capacity of local actors, in rural areas the construction of new latrines, except
for its superstructure, will be executed by construction companies that will be accompanied and
supervised at all times (before, during, and after construction) by a social engineering company, in
addition to the needed supervision of works. Procurement of construction companies will be done
competitively in packages that will group communities where the sensitization campaigns have generated
a minimum participation of the households that want latrines and are committed to build the
superstructure and to an adequate use of the latrine. In order to strengthen the capacity of local
communities to build and rehabilitate latrines after the latrines have been constructed, the contracts will
include a capacity building role whereby local masons and artisans are trained in the fabrication of spare
parts and installation of latrines.

79.    In order for the result to be verified as per DLI 4, all household latrines built under the Program
must comply with the technical specifications by the national government and have the superstructure
completed. The indicative number of household latrines by year, by rural and urban areas is presented in
Table A1.14.

          Table A1.14. Indicative Schedule of New and Rehabilitated Household Latrines Per Year [1]
                                                                                                 Total
 Targeted Area           YR 1           YR 2          YR 3          YR 4          YR 5
                                                                                             (cumulative)
 Urban                 15,000          20,000       20,000         20,000       10,000          85,000
 Rural                                 15,000       15,000         15,000        5,000          50,000
 Total                 15,000          35,000       35,000         35,000       15,000         135,000
Note: [1] Figures per year (non- cumulative).

80.      In order for the result to be verified as per DLI 5, all sanitation cabins built under the Program in
urban and rural areas must comply with the technical specifications by the national government, including
that the blocks of latrines are equipped with permanent handwashing facilities and cabins for male,
females, and handicapped. A cabin for females with menstruation should be part of the block of latrines.
A cabin is defined as an improved latrine with a door dedicated for individual use at a time. Also, the
Program will incentivize the adoption of a facility management plan so to guarantee that institutional
latrines are operational and properly maintained. Further specifications will be provided in the POM.

                        Table A1.15. Indicative Schedule of new sanitation cabins, per Year [1]
 Targeted Type of                                                                                       Total
                                Year 1          Year 2      Year 3        Year 4         Year 5
 area        institution                                                                             (cumulative)
             Schools                  -             700         1,400         1,400           700       4,200
             Health centers           -             400         1,200          600            200       2,400
 Rural       Public places            -             600         1,200         1,200           600       3,600
             Schools                 90             180          141           120             -         531
             Health centers          30              30           30            30             -         120
 Urban       Public places           30              90          129           150             -         399
             Schools                 90             880         1,541         1,520           700       4,731
 Urban       Health  centers         30             430         1,230          630            200       2,520
 and rural Public places             30             690         1,329         1,350           600       3,999
             Total                   150           2,000        4,100         3,500          1,500      11,250
Note: [1] Figures per year (non- cumulative).



                                                           51
81.    The indicative number of sanitation cabins built in in rural and urban areas, and by year is
presented in Table A1.15. The POM should include indicators to allow tracking of the results presented in
Table A1.15 by rural and urban areas.

RA 3. Improved access to reliable information on water resources

Context

82.     The sustainability of water resources is a significant concern in Burkina Faso, in particular, in view
of the multiple water uses that underpin the economy such as agriculture (80 percent total employment),
hydropower, domestic water supply, and industry (mining). Domestic water supply is strongly dependent
on groundwater resources, particularly in smaller towns and rural areas. In Bobo Dioulasso drinking water
supply relies entirely on groundwater while for the capital groundwater reserves represents a reliable
source of freshwater in the dry season. In Ouagadougou, less than 20 percent of water supply is from
groundwater sources.

83.     Challenges. Rapid population growth, climate change, environmental degradation, and pollution
of water resources34 increases the vulnerability of Burkina Faso’s hydrological systems. Evidence-based
decision making and water allocation models are hampered by insufficient, unreliable, and outdated
knowledge of the location and quantity of surface and groundwater resources. Furthermore, economic
development is often concentrated in certain parts of the country (growth poles) and as such a very high
localized water demand increases pressure on water resources. This will require improving and expanding
the existing monitoring network of surface and groundwater at national scale and disseminate the water-
related information. Even though there still are uncertainties related to the conclusions issued from the
climate models, Burkina Faso is vulnerable to climate change.

84.      In view of the scarcity of surface water, on the one hand, and of the heavy demands for
groundwater on the other, the knowledge of groundwater resources becomes a fundamental aspect for
their sustainable management. An adequate knowledge of the resource (the location and characterization
of the aquifers, the amount of water available, the development of the resource under the effects of
climate and well pumping, the water pollution risks, etc.) should allow for evidence based decision
making, in particular for water allocation across sectors and uses. The Program provides incentives for the
development of a decision and support model for the management of the aquifers to better understand
ground water resources laying in the hard rock aquifer and the western sedimentary aquifer. Likewise,
the design and equipment of an optimized piezometric network is planned, in order to sustain a
continuous monitoring of groundwater resources.

Description of activities

85.     This RA supports the priorities of GoBF established in the PN-GIRE 2016–2030. The Program aims
at strengthening IWRM by: (a) strengthening surface water knowledge and monitoring; (b) strengthening
groundwater knowledge and monitoring; and (c) operationalizing the SNIEau.

86.     Strengthened surface water knowledge and monitoring. Under this RA, the Program will support
the strengthening of the surface water knowledge and monitoring network nationwide through: (a)
carrying out a study for and implementing the optimization of the existing hydrometric network, acquiring

34
  Water resources are increasingly polluted due to mining and industrial, agricultural (pesticides and herbicides for
cotton), and even lack of urban sewage facilities.


                                                         52
and installing necessary equipment and software to modernize a maximum of 20 hydrometric stations,
and equipping and training the staff of the units in charge of data collection at the MEA; and (b) supporting
the optimization of the surface water quality network through undertaking an optimization study and
semi-annual sampling campaigns.

87.      Strengthened groundwater knowledge and monitoring. Under this RA, the Program will support
the strengthening of groundwater knowledge and monitoring network nationwide through: (a)
undertaking a study for the optimization of the existing piezometric network; (b) the organization and
update of existing data on groundwater resources; (c) the development of productive boreholes in the
hard rock aquifer by undertaking a multicriteria analysis for the identification of 50 favorable zones for
productive boreholes and the drilling of 50 productive boreholes; and (d) the development of a model for
the management of aquifers of the western sedimentary basin by undertaking geophysical seismic and
electric campaigns, the drilling of 16 deep recognition wells equipped with 14 piezometers, reports on
water withdrawals, and calibrated geological and hydrogeological models.

88.      Operationalization of the SNIEau. Under this RA, the Program will support the operationalizing of
the SNIEau 3 through: (a) providing support for the development of the SNIEau web-platform to be used
for data dissemination; (b) preparing a draft decree to institutionalize the SNIEau; (c) establishing data
exchange protocols between SNIEau and its partners; and (d) publicizing the water data repository. All the
water resource information developed under RA 3 should be made available through the SNIEau. The data
obtained from the DISE system will be available through the SNIEau, as well as all the process and results
for the technical and training programs financed under the Program. Emphasis will be placed on improving
quality of and access to water information, and on expanding public access beyond data to analytical
results (trends, water balance, among others).

Cross cutting area. Human capital strengthening

Context

89.      The human resources base for water supply, sanitation, and IWRM is limited in terms of number
of staff and skills set. This has been identified as a key constraint for the development of the sector by the
PGEA 2016-2030. The implementation plan of the PGEA seeks to ensure efficient, effective and quality
management of the human resources by developing plans for: (a) the development and planning of
human resources of the actors of the water and sanitation sector; and (b) improving managers' managerial
capacities. The PGEA places an important emphasis on increasing the participation of women in technical
and leadership positions.

90.      The relative low number of staff vis-à-vis the needs are explained by the lack of financing of the
institutions, in particular for municipal technical services; and the lack of financing of students to access
education. The shortages in general are significant and concern the following profiles35: technical field:
hydro-geologists, geophysicists, hydrologists, civil engineers; technical field (other): agronomists,
architects, mechanical engineers; administration and finance: managers, accountants, secretaries,
administrative staff; and social development specialists: sociologists, community mobilizers, and lawyers,
communication specialists, health workers (health education).



35
  Mapping human resource capacity gaps in the water supply and sanitation sector. Data collected 2011-2012,
report published April 2013. International Water Association.


                                                     53
91.     The deficit in staff numbers is compounded by the fact that current staff in MEA, ONEA, and
municipal technical services are not adequately and appropriately educated to meet the challenges of
increasing drinking-water and sanitation service provision, and IWRM.

92.       Human resource capacity of MEA. Most of MEA’s staff are within the management and finance
discipline, including large numbers of supporting staff (administrative, and secretary functions). The
technical staff are limited and MEA faces a barrier in hiring due to market constraints, in particular in
regard to WMR. Only 44 percent (i.e. 319 specialists of 734 total employees) of MEA staff is composed by
experts that are mainly specialized in rural development and engineering, with a major challenge in the
field of surface water and ground water resources. MEA is particularly understaffed of technicians36 in the
field of hydraulic structures and rural works. It is estimated that a total of 340 specialists are additionally
required (of which 70 in the field of IWRM and 270 in the field of rural water and sanitation) to enable
MEA to fulfill its mission.

                                    Table A1.16 MEA staff, by job type and gender
           Job type                         Men           Women            Total           % of woman
           Technical                        251            68               319                 21
           Non- technical                   269            146              415                 35
           Total                            520            214              734                 29

93.     Human resource capacity of ONEA. At ONEA, 57 percent of total employees are technical staff (i.e.
534 specialists of 929 total employees). ONEA is expanding its services into new centers and these will
require more technical staff. Also, as ONEA is advancing in expanding its sludge treatment capacity, waste
water capacity, and extension of sewerage additional staff trained in these areas is required.

                                   Table A1.17. ONEA staff, by job type and gender
           Job type                       Men           Women             Total           % of woman
           Technical                      514             20               534                 4
           Non- technical                 235            160               395                 41
           Total                          749            180               929                 19

94.      Human resource capacity of municipal technical services. In the four regions where the Program
will intervene for rural water supply and sanitation activities, technical municipal services are currently
understaffed or are not staffed at all, limiting their ability to take over the functions assigned as part of
the decentralization process. Municipal services are supposed to be staffed by at least one technical
expert on water supply and sanitation, but this is often not the case. The AMOC foresees significant
support for supporting the staffing of technical services with qualified staff by providing financial
resources from MEA to the hiring of technical staff. The financial resources are expected to be completely
phased out in 10 years.

95.     Gender. Women represent a small share of the total staff of MEA and ONEA, and even a lower
share of the technical staff. Within MEA, only 29 percent all staff are woman; and the percentage drops
to 21 percent when considering the share of women in technical positions. In ONEA, women represent
only 19 percent of the total labor force; and the participation rate of woman in professional positions
merely represents 3.7 percent (i.e. 20 female specialists in total).



36
     The number of technicians should be more than doubled for handling the implementation of all planned structures


                                                          54
96.     The proportion of men working in the water supply, sanitation, and IWRM sectors is partly
explained bythe unequal distribution of graduate outputs. Women in Burkina Faso are often excluded
from education opportunities and concomitantly from the workforce. In addition, the prevalence of
certain discriminatory perceptions, suggesting that a man is more productive than a woman, favors the
recruitment of men. Furthermore, in previous years socio-cultural and economic factors predisposed
families to enroll boys in school rather than girls37.

97.      There are several national wide gender equality policies, aiming at: (a) eradicating discriminatory
gender practices through encouraging girls’ education and the provision of scholarships for women; (b)
creating an environment conducive to employing women, as per the rules of the labor law and labor code;
and (c) changing the perception that women cannot do the work previously reserved for men.

98.      The Program will seek to actively encourage women to apply to the scholarships for technical and
training programs provided through the Program, and to benefit MEA and ONEA female staff of the
opportunities provided through specialization, doctoral and short-term training. The Program would
encourage women to participate by intense communication campaigns in public media (including
television, radio, newspapers, and social media) to reach women potential candidates, and publishing
opportunities in MEA’s and ONEA’s websites.

99.     Supply of human resources to the water supply, sanitation, and IWRM sectors. There are several
national and international institutions (universities, research institutes, and training centers) available to
provide the market with the needed skills to work in the water supply, sanitation, and IWRM sectors.
However, the number of people being trained each year for absorption into the labor market, especially
IWRM, is not enough to fill the gap. It is a fact that there is a mismatch between the training provided and
the needs in the field38.

100. In particular, the Centre of Water Businesses of ONEA (Centre des Métiers de l’Eau ONEA -
CEMEAU) provides short term training in project management for communal water supply and sanitation,
utility management, simplified water supply systems, production and distribution of drinking water,
sanitation (sewage and excreta). This institute trains about 500 people at municipal level each year. After
a five-year period of technical assistance (2010-2015), CEMEAU has an organization, facilities, training
programs and technical resources that are generally satisfactory39.

101. The CEMEAU capacity is limited due to weaknesses of its human resources, mainly as regards the
trainers. Today, training is provided almost entirely by external consultants. Their competence is not in
question, but their availability is limited and impacts the responsiveness of the CEMEAU to meet requests
for training setup. More seriously, the lack of CEMEAU staff with both pedagogical skills and skills on the
themes of the AEPA prevents it from capitalizing on the actions carried out. The pedagogy implemented
at CEMEAU, which is also adapted to the chosen target (operational training aimed at all levels, but mainly



37
   Mapping human resource capacity gaps in the water supply and sanitation sector. Data collected 2011-2012,
report published April 2013. International Water Association.
38
   Mapping human resource capacity gaps in the water supply and sanitation sector. Data collected 2011-2012,
report published April 2013. International Water Association.
39
   Mission d’appui au developpement et a l’autonomisation du Centre des Metiers de l’eau (CEMEAU de l’ONEA.
Rapport de fin de mission, 25 août 2016. EU/ONEA.



                                                     55
workers and technicians) uses technical forms, practical work, case studies. These can only be built
progressively by specialized thematic trainers40.

Description of activities

102. The Program will incentivize the strengthening of the human capital base of the MEA, ONEA and
municipalities on two main aspects: (a) to increase the number of staff in MEA, ONEA and technical
services of the municipalities, which currently are severely constrained, in particular in technical fields;
and (b) to strengthen the skills of existing staff of MEA and ONEA, the private sector, and municipal actors
in critical areas of service delivery, with a particular emphasis on IWRM where most of the needs are. The
lack of quality as well as the low numbers of human resources working in the water supply and sanitation
sector is directly linked to the low financial capacity of organizations to meet the demands for water and
sanitation facilities41.

103. The Program will finance four types of programs: (a) technical and training programs; (b)
specialization; (c) doctoral programs; and (d) short-term training, as follows:

104. Technical and training programs. The Program will provide scholarships for technical and training
programs that last between two to three years. These programs are intended to compensate the current
under-representation of certain professions within MEA and ONEA in the fields of water supply and
sanitation and IWRM. Potential candidates should be currently external to MEA/ONEA and will be selected
on a competitive basis. Selection procedures are planned at the start of year 1, year 2, and year 3. Financial
support will cover tuition, room, board and transportation costs are needed.

105. After completion of technical and training programs, the Program seeks to incentivize that a
number of graduates of technical and training programs are integrated into the MEA, ONEA, and the
municipal technical services (together defined as “Public Administration”) (Table A1.18). Therefore, it is
expected that the Program provides a solid foundation for the sustainability of results by increasing the
current levels of staff within MEA, ONEA and municipal technical services. In line with the provisions of
the AMOC, MEA is engaged to provide the funding to pay the salaries of the new hires for the municipal
technical services for a total of 10 years, of which five years will be fully paid and five years will be with a
partial support. In order to qualify for payment under DLI 7, the staff absorbed by the Public
Administration should be hired under a labor contract of at least five years duration.

               Table A1.18. Indicative schedule of beneficiaries of technical and training programs [1]
   Areas of technical and training programs                 YR 1       YR 2   YR 3      YR 4       YR 5   Total
 IWRM                                                        45         25     0         0          0       70
 Rural water and sanitation                                  85         80     35        0          0      200
 Urban water and sanitation                                  7          3      0         0          0       10
 Total beneficiaries of technical and training
 programs                                                   137        108    35          0          0    280
                     of which integrated into the
                            Public Administration             0         0     82         65         21    168
Note: [1] Figures per year (non- cumulative), except for total.


40
   Mission d’appui au developpement et a l’autonomisation du Centre des Metiers de l’eau (CEMEAU de l’ONEA.
Rapport de fin de mission, 25 août 2016. EU/ONEA.
41
   Mapping human resource capacity gaps in the water supply and sanitation sector. Data collected 2011-2012,
report published April 2013. International Water Association.


                                                                  56
106. Specialization program. Specialization programs funded through the Program are to last between
nine months and two years, after which a professional master’s degree will be granted. Specialization
programs will focus on IWRM (see Table A1.19), as this is an area of major deficit within MEA. Potential
candidates of specialization programs should be currently employed by MEA and/or ONEA to acquire
certain skills and knowledge that will help them to better fulfill their current job.

                Table A1.19. Indicative schedule of beneficiaries of IWRM specialization programs [1]
         Areas of Specialization                       YR 1            YR 2       YR 3       YR 4       YR 5    Total
Hydrogeological modeling                          0               5           0          0          0          5
Flood forecasting                                 0               0           5          0          0          5
Water chemistry and quality standards             10              0           0          0          0          10
Geological modeling                               0               2           0          0          0          2
Information systems                               0               0           2          0          0          2
Biology Ecology and Aquatic Ecosystems
Management                                        10              0           0          0          0          10
Total beneficiaries                               20              7           7          0          0          34
Note: [1] Figures per year (non- cumulative), except for total.

107. Doctoral programs. The Program will finance two doctoral students in the fields of IWRM and one
doctoral student in sanitation. The selection of students will take place in year 1 and year 2 and the
doctoral program will last for four years. Doctoral opportunities will be advertised externally and hence
staff currently employed by MEA and ONEA can also benefit from these opportunities.

108. Short-term training. The Program will incentivize the provision of short term trainings of less than
one month for the staff of MEA, ONEA, and municipal technical services, which will be organized as
practical or theoretical sessions. A large share of the training programs will be delivered by the CEMEAU,
providing an opportunity for the Center to grow and consolidate its external offerings.

109. The short-term trainings will allow existing staff to update their knowledge and learn from the
latest technological or research developments in the areas of water supply, sanitation, IWRM, and
program management. Also, of particular importance is the training to be provided to CEMAU trainers on
learning methodologies to reinforce the capacity of the Center to provide the training required under the
Program. These trainings will be open to participants throughout the Program duration (Table A1.20).

                      Table A1.20. Indicative schedule of beneficiaries of short-term training [1]
Areas of short term training                       YR 1            YR 2       YR 3       YR 4       YR 5         Total
IWRM                                                45              61         55         30         0            191
Rural water and sanitation                          60              70         25         0          0            155
Urban water and sanitation                         171             123         80        105         0            479
Management and finance                             177             152         90         90         0            509
Total beneficiaries                                453             406        250        225         0           1334
Note: [1] Figures per year (non- cumulative), except for total.

110. The number of beneficiaries of human capital strengthening programs financed under the
Program per year are shown in Table A1.21.

111. The management of the programs financed under the PforR will be delegated to the Human
Resources Directorate (Direction des Ressources Humaines, DRH) of MEA and ONEA, respectively. The
respective DRH will manage the selection process of the beneficiaries of technical and training programs,


                                                                  57
specialization, and doctorates; and the recruitment processes of the graduates of technical and training
programs that will be absorbed by the MEA, ONEA, and municipal technical services. The DRHs will also
be in charge of the needed agreements with the institutions (universities, institutes, and training centers)
in charge of delivering the programs. Finally, the DRHs will be in charge of consolidating in an annual
report the results of the programs financed by the PforR.

                                Table A1.21. Beneficiaries of human capital programs [1]
Type of program                                 YR 1          YR 2     YR 3      YR 4      YR 5    Total
Beneficiaries of technical and training
programs                                        137           108      35        0         0       280
Beneficiaries of specialization                 20            7        7         0         0       34
Beneficiaries of doctoral programs              1             2        0         0         0       3
Beneficiaries of short-term training            453           406      250       225       0       1334
Note: [1] Figures per year (non- cumulative), except for total.

112. Other capacity building activities. In addition to the four types of programs describe above, the
Program includes several capacity building activities for stakeholders in the sector that will also contribute
to strengthening the human capital base for water supply and sanitation. These activities are embedded
in the tree RA, and include, among others, training on the following areas:

     x    Contract management, accountability, reporting, new tariff structure, PPP strategy for rural water
          system for water supply operators;
     x    Management of water supply systems for water supply operators and municipal technical
          services;
     x    Technical aspects of water supply and sanitation service delivery for water supply operators and
          municipal technical services;
     x    Manufacturing of sanitation materials, in targeted urban centers for local artisans (masons,
          bricklayers, etc.)
     x    Promote Hygiene practices, at the national and local level; and
     x    The decision support system for IWRM, in both the hard rock aquifer and the western basin
          sedimentary aquifer.

113. The result chain of the Program is depicted in Figure A1.3. As shown, the incentives provided by
the DLIs constitute key links of the results chain that will work in tandem to achieve the PDO.




                                                                  58
Figure A1.3. Program’s results chain




                59
Excluded Activities

114. The Program will exclude activities that are likely to have significant adverse impacts on the
environment and/or affected people, including but not limited to schemes that involve construction or
rehabilitation of dams that are greater or equal to 10 m in height, sludge treatment plans, extensions of
the sewerage system, groundwater-based schemes in overexploited and critical basins that do not
integrate source sustainability measures, undertaking of any activity that uses asbestos, and undertaking
of any activity involving major land acquisition. It is envisaged that there is no high-value contract
exceeding Operations Procurement Review Committee threshold42 value that would qualify for
procurement exclusions.

D. Disbursed Link Indicators (DLIs)

115. The disbursement model consists of seven DLIs (Table A1.22 and Annex 3). The DLIs have been
selected based on the following criteria: (a) importance for successful implementation; (b) potential to
incentivize improvements within GoBF’s programs; (c) practicality and cost-effectiveness of verification;
and (d) GoBF’s capacity to achieve the DLI during the Program implementation period. The DLIs intend to
incentivize the achievement of tangible outputs and outcomes, and strengthen the institutions involved
in water supply, sanitation, and IWRM. The DLIs are presented in Figure 1. The underlying definitions used
in the DLIs are presented in Annex 3. The DLIs correspond to the pressing needs to: increase access to
water and sanitation services and improve their sustainability; improve information and accessibility to
information on water resources, which is critical to properly allocate scarce water resources; and improve
the sector human capital base by training water sector professionals and increase the staff of MEA, ONEA
and municipal technical services. The ensemble of DLIs takes into account lessons learned from prior
sector interventions in Burkina Faso, and from other PforRs, by combining process and outcome DLIs,
providing incentives to achieve key milestones towards attaining the Program goals. A detailed description
of each DLI is included as Annex 3.

116. DLI 1 seeks to provide financial incentives for increasing access to water supply to people living in
urban and rural areas, supporting the achievement of the SDG No. 6, in targeted areas where there are
major challenges for the expansion of sustainable water supply services. Access will be provided by means
of household water connections, standposts and boreholes equipped with handpumps.

117. DLI 2 will support the construction of surface and groundwater water production facilities that
are critical to increase access to improved water services in secondary urban centers and rural areas. The
Program seeks to incentivize water production expansion in urban and rural centers where there is a
significant deficit of water production and therefore provision of adequate water supply services are
severely constrained.

118. DLI 3 will provide incentives for strengthening the financial sustainability of water supply service
provision. In the first year, the DLI provides strong financial incentives for (a) the adoption by the Council
of Ministers of the rural water supply tariff structure; and (b) the adjustment of the lifeline tariff (0 to 8
m3) charged by ONEA in urban centers. From year 2 onwards, DLI 3 seeks to incentivize the undertaking
of a study and adoption of a new urban tariff structure that responds to the objectives of: providing

42
  Operations Procurement Review Committee threshold value is as follows: (a) works (including turnkey, supply and
installation of plant and equipment, PPPs), estimated to cost US$75,000,000 equivalent or more per contract; (b)
goods, information technology, and non-consulting services, estimated to cost US$50,000,000 equivalent or more
per contract; (c) consultant services, estimated to cost US$20,000,000 equivalent or more per contract.


                                                       60
affordable access to urban population according to their socio-economic levels, and ensuring the
necessary economic and financial equilibrium in the provision of water services. It will also incentivize the
validation of the new tariff structure by means of public hearings, and its adoption and implementation.

                                           Table A1.22. RAs and DLIs of the Program
RA                   DLIs                              DLIs within the main DLI                                        Amount of IDA
                                                                                                                     financed allocated
                                                                                                                        (US$ million)
RA 1. Improved       DLI 1. People provided with       DLI 1.1. People provided with access to an improved water          90 [1]
access to water      access to an improved water       source in targeted urban areas
supply               source under the Program          DLI 1.2. People provided with access to an improved water
                                                       source in targeted rural areas
                     DLI 2. Water production           Not applicable                                                     25 [2]
                     capacity constructed under
                     the Program
                     DLI 3. Adoption of water          Not applicable                                                     15 [1]
                     supply tariff structures
RA 2. Improved       DLI 4. People provided with       DLI 4.1. People provided with access to improved                   70 [1]
access to            access to improved                sanitation facilities in targeted urban areas
sanitation           sanitation facilities under the   DLI 4.2. People provided with access to improved
                     Program                           sanitation facilities in targeted rural areas
                     DLI 5. Number of new              DLI 5.1 Number of new sanitation cabins in schools, health         25 [2]
                     sanitation cabins in schools,     centers, and public places built under the Program
                     health centers, and public        equipped with handwashing facilities in targeted urban
                     places built under the            areas
                     Program equipped with             DLI 5.2 Number of new sanitation cabins in schools, health
                     handwashing facilities            centers, and public places built under the Program
                                                       equipped with handwashing facilities in targeted rural
                                                       areas
                                                       DLI 5.3 Percentage of sanitation cabins in schools, health
                                                       centers, and public places equipped with handwashing
                                                       facilities built under the Program that are operational and
                                                       properly maintained
RA 3. Improved       DLI 6. A decision- support        DLI 6.1. A model for the management of aquifers of the             35 [1]
access to reliable   model for the management          western sedimentary basin is available
information on       of the aquifers is available      DLI 6.2. Number of productive boreholes in the hard rock
water resources                                        aquifer drilled under the Program
Cross-cutting        DLI 7. Improved human             DLI 7.1. Number of beneficiaries of technical and training        39.4 [1]
                     capital for water, sanitation,    programs financed by the Program
                     and IWRM                          DLI 7.2. Number of beneficiaries of specialization
                                                       programs financed by the Program
                                                       DLI 7.3. Number of beneficiaries of doctoral programs
                                                       financed by the Program
                                                       DLI 7.4. Number of beneficiaries of short-term training
                                                       financed by the Program
                                                       DLI 7.5. Number of beneficiaries of technical and training
                                                       programs financed by the Program integrated into the
                                                       administration
Front-end fee                                                                                                             0.625
Total                                                                                                                      300
 Note: [1] This ILD is financed by the IDA credit from the SUF; [2] This ILD is financed by the IDA grant
 Further details on the DLIs are presented in Annex 3.

119. DLI 4 encompasses strong incentives for the provision of improved sanitation to people living in
urban and rural areas by means of improved household latrines, supporting the achievement of the SDG
No. 6. Targeted areas will be subject to information, education and behavioral change campaigns prior to



                                                                  61
the commencement of any construction to secure high demand for sanitation and appropriate O&M of
the facilities. Pit excavation and the provision and installation of the slab will be done at no cost for the
beneficiaries, provided that beneficiary households make a commitment to build the superstructure and
maintain the facility with their own resources. The DLI will incentivize the Government to ensure that the
household is committed towards the investments and mobilizes the adequate financing to build the super-
structure, which in turn is a significant step towards ensuring its use and maintenance.

120. DLI 5 seeks to incentivize the strengthened institutional sanitation, by means of providing new
sanitation cabins in schools, health centers and public places in urban and rural areas, in blocks of latrines
equipped with permanent handwashing facilities, and incentivize their O&M. To ensure an efficient
management and the sustainability of the facilities, which has been a common problem in the past,
adequate management arrangements will be defined. As for the facilities in public places, management
will be delegated to a third party, under municipal oversight, which will be responsible for the O&M of
the facilities and will charge a user fee to the public. In addition, DLI 5 provides financial incentives to
promote good O&M of the facilities.

121. DLI 6 seeks to provide incentives for the development of a decision-support model for the
management of the aquifers (in the sedimentary and hard-rock basin) that will allow for a better allocation
of water resources. The DLI incentivizes the development of a geological and hydrogeological model in
the western sedimentary aquifer, which is the largest and most productive and has a strategic relevance
as a buffer for economic and social planning. Also, the DLI provides financial incentives for the planning
of water resources abstraction, in particular for water supply uses, in the hard-rock basin by developing a
multicriteria analysis leading to the identification and drilling of 50 productive boreholes.

122. DLI 7 seeks to provide incentives for the strengthening of human capital at the central and
municipal level for the provision of water and sanitation services, and for IWRM, which is a key element
for the sustainability of results achieved by the Program. Therefore, financial incentives will be provided
to strengthen the capacity of professionals internal and external to sector institutions by means of:
technical and training programs, specialization, doctoral programs, and continuous education courses.
Attention will be given to addressing long standing gender imbalances at senior levels of sector decision
making, by addressing aspects of equity, and equal training opportunities for women. Given the scarcity
of specialized personnel at various sector institutions, the Program will provide incentives to entice
external beneficiaries of technical and training programs to be absorbed by MEA, ONEA, and/or municipal
technical services.

123. Disbursements will be made according to the achievements under the Program. Funds will be
used to finance the activities included in the Program. It will be the responsibility of MEA and ONEA to
prepare annual activity, procurement plans, and budgets. As part of the PAP, MEA and ONEA should adopt
annual procurement plans and disbursement estimates two months following the inclusion in the Finance
Law of the Program’s annual budget.

124. Verification Protocol. All DLIs will be independently verified by an IVA. The verification protocols
are detailed in Annex 3. GoBF’s existing DISE, MEA, and ONEA’s M&E system, and regular sector-related
reporting arrangements will be the basis for providing the data needed to verify most of the Program
results. The verification protocol uses data from civil works supervision reports, customer surveys,
progress reports from the PCU and PSU, consolidated results reports submitted by the PCU to the MEA,
and random physical verification. In accordance with good audit practice, physical verification will take
place against a sampling framework. On this basis, the IVA will prepare a Results Verification Report which



                                                     62
will be shared with the Program PCU and the World Bank. A key use of the Results Verification Report will
be to determine the amount of the eligible disbursement to be made based on the results achieved. If the
World Bank finds that the disbursement request meets the terms of the Financing Agreement, the World
Bank will disburse the corresponding funds to MINEFID.

125. The primary responsibility for collecting and reporting results for DLIs 1 through 5 will fall on ONEA
for urban areas, and on DREAs for rural areas. The information provided will be validated by ONEA’s PSU
for urban areas, and the DGEP and DGA for water and sanitation in rural areas, respectively. The
information will be reviewed and consolidated by the PCU and the IVA will verify and confirm the results
by means of reviewing all of the documents and physically inspecting representative random samples.
Once the DISE becomes functional in the four regions targeted by the Program, the data will be fed into
the DISE system and eventually be made available through the SNIEau website.

126. The primary responsibility for collecting and reporting results for DLI 6 will correspond to the SP-
GIRE with the technical support from the SISC, as needed. The information will be reviewed and
consolidated by the PCU and verified by the IVA.

127. As for DLI 7, the primary information will be provided by the participating academic and training
institutions and validated by MEA’s DRH, for the fields of IWRM and Rural Water and Sanitation, and by
ONEA’s DRH for urban water and sanitation. The PCU will review and consolidate all the reports from
ONEA and the MEA, and it will submit the consolidated report to the IVA. The IVA shall verify the
information on the reports and will interview a random sample of beneficiaries to corroborate the
information in the reports. Further details on the verification process for each DLI are included in Annex
3.

128. Any advance from the World Bank could be adjusted or rolled over until the end of the Program,
for final adjustment. The disbursements under the DLIs would be compared with Program expenditures
in the last year of the Program and a refund would be sought if DLIs paid are more than the Program
expenditures. Any other sources of financing must be deducted from the calculations. This is in line with
the Program financial management guidelines where the DLIs amount disbursed would be compared with
the Program expenditure.

129. Baseline. While baselines are drawn from existing data within MEA and ONEA, an assessment will
be undertaken to validate the baseline information of all the DLIs during the first year of the
implementation.

E. Implementation arrangements

130. A Steering Committee (Comité de Revue), chaired by the General Secretary of MEA, will provide
oversight of the Program and ensure convergence towards the Program objectives. The Steering
Committee will meet twice per year (ordinary sessions), with the purpose of: (a) reviewing and adopting
the Program’s implementation plan; (b) reviewing and adopting the Program’s evaluations; and (c)
reviewing and adopting the financial reports; the annual activity, budget, and procurement plans; among
other function established in the Decree 2018-0092 of 2018.

131. A PCU will be established within MEA. The PCU will act as the interlocutor with the World Bank
on behalf of GoBF. The PCU will ensure that the Program is implemented according to the POM, and will
be responsible for the coordination, day-to-day management of the Program activities, monitoring
results, and generating performance and financial reports on Program implementation. The PCU will be


                                                    63
responsible for providing relevant information to the IVA for the independent verification of results. The
PCU will be responsible for preparing the consolidated interim financial reports and the consolidated
annual financial statements. The PCU will be at least staffed with: A Program Coordinator, an M&E
specialist, a procurement specialist, a financial management specialist, an accountant, an environmental
safeguard specialist, a social safeguard specialist, and an internal controller. The PCU Program
Coordinator, M&E specialist, procurement specialist, and financial management specialist will be
recruited on a competitive basis. Furthermore, a full time, dedicated financial and public procurement
controller will be appointed by MINEFID and assigned to the PCU to speed up processing of transactions
and payments.

132. ONEA will establish a Program Support Unit (PSU) dedicated exclusively to support the
implementation of Program activities under ONEA’s responsibility, and report on results achieved by
ONEA. The PSU will be at least staffed with: a PSU Coordinator, an M&E specialist, a procurement
specialist, a financial management specialist, an environmental safeguard specialist, and a social
safeguard specialist. The PSU Coordinator, M&E specialist, procurement specialist, environmental
safeguards, and social safeguards specialist will be recruited on a competitive basis. The internal control
will be done by ONEA’s Internal Control Department. ONEA PSU will report to the PCU.

133. The POM will include a clear description of the function of each specialist of the PCU and the PSU,
the qualification and experience required, and method of selection, including details on the mechanism
to proceed with a competitive external selection when applicable.

                     Table A1.23. Role of MEA and ONEA Departments in relation to RAs
  Results Area (RA)                       Urban                                Rural
  RA 1. Improved access to water supply   ONEA/ DPAEP                          MEA/DGEP
                                          ONEA/ DPI
  RA 2. Improved access to sanitation     ONEA/ DASS                         MEA/DGA
  RA 3. Improved access to reliable                               MEA/ SP-GIRE
  information on water resources
  Human Capital Strengthening             ONEA/DRH                            MEA/DRH

134. Program activities will be implemented by MEA’s directorates and ONEA departments. Formal
implementation responsibility has been established as follows (see Table A1.23):

    x   Within MEA, the General Directorate for Water Supply (Direction Générale de l’Eau potable, DGA)
        and the General Directorate for Sanitation (Direction Générale de l’Assainissement, DGA) will
        implement the Program activities related to rural water supply and rural sanitation included in RA
        1 and RA 2. The DGA and DGEP will work through the DREAs to implement Program activities
        related to rural water supply and sanitation, in particular to ensure data collection for the
        verification of results. The Permanent Secretariat for Integrated Water Resource Management
        (Secrétariat Permanent de la Gestion Intégrée des Ressources en Eau, SP-GIRE) will implement
        the activities under RA 3, working in close collaboration with the DGRE. The DRH will be in charge
        of the management of the programs for human capital strengthening supported by the Program
        related to MEA and the municipal technical services.
    x   Within ONEA, the Ouagadougou Works Department (Direction Projec AEP Ouaga, DPAEP) will
        implement the Ouagadougou water supply-related activities included in RA 1. The DPI will
        implement the urban water supply-related activities in the remaining 10 urban centers where the
        Program will intervene for urban water supply. ONEA's DASS will implement all the sanitation-



                                                    64
        related activities included in RA 2 in the fourteen targeted urban centers. ONEA’s DRH will be in
        charge of the management of the programs for human capital strengthening supported by the
        Program related to ONEA.

135. The MINEFID plays a central role in achieving the Program results. The MINEFID is responsible for
the execution of the Program budget (ensuring fund flows) and setting standards and processes for the
financial management of the Program.

136. Given the complex and multidimensional nature of the program, and in view of its implementation
challenges, the DGA, DGEP, SP-GIRE and ONEA departments will be assisted by strategic implementation
support consultants (SISC) in technical aspects, including providing technical inputs into: (a) ToRs,
feasibility level and detailed design studies; (b) tendering and procurement processes; and (c) quality
control of main deliverables of studies conducted under the Program. The SISC will be competitively
selected with relevant national and international experience. The SISC will provide support and guidance
and provide the opportunity for implementing agencies’ staff to learn on the job. It is important that the
ToR for the SISC give adequate emphasis to this capacity development role.

137. Given GoBF’s desire to initiate Program implementation immediately after declaration of
effectiveness, it has been agreed that conditional to the extension of the closing date of the on-going
Urban Water Sector Project (currently December 31, 2018), remaining funds will be available for financing
the PCU, the PSU, and the SISC, and the Government will shortly initiate the process of selecting the PCU
and PSU staff and hiring the SISC.

F. Program M&E

138. The Results Framework (Annex 2) is the basis of monitoring Program results. It consists of PDO
indicators and intermediate-level indicators, some of which are DLIs. Monitoring of the indicators in the
Results Framework will be conducted semi-annually during the program implementation period for both
DLIs and non-DLIs. This will ensure effective tracking of progress so that corrective measures can be taken
to ensure the achievement of the PDO. The Program will require several of the results indicators to be
disaggregated by gender (Annex 2). This will facilitate gender-related planning and management of the
Program.

139. The M&E function will be assumed by the PCU, which has the overall coordination and
responsibility for M&E for the Program. The PSU will be in charge of monitoring activities under ONEA’s
responsibility, and will provided need inputs to the PCU for the consolidation of Program results. M&E
specialists will be hired for the PCU and PSU to ensure the M&E function.

140. The World Bank will provide implementation support to the PCU and the PSU at ONEA and the
implementation agencies on all aspects of implementation, monitoring, and reporting as outlined in the
implementation support plan (Annex 8), including supporting the PCU in the verification aspects of its
mandate and its relationship with the IVA.

141. An important lesson learned from the implementation of programs and projects in the sector is
that it is important to monitor performance and take corrective actions as soon as possible. A considerable
amount of M&E capacity will be provided under the Program, including: (a) the recruitment of dedicated
M&E specialists in the PCU and PSU; (b) the recruitment of an IVA; (c) the World Bank implementation
support plan; and (d) the progress reviews and the mid-term review. In addition, the M&E function within
the MEA will be strengthened by the technical assistance financed by DANIDA for this specific purpose.


                                                    65
142. Progress reviews. The Government and the World Bank have a shared interest in seeing the
Program succeed and the successful experience be put to broader use within the implementation of the
sectoral government programs. To facilitate such knowledge sharing and problem solving, semi-annual
meetings will be held at the management level to review progress, identify and propose remedies for any
weaknesses, and identify and propose modalities for scaling up successes beyond the Program. In addition
to regular implementation support missions, semi-annual reviews will be critical for early identification of
problems and opportunities with the Program.

143. Midterm review. The midterm review will be an opportunity to review the Program framework
and potentially adjust the DLIs. This includes the options of reallocation of disbursement amounts
between the DLIs or cancellation of DLIs. The review will also assess the quality and impact of the human
capital programs supported by the PforR.

144. DISE Scale-up. The DISE is a consolidated M&E system under pilot phase for three national
programs (PGEA, PN-AEP, and PN-AEUE)43, and thus at present it only covers water supply and sanitation-
related information. It is expected that this integrated system corrects the deficiencies of the PN-AEP M&E
system, allowing to follow the interventions of all actors whose contributions are important for the
achievement of sectoral objectives. The DISE is expected to be the unique M&E system for the sector,
covering all the 13 regions of Burkina Faso—including urban and rural areas. The DREAs are in charge of
collecting, reviewing and processing the data at the regional level. The coordination of the DISE is ensured
at the central level by the DGEP for rural water, the DGA for rural sanitation, and ONEA for urban water
and urban sanitation.

145. Since January 2017, the DISE is being piloted in three of the PforR targeted regions (Boucle du
Mouhoun, Cascades, Hauts-Bassins) with financing from DANIDA and Deutsche Gesellschaft für
Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ). Results include the acquisition of 80 mobile phones, 15 laptops,
and kits for water quality analyses; the configuration of the questionnaires on the phones; the training
supervisors, regional controllers, and investigators for data collection in the Cascades region; and the
collection and data cleaning in 103 municipalities of the three pilot regions. To complete the pilot phase,
actions include the collection of data in Bobo Dioulasso, the processing of data and the calculation of
indicators, and the data report.

146. Based on the results and lessons learned from this pilot phase, the Program will support the scale-
up of the implementation of the DISE in the four regions targeted for the Program. Support will be
provided for the DGEP, DGA, the MEA’s directorate in charge of studies, and the DREAs to carry out their
functions in the context of the roadmap for the implementation of the DISE.




43
     At a later stage, the DISE is expected to also cover the PN-GIRE and the PN-AH.


                                                           66
                                                                        Annex 2. Results Framework Matrix

                                                                            Table A2.1. PDO-Level Indicators
    PDO-Level Indicator                DLI      Unit       Baseline                                       Targets [1]                           Frequency     Data Source/ Collection
                                Core
                                                                            YR 1             YR 2             YR 3        YR 4        YR 5

Program Development Objective: Improve access to water supply and sanitation services in targeted areas



People provided with access     X      1     Number            0                                                                                Semi-       MEA and ONEA; annual
to an improved water source                                                                                                                     annual      verification of results
under the Program                                                          284,920          701,960        1,002,700    1,141,900   1,158,595               report, IVA

                                                                                                                                                            Census 2006, 52 percent of
             Of which female                 Number            0           148,158          365,019         521,404     593,788     602,469                 population are women



              Of which urban                 Number            0           123,500          289,500         470,500     609,700     626,395



               Of which rural                Number            0           161,420          412,460         532,200     532,200     532,200



People provided with access     X      4     Number            0           150,000          500,000         850,000     1,200,000   1,350,000   Semi-       MEA and ONEA; annual
to improved sanitation                                                                                                                          annual      verification of results
facilities under the Program                                                                                                                                report, IVA

                                                                                                                                                            Census 2006, 52 percent of
             Of which female                 Number            0           78,000           260,000         442,000     624,000     702,000                 population are women



              Of which urban                 Number            0           150,000          350,000         550,000     750,000     850,000



               Of which rural                Number            0              0             150,000         300,000     450,000     500,000


 Note: [1] Cumulative results presented in the table




                                                                                              67
                                                                  Table A2.2. Intermediate Results Indicators
Intermediate Results Indicator                      Unit      Baseline                                         Targets [1]                                Frequency     Data Source/
                                   Core   DLI                                                                                                                            Collection
                                                                              YR 1               YR 2               YR 3              YR 4        YR 5
Program Development Objective: Improve access to water supply and sanitation services in targeted areas
Water production capacity             2      Cubic         0               1,680              3,544               17,544             17,544      17,544   Annual      Civil works
constructed under the Program                meters/ day                                                                                                              supervision
                                                                                                                                                                      reports, ONEA,
                                                                                                                                                                      and IVA
Adoption of water supply tariff             3   Yes/No       No          -Adoption of      Completion of      Validation of       Adoption of             Annual      MEA and ONEA;
structures [2]                                                           rural water       urban water        the proposed        new urban                           annual
                                                                         supply tariff     tariff study and   new water           water tariff                        verification of
                                                                         structure         development of     tariff structure,   structure                           results report,
                                                                         - Adjustment of   new water tariff   including public                                        IVA
                                                                         urban water       structure          hearings
                                                                         tariff
Percentage of complaints                        %            0                  0%               40%                50%               60%         70%     Semi-       ONEA
resolved within the established                                                                                                                           annual
timeframes
Number of rural water systems                   Number       0                 0                  0                  30                40         50      Semi-       DGEP
built under the Program                                                                                                                                   annual
delegated for management to a
third part
Number of latrines built or                     Number       0               15,000             35,000            55,000             75,000      85,000   Semi-       Civil works
rehabilitated under the                                                                                                                                   annual      supervision
Program in targeted urban                                                                                                                                             reports, ONEA,
                                                                                                                                                                      and IVA
areas
Number of new latrines built                    Number       0                  -               15,000            30,000             45,000      50,000   Semi-       Civil works
under the Program in targeted                                                                                                                             annual      supervision
rural areas                                                                                                                                                           reports, DGA, and
                                                                                                                                                                      IVA
Number of new sanitation                    5   Number       0                150               2,150              6,250              9,750      11,250   Semi-       Civil works
cabins in schools, health                                                                                                                                 Annual      supervision
centers, and public places built                                                                                                                                      reports, ONEA,
                                                                                                                                                                      and IVA
under the Program equipped
with handwashing facilities
Percentage of sanitation cabins             5   %            0                N/A               >=70%              >=70%             >=80%       >=80%    Semi-       Civil works
in schools, health centers, and                                                                                                                           annual      supervision
public places equipped with                                                                                                                                           reports, DGA, and
                                                                                                                                                                      IVA
handwashing facilities built
under the Program that are
operational and properly
maintained



                                                                                           68
Intermediate Results Indicator                     Unit   Baseline                                             Targets [1]                                               Frequency     Data Source/
                                  Core   DLI                                                                                                                                            Collection
                                                                           YR 1                 YR 2                YR 3                YR 4               YR 5
Percentage of hydrometric and                  Percent    #%          A plan for the     20 hydrometric        A plan for the          90% of          90% of the        Annual      SP-GIRE, DGRE
piezometric stations                                                 optimization of          stations        optimization of      hydrometric        hydrometric
operational                                                                the            equipped with       the piezometric        stations of           and
                                                                      hydrometric        digital recorders        network                the          piezometric
                                                                         network             and scales         completed            optimized       stations of the
                                                                       completed           limnometric                             network are         optimized
                                                                                                                                   operational,       networks are
                                                                                                                                        data          operational,
                                                                                                                                    collected at     data collected
                                                                                                                                        given            at given
                                                                                                                                  intervals, and     intervals, and
                                                                                                                                      providing         providing
                                                                                                                                   reliable data      reliable data
Number of productive                       6   Number     0          A multicriteria            25                   50                   50                50           Annual      SP-GIRE, DGRE
                                                                     analysis for the
boreholes in the hard rock                                           identification of
aquifer drilled under the                                            50 favorable
Program                                                              zones for
                                                                     productive
                                                                     boreholes in the
                                                                     hard rock basin
                                                                     completed
A model for the management                 6   Yes/No     No         - 1 geophysical     - 2 geophysical      - 10 deep           - Reports on       -A calibrated       Annual      MEA and ONEA,
                                                                     seismic and         seismic and          recognition wells   aquifer            hydrogeological                 Annual
of aquifers of the western                                           electric campaign   electric campaigns   with eight (8)      geometry,          model completed
sedimentary basin is available                                                                                                                                                       verification of
                                                                     completed           completed            piezometers         lithology and      - Hydrogeological
                                                                                                                                                                                     results report,
[2]                                                                                      - 6 deep             drilled             aquifer            maps of the
                                                                                         recognition wells    - A report on       characteristics,   aquifer are                     IVA
                                                                                         with six (6)         water               and a              updated
                                                                                         piezometers          withdrawals         calibrated
                                                                                         drilled              completed           geological
                                                                                                                                  model
                                                                                                                                  completed
A database for groundwater                     Yes/No     No                                                  A consolidated                         The database is     Annual      SP-GIRE, DGRE,
resources established and                                                                                     and organized                          updated with                    and IVA
updated [2]                                                                                                   database of                            the data
                                                                                                              existing data on                       obtained from
                                                                                                              groundwater                            optimized
                                                                                                              available                              monitoring
                                                                                                                                                     stations
IWRM data and information                      Yes/No     No         SNIEau web          SNIEau web           SNIEau web          SNIEau web         SNIEau web          Annual      SP-GIRE, DGRE
available to the public through                                      portal designed     portal tested        portal              portal             portal
the SNIEau                                                                                                    accessible to       accessible to      accessible to
                                                                                                              the public, with    the public,        the public, with
                                                                                                              uploaded data       with               uploaded data
                                                                                                              on water            uploaded           on water
                                                                                                              supply and          data on            supply and



                                                                                         69
Intermediate Results Indicator                    Unit   Baseline                       Targets [1]                                       Frequency     Data Source/
                                  Core   DLI                                                                                                             Collection
                                                                    YR 1        YR 2         YR 3             YR 4            YR 5
                                                                                       sanitation from   water supply   sanitation from
                                                                                       the DISE          and            the DISE, and
                                                                                                         sanitation     optimized
                                                                                                         from the       hydrometric
                                                                                                         DISE and       and
                                                                                                         optimized      piezometric
                                                                                                         hydrometric    stations
                                                                                                         stations
Number of beneficiaries of                 7   Number    0          137         245         280              280             280          Semi-       Participating
technical and training programs                                                                                                           annual      academic and
financed by the Program                                                                                                                               training
                                                                                                                                                      institutions, MEA
                                                                                                                                                      and ONEA,
                                                                                                                                                      Annual
                                                                                                                                                      verification of
                                                                                                                                                      results report,
                                                                                                                                                      IVA
Number of female beneficiaries             7   Number    0          10          20           30               30              30          Semi-       Participating
of technical and training                                                                                                                 annual      academic and
programs financed by the                                                                                                                              training
                                                                                                                                                      institutions, MEA
Program
                                                                                                                                                      and ONEA,
                                                                                                                                                      Annual
                                                                                                                                                      verification of
                                                                                                                                                      results report,
                                                                                                                                                      IVA
Number of beneficiaries of                 7   Number    0          20          27           34               34              34          Semi-       Participating
specialization programs                                                                                                                   annual      academic and
financed by the Program                                                                                                                               training
                                                                                                                                                      institutions, MEA
                                                                                                                                                      and ONEA,
                                                                                                                                                      Annual
                                                                                                                                                      verification of
                                                                                                                                                      results report,
                                                                                                                                                      IVA
Number of beneficiaries of                 7   Number    0           1           3            3               3                3          Semi-       Participating
doctoral programs financed by                                                                                                             annual      academic and
the Program                                                                                                                                           training
                                                                                                                                                      institutions, MEA
                                                                                                                                                      and ONEA,
                                                                                                                                                      Annual
                                                                                                                                                      verification of
                                                                                                                                                      results report,
                                                                                                                                                      IVA




                                                                           70
Intermediate Results Indicator                       Unit       Baseline                                        Targets [1]                   Frequency     Data Source/
                                  Core   DLI                                                                                                                 Collection
                                                                                 YR 1             YR 2              YR 3      YR 4    YR 5
Number of beneficiaries of                 7     Number         0                453              859              1,109      1,334   1,334   Semi-       Participating
short-term training financed by                                                                                                               annual      academic and
the Program                                                                                                                                               training
                                                                                                                                                          institutions, MEA
                                                                                                                                                          and ONEA,
                                                                                                                                                          Annual
                                                                                                                                                          verification of
                                                                                                                                                          results report,
                                                                                                                                                          IVA
Number of beneficiaries of                 7     Number         0                 0                 0                82       147     168     Semi-       Participating
technical and training programs                                                                                                               annual      academic and
financed by the Program                                                                                                                                   training
                                                                                                                                                          institutions, MEA
integrated into the Public
                                                                                                                                                          and ONEA,
administration                                                                                                                                            Annual
                                                                                                                                                          verification of
                                                                                                                                                          results report,
                                                                                                                                                          IVA
     Note: [1] Cumulative results presented in the table, except otherwise noted in the indicator; [2] Not cumulative




                                                                                            71
                                                                     Table A2.3. Indicators’ definitions

PDO Level Indicators
Indicator                                Definition
People provided with access to an        This indicator measures the cumulative number of people who benefited from improved water supply services that have been newly
improved water source under the          constructed through the Program in selected urban and rural areas included in the Program. This includes additional people provided
Program                                  with access to improved water sources financed by the Program. Improved water sources financed under the Program include piped
                                         household connections and community water points (public standposts and boreholes equipped with manual operated pumps). The
                                         definition of ‘improved water sources’ follows that of the Joint Monitoring Program of UNICEF and the World Health Organization.
                                         The number of people served will be calculated by adding the results of multiplying (a) the actual number of household connections newly
                                         installed under the Program by the estimated number of people per household connection and (b) the actual number of new standposts
                                         and new boreholes equipped with manual operated pumps by the estimated number of people served per standpost or borehole. The
                                         norms of people served per type of water source is included in Annex 1 of the PAD. If people are provided with access to ‘improved water
                                         sources’ through both a household connection and a community water point, they should be counted only once. The total number of
                                         people benefiting from the Program should be disaggregated by gender and by rural/urban areas. Service in urban areas will be provided
                                         by household connections and standposts. Service in rural areas will be provided by household connections, standposts, and boreholes.
                                         The indicator does not include the number of people benefiting from improved water supply sources rehabilitated under the Program.
                                         The total number of people benefiting from the Program should be disaggregated by gender and by rural/urban areas.
People provided with access to           This indicator measures the cumulative number of people who benefited from improved sanitation facilities that have been constructed
improved sanitation services under the   or rehabilitated through the Program in selected urban (newly constructed and rehabilitated) and rural areas (only newly constructed)
Program                                  included in the Program. Improved sanitation facilities include VIP and TCM latrines. It does not include flush or pour-flush to elsewhere
                                         (that is, not to a piped sewer system, septic tank, or pit latrine); pit latrine without slab/open pit; bucket; hanging toilet or hanging latrine;
                                         shared facilities of any type; or no facilities, bush, or field. The definition of ‘improved sanitation facilities’ follows that of the UNICEF-
                                         World Health Organization Joint Monitoring Program.
                                         The number of people provided with access will be estimated by multiplying the actual number of improved sanitation facilities with the
                                         estimated number of people per household using the improved sanitation facility built/rehabilitated under the Program. It is assumed
                                         that 10 people benefit from an improved latrine both in urban and rural areas. Beneficiaries from school, health centers, and market
                                         sanitation cabins should not be included in this indicator. The total number of people benefiting from the Program should be
                                         disaggregated by gender and by rural/urban areas.
Intermediate Results Indicators

Indicator                                Definition
Water production capacity constructed    The capacity of the newly constructed water production by means of treated surface water facilities and groundwater boreholes that
under the Program                        produce potable water that meets Burkina Faso’s quality standards, measured in cubic meters (m3) per day. The baseline is zero. As no
                                         production increases due to the Program are expected in Ouagadougou, this indicator primarily refers to the newly built production
                                         capacity in secondary urban centers and in the 90 rural water supply systems (90 boreholes).
Adoption of water supply tariff          At present the tariff study for the rural water supply has been concluded and the recommendations are yet to be approved by the Council
structures                               of Ministries. A result in year 1 will be the adoption of the new rural water supply tariff structure by the Council of Ministers.
                                         For urban water supply, a result in year 1 will be the adjustment of the current urban water tariff. By year 2, a new tariff study for urban
                                         water supply will be completed and a new water tariff structure recommended. A national validation of the recommended new urban



                                                                                         72
                                           water tariff structure should take place by year 3, and the validated new urban water tariff structure should be approved by the Council
                                           of Ministers by year 4.
Percentage of complaints resolved          This indicator refers only to complaints received by ONEA. The timeframes vary according to the severity of the issues reported by means
within the established timeframes          of the complaints. The POM will specify the timeframes for handling complains according to their severity.
Number of rural water systems built       Third parties might be a duly established association of neighbors, or a private entity licensed to provide water supply services for a period
under the Program delegated for           of time.
management to a third party
Number of latrines built or rehabilitated This indicator captures both new latrines and rehabilitated latrines under the Program in targeted urban areas. A maximum of 42,500
under the Program in targeted urban       latrines will be rehabilitated under the Porgram in targeted urban areas. Only two types of latrines will be built/rehabilitated in urban
areas                                     areas: VIP or TCM. To secure high demand for sanitation and appropriate O&M of the facilities, targeted areas will be subject to
                                          information, education and behavioral change campaigns prior to the commencement of any works. Pit excavation and the provision and
                                          installation of the slab households will be done at no cost for the beneficiaries, provided they make a commitment to build the
                                          superstructure and maintain the facility with their own resources.
Number of new latrines built under the Only new latrines will be built in selected rural municipalities of the four targeted regions. Improved latrines should be of type VIP. To
Program in targeted rural areas           secure high demand for sanitation and appropriate O&M of the facilities, targeted areas will be subject to information, education and
                                          behavioral change campaigns prior to the commencement of any works. Pit excavation and the provision and installation of the slab
                                          households will be done at no cost for the beneficiaries, provided they make a commitment to build the superstructure and maintain the
                                          facility with their own resources. The Program will support the development of local masons and local fabrication of slabs and other
                                          materials needed for the construction of a latrine.
Number of new sanitation cabins in        A sanitation cabin is defined as an improved latrine with a door dedicated for individual use at a time. All sanitation cabins built under the
schools, health centers, and public       Program in urban and rural areas must comply with the technical specifications by the national government, including permanent
places built under the Program            handwashing facilities and cabins for male, females, and handicapped. A cabin for females with menstruation should be part of the block
equipped with handwashing facilities      of latrines.
Percentage of sanitation cabins in        This indicator measures the percentage of sanitation cabins that were built in previous years (under the Program) that are operational
schools, health centers, and public       and properly maintained. The POM will provide further details on the minimal standards required for a new sanitation cabin to be
places equipped with handwashing          considered “operational and properly maintained”.
facilities built under the Program that
are operational and properly
maintained
Percentage of hydrometric and             This indicator provides information on the progress made on the optimization and functionality of the hydrometric and piezometric
piezometric stations operational          networks under the responsibility of the MEA.
Number of productive boreholes in the      It is expected that as a result of the geotechnical studies, 50 new productive boreholes will be identified and placed in service
hard rock aquifer identified under the
Program
A model for the management of              The model for the management of aquifers of the western sedimentary basin aims at achieving an in-depth, reliable knowledge of the
aquifers of the western sedimentary        groundwater resources in Burkina Faso in the western sedimentary aquifers, which at present are barely known in terms of quantity,
basin is available                         quality, and patterns of recharge. This indicator provides information on the different stages of the study of the western sedimentary
                                           basin, which will conclude with a model for the management of the aquifers under the western sedimentary basin.




                                                                                          73
A database for groundwater resources     This indicator provides information on the progress made to have a reliable database with a baseline on the groundwater resources in
established and updated                  Burkina Faso.
IWRM data and information available to This indicator provides information on the progress undertaken to operationalize the SNIEau and make water-related information
the public through the SNIEau          available to the general public and decision makers.
Number of beneficiaries of technical    The human capital strengthening activities financed by the Program include four types of Programs: (a) technical and training programs;
and training programs financed by the   (b) specialization programs; (c) doctoral programs; and (d) short-term training. Technical and training programs last between two to three
Program                                 years. Potential candidates should be currently external to MEA/ONEA and will be selected on a competitive basis. After the completion
                                        of technical and training Program, a number of beneficiaries will be absorbed by the MEA, ONEA or municipal training programs to work
                                        in non-temporary positions under a labor contract of at least five (5) years duration.
Number of female beneficiaries of       This indicator captures the number of female beneficiaries of technical and training programs financed by the Program. Technical and
technical and training programs         training programs last between 2 to 3 years. Potential candidates should be currently external to MEA/ONEA and will be selected on a
financed by the Program                 competitive basis. After the completion of technical and training Program a number of beneficiaries will be absorbed by the MEA, ONEA
                                        or municipal training programs to work in non-temporary positions under a labor contract of at least five (5) years duration.
Number of beneficiaries of              Specialization programs funded through the Program are to last between nine months and two years, after which a professional master’s
specialization programs financed by the degree will be granted. Potential candidates of specialization programs should be currently employed by MEA and/or ONEA to acquire
Program                                 certain skills and knowledge that will help them to better fulfill their current job.
Number of beneficiaries of doctoral      Doctoral programs should last a maximum of four years.
programs financed by the Program
Number of beneficiaries of short-term     Short term trainings should last a maximum of one month and should benefit of MEA, ONEA, and municipal technical services.
training financed by the Program
Number of beneficiaries of technical     This indicator provides information on the number of beneficiaries of technical and training programs financed by the Program who upon
and training programs financed by the    successful completion of their studies are hired by the MEA, ONEA, and/or municipal technical services to work in non-temporary
Program integrated into the Public       positions under a labor contract of at least five (5) years duration.
administration




                                                                                       74
                                Annex 3. Disbursement Linked Indicators, Disbursement Arrangements and Verification Protocols

                                                                     Table A3.1. Disbursement Linked Indicator Matrix
                                       Total DLI
                                      Allocation        As % of Total Financing         DLI                                  Indicative Timeline for DLI Achievement [3]
            DLI [1]
                                    (US$, millions)            Amount                 Baseline
                                          [2]                                                            YR 1                 YR 2                 YR 3               YR 4        YR 5
RA 1. Improved access to water supply
DLI 1. People provided with access to an improved water source under the                               284,920             417,040              300,740            139,200      16,695
                                                                                         0
Program
Allocated amount [4]                      90                      30%                                   22.1               3OBJEC                23.4               10.8         1.3
DLI 1.1. People provided with access to an improved water source in targeted             0             123,500             166,000              181,000            139,200      16,695
urban areas
Allocated amount [4]                      49                                                            9.6                  12.9                 14.1               10.8         1.3
DLI 1.2. People provided with access to an improved water source in targeted             0             161,420              251,040              119,740               0            0
rural areas
Allocated amount [4]                      41                                                            12.5                19.5                  9.3                 0.0         0
DLI 2. Water production capacity constructed under the Program                           0              1,680               1,864                14,000                 0          0
Allocated amount [4]                       25                       8%                                   2.4                 2.7                  19.9                  0          0
DLI 3. Adoption of water supply tariff structures                                    Not          - Adoption of        Completion of        Validation of the    Adoption of
                                                                                     applicable   rural water supply   urban water tariff   proposed new         new urban
                                                                                                  tariff structure     study, including     urban water tariff   water tariff
                                                                                                  - Adjustment of      new water tariff     structure,           structure
                                                                                                  urban water tariff   structure            including public
                                                                                                                                            hearings
Allocated amount [4]                       15                       5%                                    5                    3                     3                  4          0
RA 2. Improved access to sanitation
DLI 4. People provided with access to improved sanitation facilities under the
                                                                                        0              150,000              350,000             350,000            350,000      150,000
Program
Allocated amount [4]                      70                        23%                                  7.8                 18.1                18.1               18.1          7.8
DLI 4.1. People provided with access to improved sanitation facilities in targeted                     150,000              200,000             200,000            200,000      100,000
                                                                                        0
urban areas
Allocated amount [4]                      44                                                              7.8                 10.4               10.4                10.4         5.2
DLI 4.2. People provided with access to improved sanitation facilities in targeted                        0                 150,000             150,000            150,000      50,000
                                                                                        0
rural areas
Allocated amount [4]                      26                                                              0.0                 7.8                 7.8                 7.8         2.6
DLI 5. Number of new sanitation cabins in schools, health centers, and public           0
                                                                                                         150                 2,000                4,100              3,500        1,500
places built under the Program equipped with handwashing facilities
Allocated amount [4]                      25                         8%                                   0.3                 4.9                  8.4                 7.4         4.0




                                                                                                  75
                                       Total DLI
                                      Allocation           As % of Total Financing      DLI                                   Indicative Timeline for DLI Achievement [3]
            DLI [1]
                                    (US$, millions)               Amount              Baseline
                                           [2]                                                             YR 1                YR 2                 YR 3               YR 4               YR 5
DLI 5.1 Number of new sanitation cabins in schools, health centers, and public           0                  150                300                  300                 300                0
places built under the Program equipped with handwashing facilities in targeted
urban areas
Allocated amount [4]                       1.8                                                              0.3                0.5                  0.5                 0.5                0.0
DLI 5.2 Number of new sanitation cabins in schools, health centers, and public           0                   0                1,700                3,800               3,200             1,500
places built under the Program equipped with handwashing facilities in targeted
rural areas
Allocated amount [4]                      17.2                                                              0.0                2.9                  6.4                 5.4                2.5
DLI 5.3 Percentage of sanitation cabins in schools, health centers, and public           0             Not applicable         >=70%                >=70%              >=80%              >=80%
places equipped with handwashing facilities built under the Program that are
operational and properly maintained
Allocated amount [4]                        6                                                                0                 1.5                  1.5                 1.5                1.5

RA 3. Improved access to reliable information on water resources
DLI 6. A decision -support model for the management of the aquifers is available     Not          - 1 geophysical       - 2 geophysical      - 10 deep            - Reports on       -A calibrated
                                                                                     applicable   seismic and           seismic and          recognition wells    aquifer            hydrogeological
                                                                                                  electric campaign     electric             with eight (8)       geometry,          model
                                                                                                  completed             campaigns            piezometers          lithology and      completed -
                                                                                                  - A multicriteria     completed            drilled              aquifer            Hydrogeological
                                                                                                  analysis for the      - 6 deep             - A report on        characteristics,   maps of the
                                                                                                  identification of     recognition wells    water withdraws      and a              aquifer are
                                                                                                  50 favorable          with six (6)         completed            calibrated         updated
                                                                                                  zones for             piezometers          - 25 productive      geological
                                                                                                  productive            drilled              wells in the hard-   model
                                                                                                  boreholes in the      - 25 productive      rock aquifer         completed
                                                                                                  hard rock basin       wells in the hard-   drilled
                                                                                                  completed             rock aquifer
                                                                                                                        drilled
Allocated amount [4]                      35                       12%               Not
                                                                                                           2.50                8.8                  11.3                6.3                6.3
                                                                                     applicable
DLI 6.1. A model for the management of aquifers of the western sedimentary           Not          - 1 geophysical       - 2 geophysical      - 10 deep            Reports on         -A calibrated
basin is available                                                                   applicable   seismic and           seismic and          recognition wells    aquifer            hydrogeological
                                                                                                  electric campaign     electric             with eight (8)       geometry,          model
                                                                                                  completed             campaigns            piezometers          lithology and      completed -
                                                                                                                        completed            drilled              aquifer            Hydrogeological
                                                                                                                        - 6 deep             - A report on        characteristics,   maps of the
                                                                                                                        recognition wells    water withdraws      and a              aquifer are
                                                                                                                        with six (6)         completed            calibrated         updated
                                                                                                                        piezometers                               geological
                                                                                                                        drilled                                   model
                                                                                                                                                                  completed
Allocated amount [4]                      25                                                               2.50                3.8                  6.3                  6.3               6.3



                                                                                                  76
                                     Total DLI
                                    Allocation          As % of Total Financing         DLI                                 Indicative Timeline for DLI Achievement [3]
            DLI [1]
                                  (US$, millions)               Amount                Baseline
                                         [2]                                                             YR 1                YR 2                 YR 3               YR 4   YR 5
DLI 6.2. Number of productive boreholes in the hard rock aquifer drilled under the   Not          A multicriteria     25 productive        25 productive
Program                                                                              applicable   analysis for the    wells in the hard-   wells in the hard-
                                                                                                  identification of   rock aquifer         rock aquifer
                                                                                                  50 favorable        drilled              drilled
                                                                                                  zones for
                                                                                                  productive
                                                                                                  boreholes in the
                                                                                                  hard rock basin
                                                                                                  completed
Allocated amount [4]                      10                                                                                  5                    5

Cross-cutting
DLI 7. Improved human capital for water, sanitation, and IWRM                            0               611                 523                  292                225     0
Allocated amount [4]                     39.4                     13%                                    11.0                8.7                  10.9                6.9   1.9
DLI 7.1. Number of beneficiaries of technical and training programs financed by          0               137                 108                   35                 0      0
the Program
Allocated amount [4]                     11.6                                                            5.7                 4.5                  1.5                 0      0
DLI 7.2. Number of beneficiaries of specialization programs financed by the              0                20                  7                    7                  0      0
Program
Allocated amount [4]                      3.9                                                            2.3                 0.8                  0.8                 0.0   0.0
DLI 7.3. Number of beneficiaries of doctoral programs financed by the Program            0                1                   2                    0                  0      0
Allocated amount [4]                     2.0                                                             0.7                 1.3                  0.0                 0.0   0.0
DLI 7.4. Number of beneficiaries of short-term training financed by the Program          0               453                 406                  250                225     0
Allocated amount [4]                     6.9                                                             2.3                 2.1                  1.3                 1.2   0.0
DLI 7.5. Number of beneficiaries of technical and training programs financed by          0                0                   0                    82                 65    21
the Program integrated into the Public administration
Allocated amount [4]                     15.0                                                            0.0                 0.0                  7.3                 5.8   1.9
Front-end fee [4]                       0.625                     0.25
Total Financing Allocated                300                      100
Note: [1] Definitions for the indicators provided in Annex 2; [2] Allocated amount in US$ million per year per DLI is rounded; [3] Targets are for each year and
not cumulative; [4] Allocated amount is estimated based on expected results; [5] Front-end fee only applies to the credit of US$250 million.




                                                                                                  77
                                                                                   Table A3.2. DLI Verification Protocol Table

                                    Definition [1] /Description of           Scalability of                            Protocol to Evaluate Achievement of the DLI and Data/Result Verification
         DLI                                                                Disbursements       Data    Verification
                                            Achievement                        (Yes/No)                                                                            Procedure [2]
                                                                                               Source     Entity
DLI 1. People provided   Access to improved water sources will be           Yes               DREAs     IVA            x   All targeted areas included in the Program will be considered for DLI 1.
with access to an        provided by means of new water household                             DGEP                     x   ONEA departments and the DREAs would be responsible for timely data collection in their
improved water           connections, standposts, or boreholes                                ONEA                         respective area. Once the DISE becomes fully functional in the targeted areas, the data will be
source under the         equipped with hand pumps, constructed under                                                       fed into the DISE system and later made available through the SNIEau website.
Program                  the Program. Improved water source means                                                      x   ONEA departments and the DREAs shall prepare reports on the number of new household
                         that water provided by these facilities meets                                                     connections, standposts and boreholes providing improved water services in any given year,
DLI 1.1. People          GoBF’s water quality standards. The number of                                                     and the number of people served in accordance to the standards per type of facility. The
provided with access     people served will be calculated using ONEA’s                                                     DREAs will submit the reports to the DGEP, and ONEA departments to ONEA PSU for their
to an improved water     and rural standards of people-served/facility.                                                    internal validation.
source in targeted       Further details will be provided in the POM.                                                  x   The DGEP and ONEA PSU should submit validated and consolidated reports to the PCU.
urban areas                                                                                                            x   The PCU will be responsible for quality control and consolidating the data obtained from the
                         Payments will be made in proportion to the                                                        DGEP (for rural water) and ONEA PSU (urban water) and submit a report to the IVA.
DLI 1.2. People          achievements by MEA and ONEA under DLI 1.1.                                                   x   The IVA shall verify the data reported by the PCU. The verification methodology and minimum
provided with access     and DLI 1.2.                                                                                      reporting standards are provided in the POM.
to an improved water                                                                                                   x   Every year, the IVA will carry out physical inspection of:
source in targeted       Undisbursed amounts in any given year can be                                                       o      Representative random samples of the new household connections and new standposts
rural areas              rolled over to the next year.                                                                             installed in the given year for every urban area included in the Program; and
                                                                                                                            o      Representative random samples of new household connections, standposts and
                                                                                                                                   boreholes built in the given year in rural areas for every municipality included in the
                                                                                                                                   Program.
DLI 2. Water             Increased water production financed under the Yes                    ONEA      IVA            x   ONEA department and the DREAs shall prepare reports on the completion of the works and
production capacity      Program by means of the construction of new                          DGEP                         satisfactory testing of the operation of the new urban and rural production facilities,
constructed under the    urban and rural water production facilities.                         DREAs                        respectively. The DREAs will submit the reports to the DGEP, and ONEA departments to ONEA
Program                  Further details will be provided in the POM.                                                      PSU for their internal validation.
                                                                                                                       x   The DGEP and ONEA PSU should submit validated and consolidated reports to the PCU on the
                         Payments will be made in proportion to the                                                        compliance of the new facilities with the water quality and volumetric compliance.
                         production capacity measured in m3/day                                                        x   The PCU will be responsible for consolidating the data obtained from the DGEP (for rural
                         added per year.                                                                                   water) and ONEA PSU (urban water) and submit a report to the IVA.
                                                                                                                       x   The IVA will verify the achievement of this DLI by physically examining the completion of the
                         Undisbursed amounts in any given year can be                                                      works and satisfactory operation of:
                         rolled over to the next year.                                                                      o      ONEA’s new production facilities at Gon-Boussougou, Mogtédo, Béguédo, Tiébélé,
                                                                                                                                   Toecé (for the Yako-Gourcy-Bousse system), and Kaya (for the Kaya-Korsimoro-
                                                                                                                                   Boussouma system). The inspection shall include, among others: the satisfactory
                                                                                                                                   operation of pumps, treatment facilities and related equipment and control devices at
                                                                                                                                   their design capacity.
                                                                                                                            o      For the 90 boreholes drill for the new rural water supply systems, the IVA shall verify the
                                                                                                                                   satisfactory operation of pumps and the static levels of water in the boreholes.
DLI 3. Adoption of       This DLI indicates whether new tariffs for rural   No                MEA       IVA            x   A new tariff structure for rural water will be considered adopted if the Council of Ministers
water supply tariff      water services have been adopted.                                    ONEA                         approves it and it is officially published.
structures                                                                                                             x   The verification of the increase in the current urban water tariff for ONEA will be done based
                                                                                                                           on the official publication of the revised existing tariff.




                                                                                                           78
                                      Definition [1] /Description of
                                                                              Scalability of                            Protocol to Evaluate Achievement of the DLI and Data/Result Verification
          DLI                                                                Disbursements       Data    Verification
                                              Achievement                       (Yes/No)                                                                           Procedure [2]
                                                                                                Source     Entity
                           This DLI also measures whether a new tariff                                                  x   ONEA will prepare a new urban water tariff structure that, based upon the mid and long term
                           structure for urban water services has been                                                      projections provided by its financial model, complies with the requirements of covering: the
                           developed and adopted.                                                                           operational costs of the provision of urban water and sanitation services, which will have to
                                                                                                                            meet the efficiency parameters established; its debt service; the depreciation of infrastructures
                           Payments under this DLI will be made in lump-                                                    for the production and distribution of water, and for the collection and treatment of
                           sum amounts.                                                                                     wastewater; and a portion of the capital expenditures. The proposed new urban water tariff
                                                                                                                            structure will be validated by means of public hearings. The new urban water tariff structure
                           Undisbursed amounts in any given year can be                                                     for urban water services will have to be approved by the Council of Ministers and will be
                           rolled over to the next year.                                                                    considered adopted when it is officially published.
                                                                                                                        x   The PCU will confirm to the IVA that the above steps have been taking and will submit the
                                                                                                                            necessary documentation. The IVA will review the documentation to verify the achievement of
                                                                                                                            this DLI in each of the years
DLI 4. People provided     Access to improved household sanitation           Yes               DREAs     IVA            x   All targeted areas included in the Program will be considered for DLI 4.
with access to             facility in rural and urban areas will be                           DGA                      x   ONEA department and the DREAs will be responsible for timely data collection in their
improved sanitation        provided by means of VIP and TCM latrines.                          ONEA                         respective targeted area. Once the DISE becomes fully functional in the targeted areas, the
facilities under the       The sub-structure, including pit excavation and                                                  data will be fed into the DISE system.
Program                    the provision and installation of the slab for                                               x   ONEA department and the DREAs shall prepare reports on the information, education and
                           beneficiary households, will be done at no cost                                                  behavioral change campaigns prior to any construction of latrines, and the number of
DLI 4.1. People            for the beneficiaries. The superstructure will                                                   improved household facilities constructed/rehabilitated in a given year. The DREAs will submit
provided with access       be completed by the household with their own                                                     the performance report to the DGA, and ONEA departments to ONEA PSU, for their internal
to improved                resources. In order to qualify for payment, the                                                  review and validation.
sanitation facilities in   latrines should be completed, including the                                                  x   The DGA and ONEA PSU should submit the validated and consolidated reports to the PCU.
targeted urban areas       super-structure. In urban areas, a maximum of                                                x   The PCU will be responsible for consolidating the data coming from the DGA (for rural
                           50 percent of the latrines can be rehabilitated                                                  sanitation) and ONEA PSU (urban sanitation) and submit a report to the IVA.
DLI 4.2. People            latrines. No rehabilitation is allowed in rural                                              x   The IVA shall verify the data reported by the PCU. The verification methodology and minimum
provided with access       areas. Further details will be provided in the                                                   reporting standards are provided in the POM.
to improved                POM.                                                                                         x   Every year, the IVA will carry out physical inspection of
sanitation facilities in                                                                                                     o      A representative random sample of the improved household latrines built or
targeted rural areas       The number of people served will be                                                                      rehabilitated in the given year for every urban area included in the Program; and
                           calculated using BF’s standards of people-                                                        o      A representative random sample of the new improved household latrines built in the
                           served/facility.                                                                                         given year in rural areas for every region included in the Program.
                                                                                                                        x   DLIs 1 and 4 will be independently sampled but samples may overlap.
                           To secure high demand for sanitation and
                           appropriate O&M of the facilities, targeted
                           areas will be subject to information, education
                           and behavioral change campaigns prior to the
                           commencement of any works.

                           Payments will be made in proportion to the
                           achievements by MEA and ONEA for DLI 4.1
                           and DLI 4.2.

                           Undisbursed amounts in any given year can be
                           rolled over to the next year.




                                                                                                            79
                                     Definition [1] /Description of
                                                                              Scalability of                            Protocol to Evaluate Achievement of the DLI and Data/Result Verification
         DLI                                                                 Disbursements       Data    Verification
                                             Achievement                        (Yes/No)                                                                           Procedure [2]
                                                                                                Source     Entity
DLI 5. Number of new     New sanitation cabins will be constructed at        Yes               DREAs     IVA            x   All targeted areas included in the Program will be considered for DLI 5.
sanitation cabins in     schools, health centers and public places. The                        DGA                      x   ONEA and the DREAs will be responsible for timely data collection in their respective targeted
schools, health          new cabins could be added to existing blocks                          ONEA                         area. Once the DISE becomes fully functional in the targeted areas, the data will be fed into the
centers, and public      or might constitute a new block of sanitation                                                      DISE system.
places built under the   cabins.                                                                                        x   ONEA departments and the DREAs shall prepare reports on the number new sanitation cabins
Program equipped                                                                                                            in schools, health centers, and public places equipped with handwashing facilities built in the
with handwashing         A sanitation cabin is defined as an improved                                                       given year, and on the O&M of the sanitation cabins. The DREAs will submit the performance
facilities               latrine with a door dedicated for individual use                                                   report to the DGA and ONEA department the PSU for their review and internal validation.
                         at a time. All sanitation cabins built under the                                               x   The PCU will be responsible for consolidating the data coming from the DGA (for rural
DLI 5.1 Number of        Program in urban and rural areas must comply                                                       sanitation) and ONEA PSU (urban sanitation).
new sanitation cabins    with the technical specifications by the                                                       x   The IVA shall verify the data reported by the PCU. The verification methodology and minimum
in schools, health       national government, including permanent                                                           reporting standards are provided in the POM.
centers, and public      handwashing facilities and cabins for male,                                                    x   Every year, the IVA will carry out physical inspection of:
places built under the   females, and handicapped. A cabin for females                                                       o      A representative random sample of the new sanitation cabins in schools, health centers,
Program equipped         with menstruation should be part of the block                                                              and public places built under the Program in urban areas in the given year to ensure that
with handwashing         of latrines. The POM will further define the                                                               they were properly constructed and are operational; and, that the blocks of latrines
facilities in targeted   conditions for a sanitation cabin to qualify for                                                           where the new cabins were built are equipped with permanent handwashing facilities.
urban areas              payment.                                                                                            o      A representative random sample of the new sanitation cabins in schools, health centers,
                                                                                                                                    and public places built under the Program in rural areas in the given year to ensure that
DLI 5.2 Number of        Payments will be made in proportion to the                                                                 they were properly constructed and are operational; and, that the blocks of latrines
new sanitation cabins    achievements by the DGA and ONEA for DLI                                                                   where the new cabins were built are equipped with permanent handwashing facilities.
in schools, health       5.1 and DLI 5.2. Undisbursed amounts in any                                                         o      A representative random sample of the sanitation cabins in schools, health centers, and
centers, and public      given year can be rolled over to the next year.                                                            public places equipped with handwashing facilities in urban and rural areas that were
places built under the                                                                                                              built under the Program in previous years to ensure that they remain operational and
Program equipped         Under DLI 5.3. to qualify for payment, the new                                                             are properly maintained.
with handwashing         sanitation cabins built under the Program in
facilities in targeted   schools, health centers and public places
rural areas              should be operational and properly
                         maintained. To ensure an efficient
DLI 5.3 Percentage of    management and sustainability of the
sanitation cabins in     facilities, facility management committees will
schools, health          be established at schools and health center
centers, and public      where the new cabins will be build. As for the
places equipped with     new cabins in public places management will
handwashing facilities   be delegated to a third party under municipal
built under the          oversight. The private entities will be
Program that are         responsible for the O&M of the facilities and
operational and          could charge a user fee to the public. Further
properly maintained      details will be provided in the POM. Payments
                         associated with DLI 5.3 will be lump-sum.
DLI 6. A decision-       This DLI includes two results, as follows:          No                DGRE      IVA            For DLI 6.1 the results will be verified as follows:
support model for the                                                                          SP-GIRE                  Year 1
management of the        DLI 6.1 refers to the availability of a model for                     SISC                     x    The contractor in charge of the geophysical and electric campaign will deliver a report on the
aquifers is available    the management of aquifers of the western                                                           geophysical seismic profile of about 130 km with a description of the different geological




                                                                                                            80
                                   Definition [1] /Description of
                                                                            Scalability of                           Protocol to Evaluate Achievement of the DLI and Data/Result Verification
         DLI                                                               Disbursements      Data    Verification
                                           Achievement                        (Yes/No)                                                                           Procedure [2]
                                                                                             Source     Entity
                        sedimentary basin, which will be fully                                                            layers and their depths. The report will be reviewed technically by the SISC who will submit a
DLI 6.1. A model for    completed by year 5. Payments will be made                                                        progress report to the SP-GIRE.
the management of       yearly based upon the achievement of key                                                     x    The SP-GIRE, upon satisfactory reception of the report on the geophysical and electric
aquifers of the         milestones.                                                                                       campaign and the review of the progress report from the SISC, will submit a consolidated
western sedimentary                                                                                                       report to the PCU.
basin is available      The DLI 6.2 refers to the multicriteria analysis                                             x    The PCU verifies the information and submits the report to the IVA.
                        for the identification of at least 50 favorable                                              x    The IVA will perform a desk review of the information in accordance with the POM and the
DLI 6.2. Number of      zones for productive boreholes in the hard                                                        technical specification of the ToR for the completion of the geophysical and electric campaign.
productive boreholes    rock basin in year 1; the drilling of 25
in the hard rock        productive boreholes in year 2, and the drilling                                             Year 2
aquifer drilled under   of another 25 productive boreholes in year 3.                                                x    For the geophysical and electric campaign (of about 270 km), the verification will follow the
the Program                                                                                                               same verification protocol as established in Year 1.
                        Payments under this DLI will be made in lump-                                                x    For the drilling of the six (6) deep recognition wells equipped with six (6) piezometers, the
                        sum amounts.                                                                                      verification will be done as follows:
                                                                                                                          o     The contractor in charge of the drilling of the depth wells will deliver a report on the
                        Undisbursed amounts in any given year can be                                                            execution of the six wells and six piezometers that, in conjunction with the report of the
                        rolled over to the next year                                                                            contractor in charge of the supervision of works, will be the basis for the verification.
                                                                                                                                This information will be reviewed technically by the SISC who will submit a progress
                                                                                                                                report to the SP-GIRE.
                                                                                                                          o     The SP-GIRE, after verifying the reports from the contractor, the supervision firm, and
                                                                                                                                the progress report from the SISC, will submit a consolidated report to the PCU.
                                                                                                                          o     The PCU verifies the information and submits the report to the IVA.
                                                                                                                          o     The IVA will perform a desk review of the information in accordance with the POM and
                                                                                                                                will proceed to perform a physical inspection of six deep wells and six piezometers in
                                                                                                                                accordance to the technical specifications of the ToR for the drilling works.

                                                                                                                     Year 3
                                                                                                                     x    For the drilling of the ten (10) deep recognition wells equipped with eight (8) piezometers, the
                                                                                                                          verification will follow the same verification protocol as established in Year 2.
                                                                                                                     x    For the report on the water withdrawals, the verification will be done as follows:
                                                                                                                          o     The report on water withdrawals produced by a consulting firm will be revised
                                                                                                                                technically by the SISC, who will submit a progress report to the SP-GIRE.
                                                                                                                          o     The SP-GIRE, upon satisfactory reception of the report on water withdrawals and the
                                                                                                                                review of the progress report from the SISC, will submit a consolidated report to the
                                                                                                                                PCU.
                                                                                                                          o     The PCU verifies the information and submits the report to the IVA.
                                                                                                                          o     The IVA will perform a desk review of the information in accordance with the POM and
                                                                                                                                the technical specifications of the ToR for the completion of the geophysical and electric
                                                                                                                                campaign.

                                                                                                                     Year 4
                                                                                                                     x    The contractor(s) in charge of the reports on: (a) the aquifer geometry; (b) the lithology and
                                                                                                                          aquifer characteristics; and (c) the calibrated geological model, will submit report(s) to the SP-




                                                                                                         81
      Definition [1] /Description of
                                        Scalability of                           Protocol to Evaluate Achievement of the DLI and Data/Result Verification
DLI                                    Disbursements      Data    Verification
              Achievement                 (Yes/No)                                                                          Procedure [2]
                                                         Source     Entity
                                                                                      GIRE, which will be technically reviewed by the SICSs that in turn will submit a progress report
                                                                                      to the SP-GIRE.
                                                                                 x    The SP-GIRE, upon satisfactory reception of the reports from the contractor (s) and the review
                                                                                      of the progress report from the SISC, will submit the report to the PCU.
                                                                                 x    The PCU verifies the information and submits the report to the IVA.
                                                                                 x    The IVA will perform a desk review of all the information submitted in accordance with the
                                                                                      POM and the technical specifications of the ToR for the completion of the different reports

                                                                                 Year 5
                                                                                 x    The reports delivered by the contractors on: (a) the calibrated hydrogeological model and the
                                                                                      tests performed to ensure its functionality, and (b) the hydrological updated maps of the
                                                                                      aquifer are technically reviewed by the SICSs, who will submit a progress report to the SP-
                                                                                      GIRE on the modelling, including the results of the conceptual and numerical hydrogeological
                                                                                      model, as well as the results of the simulations.
                                                                                 x    The SP-GIRE, upon satisfactory reception of the reports from the contractor (s) and the review
                                                                                      of the progress report from the SISC, will submit the report to the PCU.
                                                                                 x    The PCU verifies the information and submits the report to the IVA.
                                                                                 x    The IVA will perform a desk review of all the information submitted, including performing
                                                                                      simulation tests to verify the operation and reliability of the model in accordance with the
                                                                                      ToR of the assignment.

                                                                                 For DLI 6.2 the results will be verified as follows:
                                                                                 Year 1
                                                                                 x    The contractor in charge of the multicriteria analysis for the identification of 50 favorable
                                                                                      zones for productive boreholes in the hard rock basin will submit report to the SP-GIRE, which
                                                                                      will be technically reviewed by the SICSs that in turn will submit a progress report to the SP-
                                                                                      GIRE.
                                                                                 x    The SP-GIRE, upon satisfactory reception of the reports from the contractor and the review of
                                                                                      the progress report from the SISC, will submit the report to the PCU.
                                                                                 x    The PCU verifies the information and submits the report to the IVA.
                                                                                 x    The IVA will perform a desk review of all the information submitted in accordance with the
                                                                                      POM and the technical specifications of the ToR for the completion of the assignment.

                                                                                 Year 2 and Year 3
                                                                                 x    The contractor in charge of the drilling of the shallow, productive wells in the hard-rock basin
                                                                                      will deliver a report on the execution of 25 wells that comply with the technical specifications
                                                                                      required in the ToR, which in conjunction with the report of the supervision firm, will be the
                                                                                      basis for the verification. This information will be reviewed technically by the SISC who will
                                                                                      submit a progress report to the SP-GIRE.
                                                                                 x    The SP-GIRE, after verifying the reports from the contractor, the supervision firm, and the
                                                                                      progress report from the SISC will submit a consolidated report to the PCU.
                                                                                 x    The PCU verifies the information and submits the report to the IVA.




                                                                     82
                                      Definition [1] /Description of
                                                                               Scalability of                            Protocol to Evaluate Achievement of the DLI and Data/Result Verification
         DLI                                                                  Disbursements       Data    Verification
                                              Achievement                        (Yes/No)                                                                              Procedure [2]
                                                                                                 Source     Entity
                                                                                                                         x    The IVA will perform a desk review of the information in accordance with the POM and will
                                                                                                                              proceed to perform a physical inspection of the 25 shallow wells in accordance to the
                                                                                                                              technical specifications of the ToR for the drilling works.
DLI 7. Improved           Human capital for water, sanitation and IWRM        Yes               MEA       IVA            For DLI 7.1, DLI 7.2, and DLI 7.3 the results will be verified as follows:
human capital for         will be improved by means of achieving DLI 7.1                        DGRE                     Year 1 to Year 5
water, sanitation, and    to DLI 7.5: (a) technical and training programs                       ONEA                     x    For (a) technical and training programs; (b) specialization programs; and (c) doctoral programs
IWRM                      with a duration of two to three years; (b)                            DREAs                         each academic or training institution shall submit to MEA’s DRH (for the fields of IWRM, rural
                          specialization programs a duration of nine                                                          water supply, and rural sanitation), or to ONEA’s DRH (for urban water and urban sanitation),
DLI 7.1. Number of        months to two years; (c) doctoral degrees that                                                      the following: (a) lists of beneficiaries duly registered in the respective fields for each of their
beneficiaries of          will have a duration of four years; (d) short-                                                      registered beneficiaries; and (b) annual reports on the progress made or successful
technical and training    term training with a maximum duration of one                                                        completion of the programs, as the case may be, for each of their registered beneficiaries.
programs financed by      month; and (e) a number of beneficiaries of                                                         Summary of results should be disaggregated by gender.
the Program               technical and training programs financed by                                                    x    Once verified, the MEA’s DRH shall submit a report to the PCU on the beneficiaries of (a)
                          the Program integrated into the Public                                                              technical and training programs; (b) specialization programs; and (c) doctoral programs.
DLI 7.2. Number of        administration.                                                                                     Similarly, ONEA’s DRH shall submit a report to ONEA PSU on the verified beneficiaries of (a)
beneficiaries of                                                                                                              technical and training programs; (b) specialization programs; and (c) doctoral programs, which
specialization            Payments will be made in proportion to the                                                          will then be submitted to the PCU.
programs financed by      achievements made under DLI 7.1, DLI 7.2, DLI                                                  x    The PCU will produce a consolidated report of the results attained in relation to DLI 7.1, DLI
the Program               7.3, DLI 7.4, and DLI 7.5. Under DLI 7.5 In order                                                   7.2 and DLI 7.3 to submit to the IVA for the verification of results. Summary of results should
                          to qualify for payment the staff absorbed by                                                        be disaggregated by gender.
DLI 7.3. Number of        the Public Administration should be hired                                                      x    Based on the consolidated report submitted by PCU, the IVA will: (a) perform a desk review of
beneficiaries of          under a labor contract of at least five years                                                       the information, (b) verify the information with the concerning universities, research centers,
doctoral programs         duration.                                                                                           and training centers, and (c) interview a random sample of beneficiaries to corroborate the
financed by the                                                                                                               information in the reports.
Program                   Undisbursed amounts in any given year can be
                          rolled over to the next year.                                                                  For DLI 7.4 the results will be verified as follows:
DLI 7.4. Number of                                                                                                       Year 1 to Year 5
beneficiaries of short-                                                                                                  x    For short term training, each training institution will submit to MEA’s DRH (for the fields of
term training financed                                                                                                        IWRM, rural water, and rural sanitation) or to ONEA’s DRH (for urban water and urban
by the Program                                                                                                                sanitation), signed lists of beneficiaries that have successfully completed the training.
                                                                                                                              Summary of results should be disaggregated by gender.
DLI 7.5. Number of                                                                                                       x    Once verified, the MEA’s DRH shall submit a report to the PCU on the beneficiaries of the
beneficiaries of                                                                                                              short-term training programs. Similarly, ONEA’s DRH shall submit a report to ONEA PSU on
technical and training                                                                                                        the verified beneficiaries who have successfully completed the short training, which will
programs financed by                                                                                                          submit it to the PCU.
the Program                                                                                                              x    The PCU will produce a consolidated report of the results attained in relation to DLI 7.4 to
integrated into the                                                                                                           submit to the IVA for the verification of results. Summary of results should be disaggregated
Public administration                                                                                                         by gender.
                                                                                                                         x    Based on the consolidated report submitted by PCU, the IVA will: (a) perform a desk review of
                                                                                                                              the information; (b) verify the information with the concerned universities, research centers,
                                                                                                                              and training centers; and (c) interview a random sample of beneficiaries to corroborate the
                                                                                                                              information in the reports.

                                                                                                                         For DLI 7.5 the results will be verified as follows:




                                                                                                             83
                        Definition [1] /Description of
                                                           Scalability of                           Protocol to Evaluate Achievement of the DLI and Data/Result Verification
DLI                                                       Disbursements      Data    Verification
                                Achievement                  (Yes/No)                                                                         Procedure [2]
                                                                            Source     Entity
                                                                                                    Year 3 to Year 5
                                                                                                    x    MEA’s DRH and ONEA’s DRH will prepare a report for each beneficiary of technical and
                                                                                                         training programs that was hired after successful completion of the studies. Hiring should be
                                                                                                         made for a non-temporary position, and the staff should be under a labor contract of a
                                                                                                         minimum five-year duration. The report should include detailed information on the education
                                                                                                         of the staff, backgrounds and the position and responsibilities for which they were hired,
                                                                                                         copies of the signed contracts, and MEA’s DRH and ONEA’s DRH will submit them to the PCU.
                                                                                                    x    The PCU will be responsible for consolidating all the reports from ONEA and MEA and
                                                                                                         submitting the consolidated report to the IVA. Summary of results should be disaggregated by
                                                                                                         gender.
                                                                                                    x    The IVA shall verify the information on the reports and will interview the staff hired to
                                                                                                         corroborate the information in the reports.
Note: [1] Definitions for the indicators provided in Annex 2; [2] Sampling methodology to be defined in the POM




                                                                                        84
                                                                    Table A3.3. World Bank Disbursement Table
           DLI             World Bank      Of which Financing   Deadline for DLI       Minimum DLI Value to be      Target DLI Value(s) for   Determination of Financing Amount to Be Disbursed
                            Financing         Available for      Achievement              achieved to trigger            World Bank               Against Achieved and Verified DLI Value(s)
                           allocated to      (US$, millions)                         disbursements of World Bank       Disbursements
                              the DLI                                                          Financing                  Purposes
                                            Prior    Advance
                               (US$
                                           Results      s
                           millions) [1]
DLI 1. People provided         90             0         20      Results will be     This is a linearly scalable     1,158,595 people       Payments will be made in proportion to the
with access to an                                               reported and        DLI. Minimum DLI value in a     provided with          achievements.
improved water source                                           verified annually   year is 10,000 people           access to an           For DLR 1.1. Year 1 to Year 5 = US$77.7 per person
under the Program                                                                   provided with access to an      improved water         served by an improved water source built under the
                                                                                    improved water source           source under the       Program in targeted urban areas
DLI 1.1. People provided       49                                                                                   Program                For DLR 1.2. Year 1 to Year 5 = US$ US$77.7 per person
with access to an                                                                                                                          served by an improved wat10er source built under the
improved water source in                                                                                                                   Program in targeted rural areas
targeted urban areas                                            Formula for disbursement = # people provided with access to an improved water source in targeted urban areas × US$77.7 + #
                                                                people provided with access to an improved water source in targeted rural areas × US$77.7
DLI 1.2. People provided       41
with access to an                                               Hypothetical Example: In year 2, 25,000 people are verified to have achieved DLI 1.1 and 25,000 people are verified to have achieved
improved water source in                                        DLI 1.2, so disbursement will be:
targeted rural areas
                                                                25,000 people provided with access to an improved water source in targeted urban areas × US$77.7 +
                                                                25,000 people provided with access to an improved water source in targeted rural areas × US$77.7 = US$3.9 m
DLI 2. Water production        25             0         5       Results will be                  >0                17,544 m3/ day        Payments will be made in proportion to the
capacity constructed                                            reported and                                                             achievements.
under the Program                                               verified annually.                                                       Year 1 to Year 5 = US$ 1,425 per m3 per day of added
                                                                                                                                         water production capacity built under the Program
                                                                Formula for disbursement = m3 per day of added water production capacity × US$1,425
                                                                Hypothetical Example: in year 2, 1,500 m3 per day of added water production capacity are verified to have achieved DLI 2, so
                                                                disbursement will be:
                                                                1,500 m3 per day of added water production capacity × US$1,425 = US$2.1 m
DLI 3. Adoption of water       15             5         5       Results will be                 N/A                        N/A           Year 1. US$3 million for the adoption of rural water
supply tariff structures                                        reported and                                                             supply tariff structure; AND US$2 million for the
                                                                verified once the                                                        adjustment of urban water tariff
                                                                official                                                                 Year 2. US$3 million for the Preparation of urban water
                                                                publication of                                                           tariff study and corresponding new tariff structure
                                                                the new rural                                                            Year 3. US$ 3 million for the validation of the urban
                                                                water tariff                                                             water tariff study and corresponding new tariff structure
                                                                structure is                                                             Year 4. US$ 4 million for the adoption of new urban
                                                                done.                                                                    water tariff structure
                                                                For the urban                                                            Year 5. No disbursement
                                                                water supply
                                                                tariff structure,
                                                                results will be
                                                                reported and
                                                                verified annually




                                                                                              85
            DLI               World Bank      Of which Financing   Deadline for DLI        Minimum DLI Value to be      Target DLI Value(s) for    Determination of Financing Amount to Be Disbursed
                               Financing         Available for      Achievement               achieved to trigger            World Bank                Against Achieved and Verified DLI Value(s)
                              allocated to      (US$, millions)                          disbursements of World Bank       Disbursements
                                 the DLI                                                           Financing                  Purposes
                                               Prior    Advance
                                  (US$
                                              Results      s
                              millions) [1]
DLI 4. People provided            70             0         20      Results will be      This is a linearly scalable     1,350,000 people          Payments will be made in proportion to the
with access to improved                                            reported and         DLI. Minimum DLI value in a     provided with             achievements.
sanitation facilities under                                        verified annually    year is 10,000 people           access to improved
the Program                                                                             provided with access to         sanitation facilities   For DLR 4.1. Year 1 to Year 5 = US$51.9 per person
                                                                                        improved sanitation                                     provided with access to improved sanitation facilities in
DLI 4.1. People provided          44                                                    facilities under the Program                            targeted urban areas
with access to improved                                                                                                                         For DLR 4.2. Year 1 to Year 5 = US$51.9 per person
sanitation facilities in                                                                                                                        provided with access to improved sanitation facilities in
targeted urban areas                                                                                                                            targeted rural areas
                                                                   Formula for disbursement = # People provided with access to improved sanitation facilities in targeted urban areas × US$51.9 + #
DLI 4.2. People provided          26                               People provided with access to improved sanitation facilities in targeted rural areas × US$51.9
with access to improved
sanitation facilities in                                           Hypothetical Example: In year 2, 40,000 people are verified to have achieved DLI 4.1 and 40,000 people are verified to have achieved
targeted rural areas                                               DLI 4.2, so disbursement will be:

                                                                   40,000 with access to improved sanitation facilities in targeted urban areas × US$51.9 +
                                                                   40,000 with access to improved sanitation facilities in targeted rural areas × US$51.9 = US$4.1 m
DLI 5. Number of new              25             0         5       Results will be     Minimum DLI 5.1 value in a        11,250 new               Payments will be made as follows:
sanitation cabins in                                               reported and        year is 100 of new                sanitation cabins in
schools, health centers,                                           verified annually   sanitation cabins in schools,     schools, health          For DLR 5.1. Year 1 to Year 5 = US$ 1,689 for a new
and public places built                                                                health centers, and public        centers, and public      sanitation cabin in schools, health centers, and public
under the Program                                                                      places built under the            places built under       places built under the Program equipped with
equipped with                                                                          Program equipped with             the Program              handwashing facilities in targeted urban areas
handwashing facilities                                                                 handwashing facilities in         equipped with
                                                                                       targeted urban areas              handwashing              For DLR 5.2. Year 1 to Year 5 = US$ 1,689 for a new
DLI 5.1 Number of new             1.8                                                                                    facilities               sanitation cabin in schools, health centers, and public
sanitation cabins in                                                                   Minimum DLI 5.2 value is                                   places built under the Program equipped with
schools, health centers,                                                               100 new sanitation cabins in                               handwashing facilities in targeted rural areas
and public places built                                                                schools, health centers, and
under the Program                                                                      public places built under the                              For DLR5.3:
equipped with                                                                          Program equipped with                                      Year 1 – No disbursement.
handwashing facilities in                                                              handwashing facilities in                                  Year 2. US$1.5 million if at least 70 percent of the
targeted urban areas                                                                   targeted rural areas                                       sanitation cabins in schools, health centers, and public
                                                                                                                                                  places equipped with handwashing facilities built under
DLI 5.2 Number of new            17.2                                                  Minimum DLI5.3 value in a                                  the Program in year 1 are verified to be operational and
sanitation cabins in                                                                   year is 70 percent of the                                  properly maintained
schools, health centers,                                                               sanitation cabins in schools,                              Year 3. US$1.5 million if at least 70 percent of the
and public places built                                                                health centers, and public                                 sanitation cabins in schools, health centers, and public
under the Program                                                                      places built under the                                     places equipped with handwashing facilities built under
equipped with                                                                          Program in the previous                                    the Program in years 1 and 2 are verified to be
                                                                                       year(s) that are verified to                               operational and properly maintained.




                                                                                                  86
            DLI             World Bank      Of which Financing   Deadline for DLI        Minimum DLI Value to be       Target DLI Value(s) for    Determination of Financing Amount to Be Disbursed
                             Financing         Available for      Achievement               achieved to trigger             World Bank                Against Achieved and Verified DLI Value(s)
                            allocated to      (US$, millions)                          disbursements of World Bank        Disbursements
                               the DLI                                                           Financing                   Purposes
                                             Prior    Advance
                                (US$
                                            Results      s
                            millions) [1]
handwashing facilities in                                                             be operational and properly                                Year 4. US$1.5 million if at least 80 percent of the
targeted rural areas                                                                  maintained                                                 sanitation cabins in schools, health centers, and public
                                 6                                                                                                               places equipped with handwashing facilities built under
DLI 5.3 Percentage of                                                                                                                            the Program in years 1, 2, and 3 are verified to be
sanitation cabins in                                                                                                                             operational and properly maintained
schools, health centers,                                                                                                                         Year 5. US$1.5 million if at least 80 percent of the
and public places                                                                                                                                sanitation cabins in schools, health centers, and public
equipped with                                                                                                                                    places equipped with handwashing facilities built under
handwashing facilities                                                                                                                           the Program in years 1,2,3, and 4 are verified to be
built under the Program                                                                                                                          operational and properly maintained
that are operational and                                         Formula for disbursement =
properly maintained                                              # of new sanitation cabins in schools, health centers, and public places built under the Program equipped with handwashing facilities
                                                                 in targeted urban areas × US$ 1,689
                                                                 + # of new sanitation cabins in schools, health centers, and public places built under the Program equipped with handwashing
                                                                 facilities in targeted rural areas × US$ 1,689
                                                                 + lump-sum payment if the given percentage for a given year of sanitation cabins in schools, health centers, and public places
                                                                 equipped with handwashing facilities built under the Program are operational and properly maintained is attained

                                                                 Hypothetical Example: In year 2, 250 new sanitation cabins in schools, health centers, and public places built under the Program
                                                                 equipped with handwashing facilities in targeted urban areas are verified to have achieved DLI 5.1; 1,200 new sanitation cabins in
                                                                 schools, health centers, and public places built under the Program equipped with handwashing facilities in targeted rural areas are
                                                                 verified to have achieved DLI 5.2 ; and 70 percent of the blocks of latrines in schools, health centers, and public places built under the
                                                                 Program in year 1 are verified to be operational and properly maintained, so disbursement will be:

                                                                 250 new sanitation cabins in schools, health centers, and public places built under the Program equipped with handwashing facilities
                                                                 in targeted urban areas × US$ 1,689
                                                                 + 1,200 new sanitation cabins in schools, health centers, and public places built under the Program equipped with handwashing
                                                                 facilities in targeted rural areas × US$ 1,689
                                                                 + US$1.5 million as 70 percent of the sanitation blocs in schools, health centers, and public places built under the Program in year 1
                                                                 are verified to be operational and properly maintained = US$4.4 m




                                                                                                87
           DLI               World Bank      Of which Financing   Deadline for DLI      Minimum DLI Value to be     Target DLI Value(s) for     Determination of Financing Amount to Be Disbursed
                              Financing         Available for      Achievement             achieved to trigger           World Bank                 Against Achieved and Verified DLI Value(s)
                             allocated to      (US$, millions)                        disbursements of World Bank      Disbursements
                                the DLI                                                         Financing                 Purposes
                                              Prior    Advance
                                 (US$
                                             Results      s
                             millions) [1]
DLI 6. A decision- support       35            0          10      Results will be                N/A                US$25 million for         Payments will be made based as follows:
model for the                                                     reported and                                      the completion of
management of the                                                 verified annually                                 the model for the         For DLR 6.1:
aquifers is available                                                                                               management of
                                                                                                                    aquifers of the
DLI 6.1. A model for the         25                                                                                 western                   Year 1. An amount of US$2.5 million will be disbursed
management of aquifers                                                                                              sedimentary basin         provided that a geophysical seismic profile
of the western                                                                                                      is available              Year 2. An amount of US$3.75 million will be disbursed
sedimentary basin is                                                                                                                          provided that: (a) two geophysical seismic profiles; (b) an
available                                                                                                                                     electric geophysics campaign is completed, AND (c) six
                                                                                                                    US$10 million for         (6) deep recognition wells are installed and equipped
DLI 6.2. Number of               10                                                                                 the completion of         with six (6) piezometers
productive boreholes in                                                                                             the multicriteria         Year 3. An amount of US$6.25 million will be disbursed
the hard rock aquifer                                                                                               analysis and the          provided that: (a) ten (10) deep recognition wells are
drilled under the Program                                                                                           drilling of 50            installed and equipped with eight (8) piezometers; AND
                                                                                                                    productive                (b) a report on the water withdrawals is completed.
                                                                                                                    boreholes in the          Year 4. An amount of US$6.25 million will be disbursed
                                                                                                                    hard-rock basin           provided that: (a) a report on aquifer geometry is
                                                                                                                                              completed; (b) a report on lithology and aquifer
                                                                                                                                              characteristics is completed; AND, (c) a calibrated
                                                                                                                                              geological model is completed.
                                                                                                                                              Year 5. An amount of US$6.25 million will be disbursed
                                                                                                                                              provided that: (a) a calibrated hydrogeological model is
                                                                                                                                              completed and tested; AND, (b) hydrogeological maps of
                                                                                                                                              the aquifer are updated.

                                                                                                                                              For DLR 6.2:
                                                                                                                                              Year 1. No disbursement
                                                                                                                                              Year 2. An amount of US$5 million will be disbursed
                                                                                                                                              provided that 25 productive boreholes in the hard rock
                                                                                                                                              basin are drilled after the needed multicriteria analysis is
                                                                                                                                              completed
                                                                                                                                              Year 2. An amount of US$5 million will be disbursed
                                                                                                                                              provided that 25 productive boreholes in the hard rock
                                                                                                                                              basin are drilled after the needed multicriteria analysis is
                                                                                                                                              completed
                                                                                                                                              Year 4 and 5. No disbursement
DLI 7. Improved human           39.4            0         10      Results will be                 >0                US$11.6 million for       Payments will be made in proportion to the
capital for water,                                                reported and                                      beneficiaries of the      achievements.
sanitation, and IWRM                                              verified annually                                 2-3 year technical
                                                                                                                    and training              DLR 7.1. Year 1 to Year 5. US$41,464 per beneficiary of 2-
                                                                                                                    programs.                 3 year technical and training programs to be disbursed in




                                                                                               88
            DLI               World Bank      Of which Financing   Deadline for DLI     Minimum DLI Value to be     Target DLI Value(s) for    Determination of Financing Amount to Be Disbursed
                               Financing         Available for      Achievement            achieved to trigger           World Bank                Against Achieved and Verified DLI Value(s)
                              allocated to      (US$, millions)                       disbursements of World Bank      Disbursements
                                 the DLI                                                        Financing                 Purposes
                                               Prior    Advance
                                  (US$
                                              Results      s
                              millions) [1]
DLI 7.1. Number of                                                                                                                            two tranches: 50 percent upon verification that
beneficiaries of technical       11.6                                                                               US$3.9 million for        beneficiaries are duly registered in the corresponding
and training programs                                                                                               beneficiaries of          academic or training institution; and 50 percent upon
financed by the Program                                                                                             specialization            successful completion of the corresponding programs.
                                                                                                                    programs
DLI 7.2. Number of                                                                                                                            DLR 7.2. Year 1 to Year 5.US$115,000 per beneficiary of
beneficiaries of                  3.9                                                                               US$2.0 million for        the specialization programs to be disbursed in two
specialization programs                                                                                             beneficiaries of the      tranches: 50 percent upon verification that beneficiaries
financed by the Program                                                                                             doctoral programs         are duly registered for the corresponding programs; and
                                                                                                                                              50 percent upon their successful completion.
DLI 7.3. Number of                                                                                                  US$6.9 million for
beneficiaries of doctoral         2.0                                                                               beneficiaries of          DLR 7.3. Year 1 to Year 5. US$651,667 per beneficiary of
programs financed by the                                                                                            short-term training       doctoral programs to be disbursed in five tranches: 20
Program                                                                                                             programs                  percent upon verification that beneficiaries are duly
                                                                                                                                              registered for the doctoral programs; and 20 percent
DLI 7.4. Number of                                                                                                  US$15 million for         upon successful completion of each of the 4 years of
beneficiaries of short-term       6.9                                                                               external                  Program.
training financed by the                                                                                            beneficiaries of 2-3
Program                                                                                                             year technical and        DLR 7.4. Year 1 to Year 5. US$5,172 per beneficiary of
                                                                                                                    training programs         short-term training, upon certification that the
DLI 7.5. Number of                15                                                                                who are hired by          corresponding training has been successfully completed
beneficiaries of technical                                                                                          MEA, ONEA, and/or
and training programs                                                                                               the technical             DLR 7.5. Year 3 to Year 5. US$89,286 per external
financed by the Program                                                                                             municipal services        beneficiary of technical, training programs hired by MEA,
integrated into the Public                                                                                                                    ONEA, and/or technical municipal services and assigned
administration                                                                                                                                to a non-temporary position, with a labor contract of a
                                                                                                                                              minimum duration of five-years
 [1] Allocated amount in US$ million per DLI is rounded.




                                                                                               89
                              Annex 4. Summary of technical assessment

1.      As part of the Program preparation phase, a Technical Assessment of the Program was carried
out. The assessment concluded that the Program is strategically relevant and technically sound. A number
of weaknesses have been identified, which will be addressed through the adoption of key measures
included in the PAP and the POM.

2.      The Program is strategically relevant. In Burkina Faso, notwithstanding relatively high economic
growth rates in the last decade, low levels of investments in water supply, sanitation and IWRM—in
particular, in sanitation—have resulted in poor development outcomes. The Program is at the heart of
the Government’s efforts to increase access to water and sanitation and improve IWRM. The Government
has demonstrated a clear commitment towards improving sustainable access to water supply and
sanitation, in a context of efficient, evidence-informed IWRM. As a reflection of its strategic importance,
GoBF has adopted the National Water Policy in 2016 and five operational programs, which aimed at
achieving the SDG 6 for water supply, sanitation, and IWRM by 2030.

3.       The Program will contribute to fund a substantial portion of GoBF’s national programs to deliver
universal access to water and sanitation services. It will support the establishment of institutional,
contractual and financial arrangements that will enable GoBF to achieve its strategic priorities to provide
universal access to water and sanitation services, and strengthen sector governance. The Program will
significantly contribute to delivering the PN-AEP, the PN-AEUE, and the PN-GIRE. The Program will provide
incentives to expand access to water supply for 1.1 million people, and to improved sanitation for 1.3
million people. The prioritization of the Program interventions in rural areas will seek to redress
substantial disparities in water and sanitation service in southwestern regions, which are substantially
lagging behind. It will support the core intervention included in the PN-AEP and the PN-AEUE, which
consists of extending existing and constructing new piped water supply systems in urban and rural areas,
to expand access to improved household sanitation facilities, and to provide improved water supply and
sanitation services in schools, health centers and public places.

4.       Based on the recently completed SCD for Burkina Faso, which is the basis for the development of
the UPCOMING Country Partnership Framework (CPF), the Program is aligned with the country priorities
on improving the management of natural resources (including water resources), promoting skills
development, and reducing gender bias. Amongst the most binding constraints to inclusive growth
identified were inadequate access to infrastructure services, gender imbalances and a lack of female
empowerment as well as sustainability issues with respect to natural resource management.

5.      The Program is technically sound. It will allow addressing a number of identified weaknesses in
the water supply, sanitation and IWRM sectors in Burkina Faso, through an emphasis on greater service
standardization, increasing the scale of service delivery, education and communication campaigns to
boost latrine demand, maintenance of latrines and sanitation cabins, expanding the knowledge of the
western aquifer, and locating new water supply sources in the hard-rock aquifer.

6.       The Program’s approach to deliver access through a mix of household connections, standposts
and boreholes is in line with an ongoing shift in customers’ preferences towards household connections,
whilst recognizing the fact that boreholes and standpost supplies provide a good first step and will be
needed for some time, particularly in the poorest areas. A key strength of the Program’s technical design
is linked to the overlapping of water supply and sanitation investments in targeted areas so as to maximize
the Program’s impacts.



                                                    90
7.      The Program builds upon the programmatic approach adopted by GoBF, which has been a catalyst
for the mobilization of resources for the sector, and lessons learnt from the implementation of the first
generation of government programs and a number of projects funded by development partners (see
Annex 1), including the World Bank, and lessons learned from similar reforms in Sub-Saharan Africa. The
World Bank longstanding engagement on water supply and sanitation in Burkina Faso has provided the
motivation for the Program.

8.       The Program’s institutional arrangements are sound and well-aligned with GoBF’s Programs
and ongoing reforms. Having a main counterpart for Program implementation through the establishment
of the PCU within MEA will provide clarity of focus and leadership for implementation of the Program, as
it is aligned with the Decree 2018-0092, adopted in February 2018, which prescribes the general
regulations for Program and Project operations in Burkina Faso. Also, establishing a dedicated PSU within
ONEA will ensure the adequate attention to Program implementation, in particular concerning M&E,
financial and safeguards aspects. The establishment of the PCU and PSU and staffing are key elements of
the PAP, and conditions of effectiveness.

9.       Given the complex and multidimensional nature of the Program, as well as its implementation
challenges, the DGA, DGEP, SP-GIRE and ONEA will be assisted by SISC in technical aspects, including
providing technical inputs into: ToRs, feasibility level and detailed design studies, tendering and
procurement processes, and quality control of main deliverables of studies conducted under the Program.
The SISC will be competitively selected with relevant national and international experience. In addition to
provide support and guidance, the SICS will provide the opportunity for implementing agencies’ staff to
learn on the job. The ToR for the SISC should give adequate emphasis to this capacity development role,
in particular to IWRM.

10.       Program expenditure framework. The Program will be mostly financed by the IDA (US$300
million). A Dedicated Treasury Special Account (Compte d’Affectation Spéciale ouvert au Trésor, CAST)
will be opened at the MINEFID to avoid cash rationing and streamline the payment to contractors financed
under the Program. The results framework and associated DLIs have been designed to maintain incentives
for efficient delivery throughout the length of the Program. The Program’s expenditure framework will be
anchored in the national budget programming process.

11.     M&E capacity. The PCU and PSU will provide dedicated staff and resources to ensure that the
indicators are effectively monitored according to an agreed monitoring method and plan. Additionally,
the PCU will be responsible to ensure that the DGA, DGEP, SP-GIRE, DRH and ONEA meets its monitoring
requirements and makes adequate progress.

12.       Economic analysis. The Program will benefit approximately 1.1 million people who will receive
improved water supply services and 1.3 million people who will have access to an improved sanitation
facility. Beneficiaries will have to spend less time fetching water and will benefit from higher drinking
water quality. They will be able to access greater water volumes, in line with minimum standards for
hygienic practices and will suffer from less service interruptions due to technical breakdowns. Particular
attention will be paid to ensuring that women and girls can benefit from improved access, so that they
can in turn benefit from greater economic opportunities (including from being involved in water service
delivery) and educational opportunities. In addition, the Program will generate local jobs in the area of
water supply and sanitation delivery and will reduce pressure on the use of local groundwater resources
(through stronger monitoring and management of these resources) and of energy sources (through an
emphasis on connecting piped rural water supply systems to the grid or relying on solar energy). Finally,



                                                    91
the decline in child morbidity will undeniably be a major impact of the Program, but this impact was not
assessed in monetary terms.

13.    On the sanitation side, one of the major benefits of the Program is the saving in health
expenditure following the implementation of the Program. The Program impact is greater in rural areas
because of the predominance of waterborne diseases. The Program, supported by a sustained
information-facilitation-hygiene awareness campaign, will contribute to reducing the prevailing
prevalence rates by improving hygiene practice and access to improve latrines.

14.     An economic analysis was conducted to compare costs and benefits with and without the
Program. Costs and benefit streams were projected over 30 years and discounted at a social discount rate
of 6 percent based on the World Bank guidance for preparation of Economic Analysis. Costs included
Program costs associated to delivery of water supply and sanitation services as well as operating and
maintenance costs and households’ contributions.

15.      The analysis yielded a benefit-cost ratio of 5.7, which is in line with international estimates of
similar investments in areas with limited access to water supply. The NPV of costs and benefits is US$1.5
billion when a 6 percent discount rate is used. A sensitivity analysis was conducted on a number of
parameters, including the discount rate, the value of time and the impact of the investments on diarrheal
illness reduction, and operating costs. The NPV remained positive under all these scenarios.

16.      Climate change mitigation, adaptation, and co-benefits. The adaptation co-benefits are based
on specific activities supported by the RAs, due to water supply infrastructure being designed to be climate
resilient and the activities linked to water resource knowledge strengthening. The improvement in
schemes would result in more climate change resilient water supply infrastructure and the increased
adoption of solar pumping technology that potentially carry climate mitigation co-benefits. Prudent O&M
activities would reduce losses, increase efficiency, and reduce energy costs. The drop in both energy
consumption and the use of diesel pump sets will lead to reduction in fossil fuel usage which will have a
climate change mitigation effect. The increased knowledge of location, quantity, and quality of
groundwater resources will contribute toward climate adaption by providing critical information for
development and investment planning, including, but not limited to, water allocations across sectors and
sources of water supply for domestic use.




                                                    92
                  Annex 5. Summary of the integrated fiduciary systems assessment

1.      As part of Program preparation, the World Bank carried out an IFSA, in accordance with the World
Bank’s Policy, Directive and Guidance Notes on Program for Results Financing. The objective of the
assessment was to examine whether Program systems provide reasonable assurance that the financing
proceeds will be used for their intended purposes, with due attention to the principles of value for money,
economy, integrity, fit-for-purpose, efficiency, effectiveness, transparency, fairness, and accountability.
The financial management systems were assessed to gauge the extent to which the planning, budgeting,
accounting, controls, funds flow, financial reporting, and auditing systems and practices provide a
reasonable assurance on the appropriate use of Program funds and safeguarding of its assets. Equally, the
Program procurement systems have also been assessed to establish the extent to which the planning, the
bidding, evaluation, contract award and contract administration arrangements and practices provide
reasonable assurance in support of achievement of the Program results through its procurement
processes and procedures. In addition, the assessment covered the aspects of capacity of the fiduciary
systems and considered how Program governance systems manage the risks of fraud and corruption and
how such risks will be mitigated.

2.       The IFSA was carried out by an experienced team of World Bank staff included Financial
Management and Procurement Specialists. The team reviewed the existing country and sector reports,
discussed with client counterparts and assessed the working of systems on the ground. The findings and
special arrangements needed for the Program were extensively discussed with GoBF during preparation.
Government’s feedback was reflected in the final version of the IFSA.

3.      Program Design and Expenditure Framework. The PDO of the operation is to improve access to
water supply and sanitation services in targeted areas. The Program expenditures are estimated to total
US$365 million and the implementation period is five years. The Program encompasses three RAs, namely:
1) improved access to water supply; 2) improved access to sanitation; and 3) improved access to reliable
information on water resources.

4.     Progress towards the PDO will be measured through a set of simple and measurable indicators.
The Results Framework for the Program is included in Annex 2. Each RA is linked to DLIs, Program Actions
and planned capacity support, as well as to monitoring, evaluation, and verification activities in the
Program. This provides a coordinated incentive for MEA and ONEA to deliver sustainable water supply
and sanitation services.

5.       Institutional arrangements for Program Implementation. As explained in Annex 1, the Program
will have two implementing agencies: The MEA and the ONEA. The implementation arrangements for the
Program are embedded within the existing structure of MEA and ONEA. The IFSA was conducted on the
basis of a methodical review of systems and practices at national and decentralized level, consultations
within the country, and a review of lessons learned of World Bank’s operations in the water and sanitation
sector.

6.      The IFSA concludes that the Program’s Integrated Fiduciary Systems have the capabilities to
provide reasonable assurance that the financing proceeds will be used for intended purposes with the
objective of supporting the achievement of the Program objectives. Burkina Faso’s high score on the
2016 Quality of Budgetary and Financial Management as part of the Country Poverty and Institutional




                                                    93
Assessment44 (4 points against 3.1 for Sub-Saharan Africa), confirms the overall good performance of the
country procurement and financial management systems.

x          The legislative and institutional framework for procurement, financial management, governance
           and anti-corruption in place in Burkina Faso is generally considered acceptable. The framework is
           in line with international standards. The operationalization of the West African Economic and
           Monetary Union (WAEMU) directives into Burkina Faso national laws, including budget
           programming, a new procurement law and related decrees, are on track.
x          The national institutions in charge of internal and external controls (the Technical Inspection
           Services (ITS) within MEA, IGF within the MINEFID; the Court of Accounts (Cour des Comptes) and
           the ASCE-LC), have demonstrated their ability to fulfill their legal mandate, despites financial and
           human resources constraints.
x          MEA and ONEA fiduciary tools (procedures manual, accounting software) and staffing
           arrangements are deemed acceptable, subject to the strengthening of its procurement unit. In
           particular, the overall fiduciary performance of the US$160 million Bank-financed Urban Water
           Sector Project (P106909, 2008–2018) implemented by ONEA has generally been rated
           satisfactory.

7.      The IFSA identified a number of weaknesses and risks in the overall fiduciary, governance and
anticorruption systems warranting the design of specific actions to mitigate them in the context of the
Program. For the purposes of the Program the key integrated fiduciary risks are presented in the table
A5.1 (and further elaborated below), with corresponding mitigation measured to be included in the PAP
(Annex 7).

                                       Table A5.1. Summary of IFSA PAP

                                         Proposed mitigation measure to include in the Program Action Plan
                  Risk
                                                                          (PAP)
    Cash rationing lead to limited    Open a Dedicated Treasury Special Account (Compte d’Affectation
    resources to fund the Program     Spéciale ouvert au Trésor, CAST)
    and delays in processing          Include in the Annual Finance Law the annual budget of the Program and
    transactions                      appoint by the Ministry of Economy and Finance, a financial and public
                                      procurement controller fully dedicated to the Program and assigned to the
                                      PCU.
    Procurement delays                Adopt annual procurement plans for MEA and ONEA
                                      Prepare an annual report on procurement implementation
    Limited procurement capacity of   Train staff in MEA technical services and DMP and ONEA technical services
    implementing agencies             and DMP
                                      Staff MEA Program Coordination Unit (PCU) and ONEA Program Support
                                      Unit (PSU) with dedicated procurement and financial management staff

44
   The Country Poverty and Institutional Assessment is a diagnostic tool that is intended to capture the quality of a
country’s policies and institutional arrangements—i.e., its focus is on the key elements that are within the country’s
control, rather than on outcomes (such as growth rates) that are influenced by elements outside the country’s
control. More specifically, the Country Poverty and Institutional Assessment measures the extent to which a
country’s policy and institutional framework supports sustainable growth and poverty reduction, and consequently
the effective use of development assistance. The outcome of the exercise yields both an overall score and scores for
all of the sixteen criteria that compose the Country Poverty and Institutional Assessment. The tool was developed
and first employed in the mid-1970’s and over the years the World Bank has periodically updated and improved it o
reflect the lessons of experience and the evolution of thinking about development


                                                         94
                                        Proposed mitigation measure to include in the Program Action Plan
                Risk
                                                                        (PAP)
 Corruption, with the potential of   Conduct internal technical, operational, procurement and financial audits
 reducing the value for money of     of the Program on a semester basis under the leadership of IGF and in
 public investment in the sector     collaboration with ITS and Procurement Entity
                                     Conduct external audit of annual financial statements of the Program
                                     implemented by MEA and ONEA
                                     Sign a memorandum of understating between the Mediateur du Faso and
                                     ASCE-LC to promote collaboration between the two focal institutions in
                                     handling complaints and mismanagement of the Program funds
                                     Report fraud and corruption cases on a semiannual basis to the ASCE


8.      The World Bank has agreed with GoBF on the above measures. The World Bank team will work
closely with GoBF throughout the implementation support period to assist with the effective
implementation and completion of any agreed actions to improve and strengthen the fiduciary systems.

9.      In view of the risks identified by the IFSA, the fiduciary risk rating (financial management,
procurement, and governance) of the Program is assessed to be Substantial. This is due mainly to Program
design, which includes the following risk factors: (a) multiplicity of directorates within MEA and
departments within ONEA leading to large number of transactions expected; (b) works to be implemented
in remote and geographically dispersed locations within the country; and (c) limited fiduciary capacities
of ONEA and the MEA as well as the institutions of controls (e.g. ITS, court of accounts).

10.     The process of preparing and completing the IFSA has been widely consultative. A dedicated IFSA
mission was conducted between December 13, 2017 and January 2, 2018 to interview key stakeholders.
The findings of the mission were presented to stakeholders in January 2018. During the February 2018
preparation mission, the IFSA preparation team shared the preliminary findings and proposed mitigation
measures with government officials, including representatives of the MINEFID, MEA, and ONEA.
Thereafter the IFSA team reflected their feedback in a revised version, which was shared with
stakeholders during the month of March 2018 (in French and English versions). The final version of the
IFSA was completed in April 2018 in advance of appraisal.

A. Program financial management systems

11.     The Program financial management systems are assessed as to the degree to which the relevant
planning, budgeting, accounting and financial reporting, internal and external controls, and funds flow
provide reasonable assurance on the appropriate use of Program funds and safeguarding of its assets. The
design of the Program relies on the existing financial management systems and institutions in Burkina
Faso.

12.     Institutions involved in Program Financial Management. The two implementation agencies of
the Program are MEA and ONEA. In addition, as the primary responsible of the budget elaboration process
and execution and the single payer of the Program, the MINEFID has a central role to play in achieving the
Program results in terms of budget execution and release of funds and elaborating the standards and
processes for Program financial management. The systems maintained by the MINEFID provide a
guarantee in terms of fiduciary risks. However, there is still room for improvement in the areas of budget
execution, cash management and external oversight. The ITS within MEA, the IGF within MINEFID, the
Court of Accounts and the ASCE-LC are involved in the implementation of the Program to carry out the


                                                       95
functions of internal and external audits. To speed up processing of transactions and payments, a financial
and public procurement controller appointed by the MINEFID will be assigned on a full-time basis to the
Program.

13.    Planning and Budgeting. Planning and budgeting related to the Program will follow the national
procedures. The overall cost of the supported Program will be included in multi-year expenditure
programming documents. Based on budget instructions, the implementing agencies will prepare the
budget of the Program. The consolidated budget of the Program will be integrated in the budget of the
MEA. For ONEA, a procurement plan for works contracts and consulting services should be developed and
approved by ONEA’s Board. The PAP requires the inclusion in the Annual Finance Law of the annual
Program budget.

14.     Accounting and financial reporting. For MEA, the existing public expenditure chain will be used
in the Program. In order to comply with the World Bank fiduciary requirements, the PCU established at
the MEA will be responsible for preparing the consolidated interim financial reports and consolidated
annual financial statements that will be audited by the Court of Accounts.

15.     Internal Controls and External Audit. Administrative control bodies in Burkina Faso include the
ITS within MEA, the IGF within MINEFID, the Court of Accounts and the ASCE-LC, in addition to a
designated financial controller of the MINEFID dedicated to the Program. As per the IFSA, their overall
performance is considered acceptable, despite financial constraints and limited number of staff.

16.     The IGF within MINEFID is responsible for ensuring the control of all financial, fiscal and
accounting services of the State, local authorities and generally all institutions that receive, hold or
manage public money. The main tasks of the Inspectorate General of Finance are to: (a) control the
financial, fiscal and accounting services of the State, local authorities and public institutions; (b) ensure
budgetary control of civil and military public administrations; (c) ensure the control of the financial
management of projects, public institutions, state-owned companies, semi-public companies and all the
companies in which the State has participation, as well as private establishments which receive subsidies
from the State; (d) ensure the management of the internal control function within the department; (e)
carry out organizational and functional audits of Public Administration institutions; and (f) coordinate the
fight against corruption within the MINEFID.

17.     The IGF will lead the internal audit mission in collaboration with ITS within MEA. ONEA has an
adequate internal audit function in place. The annual audit work Program will include the review and
physical verifications of work and goods and services acquired by MEA and ONEA under the Program.
Contracts under the Program will be subject to ex-post control. The audited financial statements of the
Program, inclusive of the transactions in the CAST, will be the basis for the financial assurance required
by the World Bank. The PAP requires to conduct semester internal audits and reviews covering
operational, technical, procurement, and financial aspects of the Program six months following the end
of each year starting from the first year of Program effectiveness.

18.     External audits of the consolidated annuals financial statements prepared by the PCU will be done
by the Court of Accounts both for the activities implemented by MEA and ONEA. Among other functions,
the Court of Accounts audit the regularity of the revenues and expenses described in public accounts,
assesses the use of public funds, and participates in the control of the execution of the financial law. In
addition, it ensures the audit of the accounts and management of state-owned, mixed-economy
companies or public limited companies. Therefore, the Court of Accounts will audit on an annual basis the



                                                     96
consolidated financial statements of the Program. The Program Audit Reports and audited Program
financial statements shall be submitted to the World Bank within nine (9) months following the end of
each year starting from the first year of Program effectiveness. The Court of Accounts may if needed,
collaborate with or use the services of, an independent auditing firm to carry out the audit of the Program
annual financial statements.

19.      The ASCE-LC is responsible in particular for, among other functions, monitoring the
implementation of the recommendations of the control bodies and the fight against corruption. Indeed,
the ASCE-LC is legally mandated to investigate corruption cases and refer substantiated cases either to
the prosecutor’s office for criminal acts or to the relevant ministries and public institutions for
administrative breeches. However, a large number of corruption cases transmitted for judgment at the
courts are still pending after several months and in some cases several years (RANLAC). The Government
has initiated the process for anticorruption branches within the two first instance tribunals and strengthen
the capacity of judges to deal exclusively with corruption cases.

20.      Flow of Funds. Weak budgetary controls and unpredictable revenue inflows mean that Burkina
Faso at times use the availability of cash as the de facto mechanism for trying to keep expenditure within
set limits, with budget execution managed through “cash rationing”. Spending may be limited by reducing
the amounts that ministries are authorized to spend below the legally adopted budget. The cash-flow
needs submitted by line ministries are simply reduced (often arbitrarily) from month to month, rather
than honored in full through the warrants that are issued. The payment of certain obligations may be
delayed. Payments for capital projects and goods and services are often the first to be delayed. In addition,
the execution and management of contracts financed by the Treasury suffer from long delays in payments
due to the many stakeholders involved in the authorization and liquidation process with unnecessary
duplication of tasks.

21.     To mitigate the risk of cash rationing and avoid long payment delays, GoBF has requested to use
a CAST to avoid cash rationing and streamline the payment contractors financed under the Program. The
CAST will enable resources to be directly linked to spending, in contrast to the general budget where
resources cannot be allocated to specific expenditure. The creation of CASTs is provided for in the Public
Finance Organic Law. The National Assembly is responsible for approving the establishment of CASTs and
their expenditure ceilings. The MINEFID is familiar with CASTs which are used for sectoral budget support
by other development partners. CAST is also being used for the PforR for the Public Administration
Modernization Program financed by the World Bank.

22.     The CAST, among others things, facilitates the: (a) monitoring of resources and their related
expenditures in the national budget; (b) carrying forward unused but committed budgetary allocations,
which is an exception to the principle of the annual budgetary system; (c) managing transactions directly
through Integrated Financial Management System for budget monitoring; and (d) having separate
reporting on implementation, as well as an independent audit, since the transactions on the CAST can be
extracted from the Integrated Financial Management System and the IT application for accounting.

23.     A CAST for the Program will be opened at the Central Bank of West African States (BCEAO). It will
be replenished with World Bank/IDA disbursements and GoBF contribution (including MEA and ONEA
contributions to the Program). The CAST will be under the responsibility of the General Directorate of the
DGTCP. The World Bank will transfer the eligible disbursements based on the Results Verification Report
and achieved DLIs submitted by IVA to the PCU and World Bank. The funds for the Program will be spent
by MEA and ONEA and are not expected to be transferred further to the communities. All expenditures



                                                     97
incurred in the Program by MEA and ONEA will be paid through the CAST under the responsibility of the
DGTCP. A dedicated financial and public procurement controller will be appointed by the MINEFID to work
on the Program. ONEA will not manage any bank account to make payment of activities implemented in
the Program. ONEA will follow its financial management procedures to execute the budget and report to
MEA. The administrative control bodies will reserve the right to verify the expenditures ex-post.

                            Figure A5.1 Flowchart of fund flows to CAST



                                                 World Bank




                         Program Account at the Central Bank of West African States
                         (Banque Centrale des États de l'Afrique de l'Ouest /BCEAO)




                        Ministry of Economy, Finance and Development (MINEFID)
                                                  CAST




                               MEA’s
                              suppliers                                ONEA’s suppliers

24.      Disbursement arrangements from the World Bank. Disbursements of the IDA credit will be made
at the request of the Borrower upon achievement of DLIs. Disbursement requests will be submitted to the
World Bank using the World Bank’s standard disbursement forms through the e-disbursement
functionality in the World Bank’s Client Connection system.

B. Program procurement systems

25.     The national procedures for award, execution and settlement of public contracts and public
service delegations45 will apply to the Program. In the context of the Program aspects of the existing
procurement process, publication of notices, international tendering and capacity for contract
administration should be improved.

26.     Procurement capacity. The procurement experience of the staff of MEA and ONEA DMP is limited,
which will potentially generate procurement delays. Implementation arrangements include the
recruitment of a dedicated procurement specialist dedicated to the Program implementation in MEA PCU
to provide the day to day support to the SP-GIRE, the DGEP and the DGA and the recruitment of a


45
 Described in the Law No. 039-2016 / AN on the General Regulation of Public Contracts and detailed in the Decree
No2017-0049 / PRES / PM / MINEFID of February 1st, 2017.


                                                      98
dedicated procurement specialist dedicated to the Program in the PSU exclusively to support the
implementation of ONEA’s activities under the Program, who will be supported by ONEA DMP as needed.

27.      Internal procurement controls. The IFSA found that there is insufficient internal procurement
review to verify compliance with the procurement rules in place before moving forward in the
procurement process and signing contracts. For the ministries, this role is assigned to the General
Directorate for the Control of Public Tenders and Financial Engagements (Direction Générale du Contrôle
des Marchés et des Engagements Financiers, DGCMEF). ONEA is not subject to this process as an
independent public utility. Particularly, as part of the implementation of the Urban Water Sector Project
(P106909, 2008–2018), the limited internal procurement controls led to some delays in the procurement
process. To mitigate this risk, within the POM detailed procurement procedures defining the role and skills
of each stakeholder in the public procurement chain within MEA and ONEA, with a focus on control, will
be included. To reinforce procurement controls for the contracts related to activities financed under the
Program, implementation arrangements included the appointment of a dedicated internal controller as
part of the PCU. This action will be part of the PAP.

28.    Procurement delays. Delays in the procurement process are common in Burkina Faso. MEA and
ONEA are responsible for the procurement and approval of contracts within their respective activities.
The DGCMEF within MINEFID is in charge of the publication of notices and results.

29.     Preparation of procurement plans. Delays are partially explained by the delayed preparation and
approval of procurement plans. The PAP requests the adoption of annual procurement plans and
disbursement estimates based on the annual approved budget.

30.      Advertising of procurement opportunities and awards. A significant bottleneck in the procurement
process is the advertising of procurement opportunities and awards in procurement revue (Revue des
Marchés Publics). The DGCMEF has three days to review, give no-objection and advertise. However, in
practice, this deadline is not respected. The DGCMEF’s challenges to comply with the deadlines include
insufficient publication equipment (computers, scanners and printers) and limited number of staff
(currently the service has only four modelers who rotate weekly). To speed up the publication process
and mitigate this risk, GoBF will provide for needed equipment, such as hardware and software, for the
DGCMEF.

31.    The Program will monitor delays in the procurement process of contracts funded by the Program.
Therefore, annual reports on procurement implementation should be submitted six (6) months following
the end of each year starting from the first year of Program effectiveness. This action is included in the
PAP.

32.      International tendering and international publication. To successfully achieve the results of the
Program, a number of contracts will require international tendering and international publication to
ensure sufficient competition and technical skills. These includes, among others, contracts for strategic
implementation support consultants (SICS), expanding storage and production capacity of ONEA’s urban
centers, building and rehabilitating rural water supply systems, constructing latrines in targeted rural
areas, drilling of deep wells in the western sedimentary basin, drilling of shallow wells in the hard-rock
aquifer.

33.    Even though open tendering is the default method it does not appear that for high-value and high-
complexity contracts open tendering must be open internationally. In addition, there is no provision for
the publication of international notices. Therefore, the IFSA recommends:


                                                    99
x       Establishing clear thresholds above which procurement process should be open internationally.
        Procurement for works contracts above five milliards FCFA, goods and non-consultancy contracts
        above five hundred million FCFA, and consultant services contracts estimated to three hundred
        million FCFA and above, use an international approach of the market. These thresholds should be
        included in the POM.
x       Advertising notices of contracts procured by MEA and ONEA in the context of the Program in an
        international publication support like UNDB or dgMarket. This measure should be stated in the
        POM. During Program preparation MEA and ONEA should ideally enter into a partnership with an
        international publication to ease the task of proceeding with international notice once the
        Program is declared effective.
x       Reviewing the quality of standard bidding documents to enhance participation of international
        bidders. The Government via ARCOP has developed a standard bidding documents reflecting the
        new procurement framework and WAEMU guidelines. For this purpose, the IFSA recommends
        supporting ARCOP to improve key aspects of the standard bidding documents, including but not
        limited to: (a) allow certain percentage of the total contract value to be expressed in in hard
        currency to reduce the risk of price fluctuation for complex contracts above certain thresholds;
        and (b) introduce amicable dispute resolution and arbitration mechanism.

34.    Procurement exclusions. There will be no high-value contract exceeding Operations
Procurement Review Committee threshold value that would qualify for procurement exclusions.

C. Program governance and anti-corruption systems

35.     Corruption in the water sector is high, with the potential of reducing the value for money of public
investment in the sector. Generally, corruption could be difficult to identify because the phenomenon is
complex, multi-layered and frequently interwoven with politics and wider social structures. It is often
systemic and institutionalized, in the sense that persistent informal rules have developed, which reinforce
corrupt practices within organizations46.

36.      The creation of the ASCE-LC in 2007 has provided an opportunity to step-up Burkina Faso’s efforts
in the fight against corruption. ASCE is currently concentrating on the investigation of corruption cases,
focusing on the identification of individual responsibilities when funds are misappropriated. A major
achievement of the progress made by ASCE is the elaboration of indicators to follow up the impact of anti-
corruption actions and the adoption of a statistical reporting system on pending and closed corruption
cases. ASCE has also set up a toll-free number to handle corruption, allegation and trigger investigation.

37.    In particular, in the last five years GoBF has taken several initiatives to tackle corruption, but
implementation is hampered by weak capacity and limited availability of resources. In 2015 a
comprehensive Anticorruption Law47 was adopted to strengthen the legal framework on transparency and
accountability in the public sector. At the sector level, the National Governance Program for the Water
and Sanitation Sector (Programme gouvernance du secteur eau et assainissement, PNGEA) seeks, among
other objectives, to improve coordination for the fight against corruption and other economic crimes in
the water sector. While these initiatives testify to the Government’s seriousness in tackling corruption,
measurable impact has been limited so far.


46
   United Nations Development Program (2011) Fighting Corruption in the water Sector Methods, Tools and Good
Practices
47
   Loi 04/2015 portant prévention et répression de la corruption au Burkina Faso.


                                                    100
38.      The Program should prioritize an effective governance oversight through increased accountability
of the sector to citizens; increased monitoring and auditing; and greater disclosure and transparency. The
IFSA recommends:

x       Increasing monitoring and auditing through support to systematic tracking and reporting on
        sector spending by the sector, to foster efficiency and accountability in the use of resources, and
        prioritize auditing sector accounts.
x       Updating the sector websites to develop a coherent online presence with user-friendly content
        and functionalities to enhance greater disclosure and transparency.
x       Developing and adopting a sector wide citizen engagement strategy.

39.     As part of the PAP and in order to monitor corruption and fraud in the Program, MEA and ONEA
should prepare bi-annual reports on fraud and corruption cases related to activities under the Program
two months following the end of each calendar semester starting from the first year of Program
effectiveness. The reports should be submitted to the ASCE-LC.

40.     GoBF has agreed to follow the World Bank’s Anti-Corruption Guidelines that apply to all PforR
lending operations. Key arrangements for the implementation of these guidelines will be included in the
POM. The POM will set out the steps that GoBF will take to (a) report on allegations of fraud and
corruption in the Program and how they are handled; (b) apply the World Bank’s debarment list to the
Program; and (c) assist any World Bank investigation under the Anti-Corruption Guidelines by ensuring
cooperation from those involved in the Program, including ensuring that these participants will be
obligated to cooperate with the World Bank. The World Bank will monitor the arrangements for the
implementation of the Anti-Corruption Guidelines, considering the experience of the existing PforR
operation in Burkina Faso, and consider updates to the POM, as appropriate.

41.     Complaints Handling and Grievance Redress. Citizens’ complaints and grievances pertaining to
the Program will be coordinated and addressed by the Ombudsman (the Médiateur du Faso) and the
ASCE-LC, using the grievance redress systems and administrative structures of these institutions. Through
focal points established at the local level and regional delegations, the Mediateur will be responsible for
(a) receiving and responding to, and resolving complaints pertaining to rules, procedures and unfair
treatments under the Program; (b) forwarding all complaints related to fraud and corruption to the ASCE-
LC in accordance with the terms defined in the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) and Grievance
Redress Manual of the Program; and (c) maintaining the register of complaints, preparing reports annually
on grievance redress activities specifically for the Program. Technical support will be provided to the
Médiateur to support the implementation of key aspects of the Médiateur’s action plan to improve
capacity of its regional offices and appoint focal points for communes. The ASCE’s role in the grievance
redress process will consist of receiving complaints on fraud and corruption, not only from the Médiateur,
but also directly from citizens through its normal processes and taking steps to investigate and take action
in accordance with its operation manual, regulations and the terms of the MoU.

42.     The existing country grievance redress systems have been assessed as functioning reasonably
well. The Médiateur du Faso is a classical, single-purpose, complaint handling body, with relatively strong
capacity at the center and weak decentralized units in the regions. As explained earlier, the ASCE is legally
mandated to investigate corruption cases and refer substantiated cases either to the prosecutor’s office
for criminal acts or to the relevant Ministries and public institutions for administrative breeches. Though
investigative capacity needs to be strengthened and sanctions need to be followed through, the ASCE is
assessed as having demonstrated relatively strong ability to perform its legal mandates.



                                                    101
43.     As part of the PAP, a memorandum of understating should be signed between the Mediateur and
ASCE-LC to promote collaboration between the two focal institutions in handling complaints and
mismanagement of the Program funds. The MoU will provide institutional and operational guidelines for
compliance with the World Bank’s governance and anti-corruption requirements on respecting the World
Bank debarment list, transparent reporting and effective handling of grievances, including fraud and
corruption allegations.

44.     With the support of the Program, a communications strategy will be developed to promote
awareness of citizens on the proposed Grievance Redress Mechanism and technical support will be
provided to the Médiateur du Faso to improve capacity of its regional offices and appointment of focal
points for communes.

45.      WB’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS). Communities and individuals who believe that they are
adversely affected because of a Bank supported PforR operation, as defined by the applicable policy and
procedures, may submit complaints to the existing Program grievance redress mechanism or the WB’s
GRS. The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed to address pertinent concerns.
Affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the WB’s independent Inspection
Panel which determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, because of WB non-compliance with its
policies and procedures. Complaints may be submitted at any time after concerns have been brought
directly to the World Bank’s attention, and Bank Management has been given an opportunity to respond.
For information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank’s corporate GRS, please visit
http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank
Inspection Panel, please visit www.inspectionpanel.org.




                                                 102
                  Annex 6. Summary of environmental and social systems assessment

1.      As part of Program preparation, the World Bank carried out an ESSA, in accordance with the
requirements of OP 9.00, PforR Financing, to identify the strengths, weaknesses, and shortcomings of the
Program’s ESMS with a view to assessing the adequacy of the ESMS for Program financing and identifying
key actions to improve the environmental and social management performance of the Program. Specific
objectives include:

    x   Verifying that the potential environmental and social risks and impacts of the Program were
        subject to an adequate initial screening.
    x   Ensuring that environmental and social mitigation measures to avoid, minimize, offset, and/or
        compensate any adverse impacts and promote environmental and social sustainability will be
        applied to activities that will have potential environmental and social negative impacts.
    x   Identifying suitable measures to strengthen the ESMS. These measures to be implemented by the
        Borrower will be agreed upon between the Borrower and the World Bank. The proposed
        measures shall be part of the PAP.

2.       The ESSA concludes that the Program ESMS is adequate for PforR financing and that the
activities to be funded under the Program should, by their nature, characteristics and size, generate
low-to-moderate environmental and social impacts and generally bring beneficial and positive
environmental and social impacts. The national project screening system in place provides adequate
mitigation measures in the case of infrastructure and rehabilitation activities. The ESSA further concludes
that, subject to the adoption of the recommendations outlined below, the ESMS is appropriately equipped
with the necessary tools and processes to identify, mitigate, and report on possible environmental and
social impacts of Program activities. Accordingly, it finds that the risk of negative environmental and social
impacts is addressed through the relevant ESMS provisions and operational procedures.

3.       To adequately manage inherent risks and promote sustainable development, ESSA focuses on the
six Core Principles of the World Bank's Policy, namely: (a) General Principles of Environmental and Social
Assessment; (b) Natural habitats and physical Cultural Resources; (c) Public and worker Safety; (d) Land
acquisition; (e) Indigenous people and Vulnerable groups; and (f) Social conflict.

4.      Methodology. The preparation of ESSA and the development of measures to strengthen ESMSs
has benefited from various information and a significant process of consultation with institutional actors,
especially:

    x   The review of available documents and data on national environmental and social procedures and
        the related political, institutional and regulatory frameworks, analysis of the environmental and
        social safeguards capacities of institutions involved in the Program; and World Bank
        documentation on PforRs and ESSAs;
    x   Interviews and working meetings with representatives of state and non-state institutions involved
        in the Program and key stakeholders and field visits;
    x   Consultations with representatives of key stakeholders and civil society organizations to identify
        environmental and social issues of the Program, assess technical assistance and capacity building
        needs. Extensive consultations were held during the ESSA dedicated mission of January 2018 and
        mission results’ presented to stakeholders at the end of January 2018, the presentation of the
        preliminary results to stakeholders during the preparation mission of February 2018.




                                                     103
    x   A National Public Consultation was held on March 27th, 2018 to disseminate the findings of the
        ESSA with the participation of representatives from all stakeholders, development partners, civil
        society organizations and the private sector. Comments from the workshop were incorporated in
        the final version of the ESSA.
    x   The ESSA report is available on the World Bank's external website.
        http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/511841524343098005/pdf/Draft-Environmental-
        and-Social-Systems-Assessment-ESSA-Burkina-Faso-Water-Supply-and-Sanitation-Program-
        P164345.pdf . It was disclosed on the World Bank portal on April 21, 2018.

A. Environmental and social impacts of the Program

5.      The Program supports the GoBF priorities for providing universal access to water supply services,
sanitation services, and strengthening WRM. Based on the objectives and actions proposed by the
Government Sector Programs, the Program to be supported by this IDA operation will finance a subset of
investments included in the National Water Supply Program (Programme national d’approvisionnement
en eau potable à l'horizon 2030, PN-AEP) and the National Sanitation and Wastewater Program
(Programme National d’Assainissement des Eaux Usées et Excréta à l'horizon 2030, PN-AEUE) in selected
geographical areas and the key actions of the National Program for Integrated Water Resource
Management (Programme National pour la Gestion Intégrée des Ressources en Eau à l'horizon 2030, PN-
GIRE). The Program is designed around three RAs, as follows:

6.       Result Area 1. Improved access to water supply. The Program will support the development of
priority infrastructure to improve water supply and enhance its operational efficiency. Geographically, the
RA 1 will cover urban areas including Ouagadougou and 10 additional secondary centers, and selected
rural municipalities in four selected regions.

7.       Result Area 2. Improved access to sanitation. The Program will support sustainable access to
sanitation services. In urban and rural areas, the Program will support the construction of household
latrines and public latrines with male/female compartments (in schools and markets. Geographically, the
RA 2 will cover urban areas including Ouagadougou and 13 additional secondary centers and selected
rural areas of four targeted regions.

8.      Result Area 3. Improved access to reliable information on water resources. The Program aims at
strengthening WRM by upgrading, optimizing, and modernizing surface and groundwater resources
observation networks for surface water and groundwater sources; strengthening water resources
knowledge; and operationalizing the SNIEau. Geographically, the RA 3 will be implemented across Burkina
Faso.

9.       Beneficial environmental and social impacts. Program activities – which are aimed at increasing
access to water supply and sanitation service and to strengthen service delivery arrangements in selected
rural areas - will generate major beneficial effects both on the environment and communities that should
be maintained over the long term, including: access to drinking water and improved sanitation facilities;
reduction in the reliance on open defecation; reduction of the incidence of waterborne disease;
improvement of hygiene practices; strengthening of the institutional capacities of the stakeholders at
national, regional, and local levels; change of people's behavior regarding the use of community facilities;
as well as fight against poverty and unemployment.




                                                    104
10.      Diverse negative environmental and social risks. The investments’ negative environmental and
social impacts will be limited, low to medium scale, reversible and easily controllable and manageable
During the works’ planning phase, the main risk is the neglect in the preparation of tender documents of
environmental and social aspects and their lack of consideration when developing technical studies.
During the works phase, there are several types of environmental and social risks: (a) Environmental risks
linked to: adverse impacts, which are expected to be typical construction impacts that are site-specific
and generally limited to air or water pollution, production and management of waste, use and disposal of
hazardous materials; however, these risks can be easily mitigated. Other non-construction works could
have some adverse environmental impacts or risks (on water uptake, water contamination, etc.), but
adequate measures (including modeling studies) will be taken during the preparation and implementation
phases; (b) Social risks: investments may include some more or less temporary forms of involuntary
resettlement of residential or business households, acquisition of private lands or restrictions on access
to local social and economic infrastructure. As stated, most of the negative social impacts will be time-
limited and spatially restricted (due to the relatively low land requirements of the various investments
planned under the program and the use of state-owned land).

11.      Screening mechanism. Environmental and social screening will be conducted for each sub-project
to determine the type of planning tool required based on the scale and significance of environmental and
social impacts. The environmental monitoring system that will support the operation phase should allow
for identifying malfunctions in real time in order to make any required correction.

12.    The Program will automatically exclude any activity posing a potentially significant
environmental and social risk and significant negative, irreversible, diverse, varied and unprecedented
impacts. Therefore, a sub-project will be considered non-eligible if involves the following:

    x   Construction or rehabilitation of works create significant social risks, i.e., a significant physical
        displacement of persons or the acquisition of large areas of private land or the demolition of a
        large number of single-family houses or else significant restricted access to economic and natural
        resources;
    x   Construction or rehabilitation of structures that could create or exacerbate existing land-based
        social conflicts;
    x   Works that could have an irreversible impact on physical cultural resources of an archaeological
        or historical nature or places of worship;
    x   Works that could have and irreversible impact on any zone classified as a site of biological or
        ecological interest.

B. Evaluation of the environmental and social management system (ESMS)

13.      The Burkina Faso system for environmental management systems is relatively comprehensive and
is generally consistent with the core principles of the World Bank’s policy for PforR. Burkina Faso’s legal
framework and related action plans are conducive to environmental protection. Adequate institutions are
in place and their mandates are established.

14.      Environmental system. In Burkina Faso, environmental protection is one of the priority areas for
policies to contribute to achieving the goals of sustainable development. The Burkina Faso Constitution,
promulgated on 11 June 1991, contains many environmental references. The most important policies are
the following:




                                                    105
      x   The National Economic and Social Development Program (Plan national de développement
          économique et social à l’horizon 2020, PNDES) aims at reforming institutions and modernizing the
          administration, developing human capital and boosting growth sectors for the economy and
          employment.
      x   The National Sustainable Development Policy presents a vision for sustainable development by
          2050.
      x   The National Environmental Policy marks the government's desire to create a reference
          framework for taking environmental issues into account in development policies and strategies.
      x   The Water Policy and Strategy contributes to sustainable development through appropriate
          solutions to water-related issues.
      x   The purpose of the National Sanitation Policy and Strategy is to contribute to sustainable
          development by providing appropriate solutions to sanitation problems, in order to improve
          people's living and housing conditions, to preserve their health and protect natural resources.

15.     In addition, the Environmental Code, adopted by Law N ° 006-2013 / AN of 02 April 2013, is
devoted to the Strategic Environmental Assessment, the Impact Evaluation Assessment and the Notice on
the Environment.

16.     Finally, it should be noted that according to Law No. 021-2006 / AN of 14 November 2006, on the
General Code of Territorial Communities, local and regional authorities contribute to the administration
of the territory, to economic, social, educational and health development, cultural and scientific as well
as the improvement of the environment.

17.       Major institutional actors in charge of the environment are:

      x   The Ministry of the Environment, the Green Economy and Climate Change (Ministere de
          l'Environnement, de l'Economie Verte et du Changement climatique) ensures the implementation
          and monitoring of the Government's policy on the environment and sanitation of the living
          environment. This Ministry includes several directorates, among which: The General Directorate
          for the Preservation of the Environment and the Directorate for the Prevention of Pollution and
          Environmental Risks.
      x   The BUNEE is responsible for coordinating the implementation and monitoring of the national
          environmental assessment policy.
      x   MEA has the mandate to define and implement the national policy on drinking water and
          sanitation.
      x   ONEA’s mandate is to: (a) create, manage and protection of facilities for collecting, supplying,
          treating, and distributing drinking water for urban and industrial purposes; and (b) the creation,
          promotion and improvement and management of collective or individual sanitation facilities for
          the disposal of wastewater and excreta in urban and semi-urban areas.

18.      Social systems. Burkina Faso also has an extensive legal framework as regards land tenure, land
acquisition, and restructuring mechanisms. Other social aspects such as social protection of vulnerable
people, labor management, child labor, and abuse on communities living in works implementation site
are also addressed. The Constitution of Burkina Faso guarantees everyone the right to private property,
its protection and expropriation. No one shall be deprived of his enjoyment except for reasons of public
utility and on the condition of just compensation determined in accordance with the law. This
compensation must be prior to the expropriation, except in case of emergency or force majeure.



                                                    106
19.     In terms of land management in Burkina Faso, the organizations or management structures are
defined by the RAF and the law No. 034-2009 / AN on rural land tenure and priority implementation texts.
These organizations are at four levels: national, regional, communal and village.

    x   At the national level: A national body for consultation, M&E of rural land policy and legislation is
        set up bringing together all public, private and public-sector stakeholders. civil society. Currently
        this instance is not yet operational.
    x   At the regional level: The competent deconcentrated technical services of the State are in charge
        of providing support to the Rural Land Services of local authorities as stipulated by the law No.
        034 on rural land tenure.
    x   At the communal level: The Rural Land Service at the level of each rural municipality is responsible
        for all the activities of management and security of the land area of the municipality and activities
        of land tenure security of the rural property of individuals on the municipal territory.
    x   At the village level: A Village Land Commission, created in each village and composed of customary
        and traditional village authorities in charge of land, is responsible for contributing to securing and
        managing the environment.

C. Adequacy of environmental and social systems

20.     The ESSA analyzed the strengths, gaps, risks and opportunities of Burkina Faso ESMS against the
core principles and key planning elements intended to ensure that PforR operations are designed and
implemented in a manner that maximizes potential environmental and social benefits, while avoiding,
minimizing, or otherwise mitigating significant adverse environmental or social impacts that are diverse
or unprecedented. From the previous analysis of the legal and institutional framework for environmental
and social management in Burkina Faso, a number of conclusions can be drawn:

    x   Most institutions are in place and their mandate has been defined. However, their actions are not
        coordinated and they lack human and financial resources.
    x   There is no coordination between central and regional level.
    x   Administrative procedures are slow and do not allow for quick and timely decision-making.
    x   Public inquiries are often public information sessions and do not result in proper public
        consultation.

21.      These gaps will have to be filled by appropriate reforms and arrangements. Together with the
community of technical and financial partners, the World Bank is already playing and could play an
important role in supporting needed improvements. However, already within the framework of this PforR,
it is possible to seize the opportunity to improve certain technical and administrative aspects, create a
new dynamic, clarify and consolidate partnerships and synergies between the stakeholders, and
strengthen the institutional capacity of all stakeholders involved in environmental and social safeguards
at the national, regional, communal and village levels.

22.     Adequacy of applicable systems. The strengths, weaknesses, threats, and opportunities
associated with the national systems are set forth in the light of the Core Principles applicable to the
Program - as described in the World Bank Policy and Directive for PforR funding.

23.   Core Principle 1: General principle of environmental and social impact assessment and
management. This Principle applies to the Program. The ESSA has been prepared and its
recommendations have been integrated in to the overall Program Action Plan. In line with the principles


                                                    107
set forth in ESSA, an Environmental and Social Management Plans will be prepared for any individual
investment project that the initial diagnostic and screening system set up have deemed to have moderate
environmental impact.

    x   Strengths: Burkina Faso has adequate regulatory and legal frameworks to appropriately manage
        the environmental and social impacts of the Program and an environmental assessment
        institution, the BUNEE.
    x   Weaknesses: National regulations lack precision with regard to the classification of activities and
        projects according to their impacts. Environmental and social project management procedures
        follow a centralized logic, leaving little room for regional institutions. The institutions in charge do
        not have the human resources or the appropriate financial means.
    x   Opportunities: Organization of sensitization initiatives of all stakeholders and stakeholders on the
        issues of environmental management, impact. Initiatives to strengthen more appropriately the
        capacities of central and local officials in environmental and social safeguard procedures
    x   Threats: Poor implementation of environmental and social management rules and procedures.
        Failure to enforce current environmental regulations in a timely manner.

24.       Core Principle 2: Natural habitats and physical and cultural resources. This Principle does not apply
to the Program. No investment will be eligible if it threatens fragile ecosystems. No investment will be
eligible if it directly threatens the cultural and religious heritage of a region.

25.     Core Principle 3: Public and workers safety. This principle applies to the Program. The work
undertaken under the Program could have an impact on the safety of the public and construction site
workers. Worksite workers may be exposed to work-related accidents / injuries, water pollution, air
pollution, solid waste, and toxic or hazardous materials on the site. Populations in areas near the sites
could also be exposed to the same hazards as well as issues associated with labor influx.

    x   Strengths: Burkina Faso's legal / regulatory system includes safety provisions on construction
        sites. The safety of workers is ensured by the Labor Inspectorate. There are national policies and
        guidelines concerning the safety and health of the public and workers.
    x   Weaknesses: Worker safety provisions are not always included in civil works contracts. The
        insufficient number of screening officers does not allow for regular monitoring of the application
        of site provisions.
    x   Opportunities: Information and training on site safety measures. Local presence of branches of
        the Labor Inspectorate.
    x   Threats: Inability to enforce current environmental, social, and safety regulations in timely
        manner. Non-involvement of Labor Inspectors

26.     Core Principle 4: Land acquisition. This principle applies to the Program, because it could: (a)
involve temporary physical relocations of resident households or businesses; (b) require the acquisition
of private land, and, as a consequence, expropriation public purposes and involuntary resettlements of
resident households or businesses; and (c) temporarily disrupt local small-scale and economic activities.
A RAP will be prepared for any investment sub-project with moderate environmental impact.

    x   Strengths: Compensation of affected persons is fixed by the existing land tenure system in Burkina
        Faso.




                                                     108
    x   Weaknesses: National land acquisition procedures are unclear and incomplete. Informal
        occupants are not recognized by Burkina Faso law. Customary land ownership is recognized but
        must be confirmed before being compensated.
    x   Opportunities: Provide a compensation system, including for informal occupants. Ensure
        adequate follow-up of the affected people so that they recover the ex-ante project conditions and
        that they do not become poor anymore.
    x   Threats: Non-compliance with the existing legislation. Non-compliance with existing legislation.
        Lack of human resources and financial means at the level of national and local institutions in
        charge of enforcing laws and devices. Lack of coordination between the relevant institutional
        actors.

27.      Core Principle 5: Social considerations: indigenous peoples and vulnerable groups. This principle
applies (except that there are no indigenous people in Burkina Faso).

    x   Strengths: Sensitization initiatives are conducted to inform people about the project and to gather
        their observations; information posters are posted for this purpose in public places. The law
        provides for the services of an Ombudsman for vulnerable people.
    x   Weaknesses: The Burkina Faso legislation does not provide for specific measures for vulnerable
        groups. There is no real grievance management system at the local level.
    x   Opportunities: Define and set up a sound stakeholder engagement strategy as part of the
        sensitization program, targeting vulnerable groups more particularly. Specify any form of support
        for the most vulnerable groups. Ensuring the functionality of the grievance management system
    x   Threats: Lack of clarity and consistency of the mechanism for implementing public consultations
        and engaging stakeholders could alienate poor and vulnerable groups.

28.      Core Principle 6: Social considerations - Social conflict does not apply to the Program. The Program
is not implemented in conflict areas.

D. Gender assessment

29.     A gender assessment was conducted by GoBF as part of Program preparation to inform
understanding of gender gaps in water and sanitation access and management, and propose appropriate
interventions. The findings of the gender assessment were used to inform the Program design.

30.     The gender assessment provided critical elements for the develop of a gender action plan for the
water supply, sanitation, and IWRM sector, which is a key action included in the PAP.

    x   Strengthening human capital with a focus on gender gaps in the sector. The assessment
        highlighted the prevalence of social - cultural norms and attitudes underpinning gender
        inequalities and discrimination. The response in the action plan to weak participation of women
        at national and local levels is two-fold. At the national level the opportunity presented by the
        Program to increase the human resource shortfall of the sector will provide an opportunity to
        extend equal opportunities to women, to be trained as water technicians and engineers, and
        compete for employment by MEA and ONEA. The number of women participating in these
        trainings will be monitored by the Program, with a corresponding indicator included in the results
        framework. At the local level, within WUAs and other water committees the Program will support
        enhanced women’s voice, by moving beyond the current quota system. This will involve building




                                                    109
        awareness among men and women on the characteristics of leadership in water, and building
        women’s and stakeholders awareness of the importance of representative governance structures.
    x   Increasing women’s access to water and sanitation as assets and enablers for endowments and
        wellbeing. The assessment demonstrated that non-access to water and sanitation, or poorly
        maintained services, create practical impediments to girls and women for education, health
        services, working in markets and travelling from bus stops. The Program will adopt a project cycle
        that incorporates steps to engage, and establish preferences of girls and women at identification
        and design stage, before implementation begins. Aspects of design that shape accessibility, safety
        and privacy, and models for facility maintenance models, and menstrual hygiene management
        are aspects that ignored have often unseen negative consequences. The specifications in bidding
        requirements, feasibility studies and implementation processes will uphold these gender sensitive
        features and processes, as an incentive for achieving targeted outputs.
    x   Securing gender disaggregated citizen feedback to inform adjustments. Household surveys, as
        part of the verification protocols, will disaggregate and monitor women’s and men’s (perceived)
        time taken, and safety in accessing water and sanitation services both at home, and in public
        intervention areas. Surveys will serve as feedback to inform adjustments to the strategies being
        implemented and improve satisfaction with service delivery.
    x   Compliance to gender in the PforR at a programmatic level. The Results Framework to be
        developed as part of the POM will monitor the ratio of men to women accessing capacity building
        opportunities, the ratio of men to women represented in WUAs, and water and sanitation
        committees. The action plan will be used to test and eventually integrate selected gender
        measures in DISE, the national monitoring system under development in the sector. Ratios in
        committees, sanitation access by girls and boys in schools, and women’s and men’s sanitation
        access in market places and health centers will be tracked.

31.     The assessment highlighted the need for widespread awareness raising to institutionalize gender
equity principles and create an enabling environment for gender in management and in operations under
the Program.

E. Action Plan for Environmental and Social Management

32.     The Program will support specific measures to improve the conditions for the performance of the
ESMS in the implementation and monitoring of the Program activities. The actions included in the PAP are
as follows:

33.      Preparation of a MTGES of the Program investments for MEA and ONEA and all technical services,
as well as all stakeholders, who will be involved at national, regional and local level in the implementation
of the Program, so that environmental and social management procedures are duly understood, perfectly
owned and followed. This Manual will be an integral part of the POM. The Manual will include, among
other things, the following:

    x   Procedure for the screening of sub-projects
    x   Procedure for the elaboration of Environmental and Social Management Plans and Environmental
        and Social Impact Studies
    x   Procedure for the elaboration of social assessment and Resettlement Action Plans
    x   Procedures for land acquisition
    x   Standard elements (environmental and social clauses, minimum staff, price details) for the
        contracts of (a) works contractors; (b) engineering consultant and (c) regional private operators


                                                    110
      x   Citizen engagement mechanism
      x   Good practices guidelines for environmental and social management
      x   Control & monitoring procedures

34.      Training on MTGES. A training program will be developed for the implementation of the MTGES
for all the different stakeholders involved in the implementation of the Program, in particular: the
members of the environmental units of the MEA, ONEA, and of the other ministries involved, the
members of the communal environment and local development departments, and of the land
developments departments, of BUNEE, and of Regional Directorates of the Ministry of the Environment,
the Green Economy and Climate Change.

35.    Adoption of an interinstitutional convention between MEA and ONEA, on the one hand, and
preparation and enforcement of an interinstitutional cooperation agreement between MEA and the
BUNEE, on the other hand. The content of this agreement will establish the conditions for collaboration
(awareness raising; information and training; rapid review and certification of sub-projects;
environmental and social control and monitoring; among others).

36.      Recruitment of Environmental and Social Management Specialists within MEA PCU and ONEA
PSU. Recruitment by MEA and ONEA of a dedicated social specialist and a dedicated environmental
specialist within the PCU and PSU (respectively), who will be employed full-time throughout the
implementation of the Program.

37.      Specialized training in monitoring and control of environmental and social mitigation and
reporting measures. This more in-depth training in monitoring and control of environmental and social
mitigation and reporting measures will be provided to representatives of all local, regional and national
institutions (including contractors) involved in collecting, processing and analyzing information regarding
the implementation of mitigation measures.

38.       Develop a gender action plan for the water supply, sanitation, and IWRM sector (see above).

39.      The World Bank has agreed with the Borrower on the above measures. Key measures are included
into the PAP (Annex 6). Mitigation measures not included in the PAP should be included in the POM. The
World Bank team will work closely with the Borrower throughout the implementation support period to
assist with the effective implementation and completion of any agreed actions to improve and strengthen
the ESMS.

40.      WB’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS). Communities and individuals who believe that they are
adversely affected because of a Bank supported PforR operation, as defined by the applicable policy and
procedures, may submit complaints to the existing Program grievance redress mechanism or the WB’s
GRS. The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed to address pertinent concerns.
Affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the WB’s independent Inspection
Panel which determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, because of WB non-compliance with its
policies and procedures. Complaints may be submitted at any time after concerns have been brought
directly to the World Bank’s attention, and Bank Management has been given an opportunity to respond.
For information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank’s corporate GRS, please visit
http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank
Inspection Panel, please visit www.inspectionpanel.org.




                                                   111
41.     A gender assessment was conducted for the Program to explore opportunities for promoting
gender mainstreaming in water and sanitation access and management, through identifying and analyzing
current constraints and proposing interventions; and to promote gender equality in access to water and
sanitation services and accessibility to facilities. The findings of the gender assessment informed the
design of the Program, in particular the human capital strengthening activities, which will encourage
women participation and contribute to increasing the proportion of women in technical positions in MEA
and ONEA. Also, the PAP includes the development of a gender action plan.

42.     The gender action plan will aim at, but not be limited to, institutionalizing gender and creating an
enabling environment for gender in management and in operations under the Program. The gender action
plan could include, among other elements, the extension of the current quota system to include
leadership positions, actively promoting female water technicians and engineers, training on sanitation
and hygiene to promote their active participation, training on mechanism to prevent gender-based
violence and mitigation measures, continuous sensitization of all sectors on social and cultural
discriminatory practices and norms underpinning gender inequalities and discrimination against women,
and the participation of women in governance and WUAs.




                                                    112
                                           Annex 7. Program Action Plan

                                                                             Responsible        Completion
Action Description                              DLI*   Due Date
                                                                             Party              Measurement
Open a Dedicated Treasury Special Account       n/a    Effectiveness         MINEFID, after     CAST opened
for the Program (Compte d’Affectation                                        authorization of
Spéciale ouvert au Trésor, CAST)                                             National
                                                                             Assembly
Prepare, adopt, and disseminate the             n/a    Effectiveness         MEA, with inputs   POM submitted to
Program Operations Manual (POM), which                                       from ONEA          the Bank, including
should include a Technical Manual for                                                           the MTGES
Environmental and Social Management of
the Program investments (MTGES)
Create a Program Coordination Unit (PCU)        n/a    Effectiveness and     MEA                Creation of the PCU,
within MEA, and staff it with at least a PCU           throughout entire                        and recruitment of
Coordinator, a monitoring and evaluation               Program                                  key staff
(M&E) specialist, a procurement specialist, a          implementation
financial management specialist; an
environmental safeguard specialist, a social
safeguard specialist, and an internal
controller with functions and resources
agreed with the World Bank, and with staff
in adequate numbers and qualifications,
experience, and terms of reference agreed
with the World Bank
Create a Program Support Unit (PSU) within      n/a    Effectiveness and     ONEA               Creation of the PSU,
ONEA, and staff it with at least a PSU                 throughout entire                        and recruitment of
Coordinator, a M&E Specialist, a                       Program                                  key staff
procurement       specialist,  a    financial          implementation
management specialist, an environmental
safeguard specialist, and a social safeguard
specialist with functions and resources
agreed with the World Bank, and with staff
in adequate numbers and qualifications,
experience, and terms of reference agreed
with the World Bank
Recruit strategic implementation support        n/a    90 days after         MEA, with inputs   Contract with SISCs
consultants (SISC)                                     effectiveness         from ONEA          signed submitted to
                                                                                                the Bank
Establish a Steering Committee (Comité de       n/a    90 days after         MEA                MEA’s decree of
Revue), chaired by the General Secretary of            effectiveness                            creation of Steering
MEA, to provide oversight of the Program                                                        Committee
and ensure convergence towards the
Program objectives
Recruit the Independent Verification            n/a    8 months after        MEA, with inputs   Contract with IVA
Agency (IVA)                                           effectiveness         from ONEA          signed submitted to
                                                                                                the Bank
Prepare, adopt, and disseminate a fecal         n/a    September        1,   ONEA               Disseminated fecal
sludge management strategy for urban                   2020                                     sludge management
centers                                                                                         strategy for urban
                                                                                                centers submitted
                                                                                                to the Bank



                                                        113
                                                                         Responsible        Completion
Action Description                            DLI*   Due Date
                                                                         Party              Measurement
Environmental and Social
Adopt an interinstitutional convention        n/a    90 days after       MEA and ONEA       Interinstitutional
between MEA, ONEA, and BUNEE. The                    effectiveness       with BUNEE         convention
content of this agreement will define the                                                   submitted to the
conditions for collaboration (awareness,                                                    Bank
information and training initiatives; rapid
review and certification of sub-projects,
environmental and social control and
monitoring, etc.).
Develop a training program for the            n/a    120 days after      MEA and ONEA,      Stakeholders
implementation of the MTGES for the                  effectiveness       with inputs from   involved in the
various stakeholders involved in the                                     the BUNEE          implementation of
implementation of the Program, and train                                                    the Program trained
stakeholders accordingly                                                                    on the MTGES
Provide specialized training in monitoring    n/a    120 days after      MEA and ONEA       Trained provided
and control of environmental and social              effectiveness       with BUNEE
mitigation measures
Develop citizen engagement guidelines to      n/a    120 days after      MEA and ONEA       Citizen engagement
ensure effective participation of and                effectiveness                          guidelines
consultation with local people, targeted                                                    submitted to the
beneficiary community, and vulnerable                                                       Bank
groups
Develop a gender action plan for the water    n/a    September 1,        MEA and ONEA       Adopted gender
supply, sanitation, and IWRM sectors                 2019                                   action plan
                                                                                            submitted to the
                                                                                            Bank
Fiduciary
Appoint a financial and public procurement    n/a    Effectiveness and   MINEFID            Appointment of the
controller dedicated to the Program and              throughout entire                      financial and public
assigned to the PCU.                                 Program                                procurement
                                                     implementation                         controller
Train staff in MEA (DMP and technical         n/a    90 days after       MEA and ONEA       Training completed
services) and ONEA (DMP and technical                effectiveness
services) on procurement
Include in the Annual Finance Law the         n/a    Throughout          Directorate of     Unaudited financial
Program’s budget                                     entire Program      Budget /           report of the first
                                                     implementation      PCU, with inputs   quarter of each
                                                                         from PSU           fiscal year of the
                                                                                            Program
                                                                                            implementation
                                                                                            period
Adopt annual procurement plans and            n/a    Throughout          MEA and ONEA       Procurement plans
disbursement estimates based on the                  entire Program                         and disbursement
annual approved budget for the Program               implementation                         estimates
                                                                                            submitted to the
                                                                                            Bank
Prepare an annual report on procurement       n/a    Six months          MEA and ONEA       Report submitted to
implementation                                       following the end                      the World Bank and
                                                     of each year                           ARCOP
                                                     starting from the



                                                      114
                                                                             Responsible        Completion
Action Description                              DLI*   Due Date
                                                                             Party              Measurement
                                                       first year of
                                                       Program
                                                       effectiveness
Conduct semi-annual internal audits and         n/a    Six months            Lead by IGF        Audit reports
reviews covering operational, technical,               following the end     within MINEFID     submitted to the
procurement, and financial aspects of the              of each calendar      in conjunction     World Bank
Program                                                semester starting     with the ITS
                                                       from the first year   within MEA
                                                       of Program
                                                       effectiveness
Conduct annual external audit of annual         n/a    Nine months           Court of           Audit reports
financial statements of the Program                    following the end     Accounts for       submitted to the
                                                       of each year          MEA                World Bank
                                                       starting from the
                                                       first year of
                                                       Program
                                                       effectiveness
Fraud and Corruption
Sign a memorandum of understating               n/a    120 days after        Mediateur du       Memorandum of
between the Mediateur du Faso and ASCE-                effectiveness         Faso and ASCE-LC   understanding
LC to promote collaboration between the                                                         signed
two focal institutions in handling complaints
and mismanagement of the Program funds
Prepare bi-annual reports on fraud and          n/a    Two months            ASCE/PCU MEA       Report submitted to
corruption cases related to activities under           following the end                        the ASCE
the Program                                            of each calendar
                                                       semester starting
                                                       from the first year
                                                       of Program
                                                       effectiveness
 Note: n/a = not applicable




                                                        115
                                 Annex 8. Implementation Support Plan

1.       The Implementation Support Plan is based on the implementation support guidelines for the
PforR operations, adapted to the design and risk profile of the Program. The Borrower is responsible for
the Program’s overall implementation, including its technical aspects. The PforR operation in Burkina Faso
will require considerable focused support from the World Bank team, particularly during the early stages
of implementation. The implementation agencies and the DREAs will need to make a rapid shift in the
focus of their planning to ensure that available funding can be absorbed and results delivered in time and
within budget envelopes. The team recognizes that the PforR mode of operation, which transfers
performance risk to the implementing agencies, lays down a challenge to change numerous operational
practices and norms. The basic mandate for the World Bank implementation support under the PforR is
to:

        x    Review implementation progress and achievement of Program results and DLIs;

        x    Provide support for resolving emerging Program implementation challenges;

        x    Provide technical support for the implementation of the PAP, the achievement of DLIs and
             other results, and institutional development and capacity building;

        x    Monitor systems’ performance to ensure their continuing adequacy through Program
             monitoring reports, audit reports, and field visits; and

        x    Monitor changes in risks to the PforR and compliance with legal agreements and, as needed,
             the PAP.

2.       Key to effective implementation support will be the coordination of its timing with critical points
in the timelines of planning and verification of results for payments request to the World Bank. The first
implementation support mission will take place as soon as possible after effectiveness to provide direct
feedback and implementation support with critical inputs and involvement of environmental, social, and
fiduciary teams.

3.     To support Program implementation, a POM will be jointly prepared and implemented by MEA
and ONEA. The POM will provide overall guidance on Program implementation and will include
information such as the detailed project description, financing plan, roles and responsibilities for
implementing agencies, the role of the World Bank during implementation, key actions required to meet
the PDO, fiduciary requirements (procurement, financial management and fraud and corruption),
environmental and social safeguards, and the M&E arrangements. The World Bank will support
implementation through regular missions and will provide guidance on implementation arrangements.




                                                    116
                               Table A8.1. Main Focus of Implementation Support
   Time                       Focus                     Skills Needed             Resource         Partner
                                                                                  Estimate          Role
First 12      Design of water supply schemes       Team leader, Legal;
months        and water resource knowledge         gender; procurement;
              related activities, procurement of   financial management;
              SISC, revision of guidelines and     social and environment;
              manuals, gender strategy,            water and sanitation
              establishment of arrangements        specialist; IWRM
              for independent verification,        specialist; M&E
              strengthening of DISE
12–48         Reviewing implementation             Team leader, Legal;
months        progress, field verification of      gender; procurement;
              verification reports from the IVA    financial management;
                                                   social and environment;
                                                   water and sanitation
                                                   specialist; IWRM
                                                   specialist; M&E
Other         Independent audit/assessment of      Independent technical
              verification of results              expertise


                 Table A8.2. Task Team Skills Mix Requirements for Implementation Support
           Skills Needed              Number of Staff        Number of Trips              Comments
                                      Weeks (annual)            (annual)
Task team leader                           24                      4              International / country
WRM                                        12                      3              International / country
Water supply and sanitation                20                     None            Country office based
M&E/Verification                            6                      2              International / country
Procurement                                 8                     None            Country office based
Financial management                        8                     None            International / country
Governance                                  3                      2              International / country
Environment safeguards                      8                     None            Country office based
Social safeguards                           8                     None            International / country
Gender                                      4                      2              International / country
Legal                                       2                     None            International / country
Team assistance                             4                     None            Country office based




                                                     117
Annex 9. Map of the Program’s water supply and sanitation targeted areas




                                  118
