Public Disclosure Authorized
                                      ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SYSTEM ASSESSMENT – ADDENDUM
                                                                COUNTRY: BURKINA FASO
                                   Additional Funding for the Water Supply and Sanitation Program (PAEA) in Burkina Faso –
                                                           Program for Results (PforR) - PAEA-PforR


                               Introduction




Public Disclosure Authorized
                               1.       The Government of Burkina Faso has expressed interest for an Additional Funding for the
                               current Water Supply and Sanitation Program (PAEA-PForR) in Burkina Faso whose close-out date is
                               on June 30, 2025. The Additional Funding will allow for scaling up the positive impacts of the Parent
                               Project and would build on its current achievements to increase access to water supply and sanitation in
                               target areas, with possible extension to underserved areas and/or host areas with high concentrations of
                               Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs). It would also incorporate an innovative aspect relating to the
                               resilience of infrastructure in regions affected by serious security challenges.
                               2.       The Parent Program (PAEA-PforR) aimed at improving access to water supply and sanitation
                               in rural and urban areas is the center piece and backbone of the national water program1, namely PN-
                               AEP, PN-AEUE and PN-GIRE. The Parent Program, with a funding of USD 300 million, was approved
                               by the International Development Association’s Board on May 15, 2018 and became effective on
                               December 19, 2018. Its development objective (ODP) is to improve access to safe water supply and




Public Disclosure Authorized
                               sanitation services in targeted areas.
                               3.      The PAEA-PforR is implemented through a Program Management Unit (PMU) and a Program
                               Support Unit (PSU). The PSU is responsible for implementing activities in urban areas. The Program is
                               structured around four Result Areas (RAs), in line with the national programs mentioned above.
                               4.        Result area 1 (RA 1): “Improving access to safe water”. In rural areas, it provides funding for
                               the implementation of (i) boreholes equipped with human-powered pumps (HPPs), (ii) safe water supply
                               systems, and (iii) rehabilitation of simplified safe water supply systems (SSWS). In urban areas, it funds
                               (i) the strengthening of services in seven secondary cities, (ii) the creation of safe water systems in six
                               new centers, and (iii) in Ouagadougou specifically, the construction of ground reservoirs, pumping
                               stations and towers on two sites (East and North to the town of Ouaga), as well as the extension and
                               densification of the network in order to supply priority development zones.
                               5.      Result area 2 (RA 2) “Improving access to sanitation” supports the construction of 135,000
                               family latrines in rural and urban areas and the equipment of 1,300 schools and health centers with




Public Disclosure Authorized
                               adequate sanitation facilities.
                               6.     Result area 3 (RD#3) “Improving access to reliable information on water resources” supports
                               the Government’s priorities to: (a) strengthen knowledge and monitoring of surface water; (b) strengthen
                               knowledge and monitoring of groundwater; and (c) operationalize the National Water Information
                               System (SNIEau).
                               7.      Result area 4, which is a cross-cutting one (CCRA), “Improving human capital” focuses on
                               capacity building through diploma and certification training. Some of the beneficiaries would work at
                               the Ministry of the Environment, Water and Sanitation and at ONEA.




                               1
                                The national programs are: The National Drinking Water Supply Program (PN AEP), the National Wastewater
                               and Excreta Sanitation Program (PN AEUE), and National Integrated Water Resources Management Plan (PN
                               GIRE).



                                                                                                                                        1
8.       The need for safe water supply in rural and urban areas in Burkina Faso continues to increase
despite the implementation of the PAEA-PforR, hence the need for an Additional Funding to the
Program that is currently being implemented. Following discussions between the Government of
Burkina Faso and the World Bank, it was established that an Additional Funding of USD 100 million is
required to continue and expand the provision of water and sanitation services, and strengthen their
resilience, with a particular focus on IDPs and the promotion of innovations. The Additional Funding
would not change the development objective of the Parent Program mentioned above. Similarly, the
activities under the Additional Funding, in addition to the cross-cutting result area (CCRA), would
remain structured according to the same three Parent Program’s RAs as described above. However, the
Program’s Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs) have been updated to reflect the program’s scaling
up and the deepening of reforms.
9.      To ensure that adverse environmental and social risks and impacts continue to be adequately
avoided, reduced, or mitigated, the World Bank team has prepared this addendum to the Environmental
and Social System Assessment (ESSA) to cover additional potential adverse environmental and social
risks and impacts that may arise from the Additional Funding activities. It is important to note that this
addendum does not constitute a new ESSA and should be considered as complementing the Parent
Project’s ESSA. It should also be noted that the Parent Project’s ESSA was carried out in accordance
with the requirements of the World Bank policy and directive for the funding of programs for results
(PforR) and addressed the obligations of the national and municipal systems with regard to institutional
capacity and performance, political and regulatory bases, public consultation, and the grievance redress
mechanism to manage and mitigate impacts.
10.      The aim of the addendum is to ensure that the environmental and social risks associated with
the Additional Funding will be properly managed and that the Funding is aligned with the principles of
sustainable development. The objectives of the addendum to the Parent Program’s ESSA are to (i) assess
progress in the implementation of the recommendations and actions under the Parent Program action
plan; (ii) identify relevant legislative and procedural changes since the preparation of the Parent
Program’s ESSA; (iii) present the activities planned under the Additional Funding and identify potential
new environmental and social risks and impacts associated with this Funding; (iv) recommend measures
to further strengthen the environmental and social system; and (v) address aspects related to stakeholder
engagement and consultations and disclosure.
11.    The methodology used for drafting the ESSA Addendum consisted in reviewing the
environmental and social management system applicable to the Program with a view to assessing its
compliance with the provisions of the World Bank’s Policy and Directive applicable to the funding of
the PAEA PforR2 and subsequent amendments to which the Program must comply under the Additional
Funding.
12.     The preparation of the Addendum required a series of reviews and consultations with
stakeholders concerned by the Parent Program. Thus, the Addendum reflects several documents,
including the original Environmental and Social System Assessment and subsequent World Bank
implementation support mission reports (aide-mémoires), and monthly, quarterly environmental and
social monitoring reports. Interviews were also conducted with key stakeholders at the central level,
including the Program Management Unit (PMU), the Program Support Unit (PSU), the Directorate
General of Drinking Water (DGEP), the Directorate General of Sanitation, Wastewater and Excreta
(DGAEUE), the Directorate General of Water Resources (DGRE), the Technical Secretariat for
Integrated Water Resources Management (ST/GIRE), and the National Agency for Environmental
Assessments (ANEVE). Field investigations were carried out in some program beneficiary communes,
namely in the communes of Bobo-Dioulasso and Karangasso Vigué in the Hauts-Bassins region, where
various technical and local stakeholders were consulted. Construction contractors, social and technical

2
  Under the World Bank Policy for PforR funding (OP 9.00), six fundamental principles that are set out in
paragraph 8 of the Policy have to be complied with, namely: (i) Environmental and social impact assessment and
management, (ii) Natural habitats and physical and cultural resources, (iii) Community and worker safety, (iv)
Land acquisition, (v) Indigenous peoples and vulnerable groups and (vi) Social conflict. OP 9.00 focuses on the
importance of linking funds disbursements to the achievement of specific results.



                                                                                                             2
contracting authorities, representatives of beneficiary communities, and IDPs were also consulted. After
data were processed and findings analyzed, environmental and social risk mitigation measures specific
to the Additional Funding were designed and integrated into the Program Action Plan (PAP).


A - Progress in the implementation of the Parent Program
13.      Overall progress of the Parent Program: The main achievements under the Parent Program to
date are as follows:
14.     Result area 1: Overall, the number of people provided with access to an improved water source
under the Program as of June 30, 2024 is 953,976, i.e. 59.3 percent of the post-restructuration target.
The number of women among beneficiaries is 496,067.52 or 59 percent of the total number of
beneficiaries. The number of IDPs among beneficiaries as of the same date is 2,162, i.e. 4 percent of the
post-restructuration target. The additional water production capacity built under the program is
23,565.44 m3/day, i.e. 82 percent of the post-restructuration target value. Other achievements should
also be reported, including the percentage of grievances resolved in a timely way that stands at 94
percent over the same period.
In rural areas, the number of people provided with access to an improved water source under the
Program is 318,110, or 38 percent of the post-restructuration target. The number of rural water systems
built under the Program whose management is delegated to a third party is 25, which corresponds to 50
percent of the post-restructuration target value. In urban areas, the number of people provided with
access to an improved water source under the Program as of June 30, 2024 is 635,866, i.e. 83 percent of
the post-restructuration target.
15.      The achievements under RA 1 that have allowed for reaching those indicator values include: (i)
1,286 F1 type boreholes built, 892 of which are equipped with HPPs; (617 in community locations and
275 in health centers and schools); (ii) 90 F2 boreholes built, (iii) 29 simplified safe water supply
systems implemented in rural areas; (iv) 751 private connections installed in rural areas and 90,069
private connections installed in urban areas; (v) 254 standpipes built in rural areas and 262 standpipes
built in urban areas; (vi) 1,100 km of water distribution network installed in urban areas; (vii) 4 water
towers, 02 ground tanks and pumping stations implemented; (viii) increase in water production capacity
by more than 23 565.44 m3/day with 18,506 m3/day in rural areas and 5,059 m3/day in urban areas; (ix)
management delegated to a third party of 25 water supply systems out of the 50 already built by the
Program in the four regions.
Result area 2: In urban areas, the number of people provided with access to improved sanitation
infrastructure under the Program is 329,330, i.e. 58 percent of the post-restructuration target. In rural
areas, the number of people provided with access to improved sanitation infrastructure under the
Program is 96,410, i.e. 29 percent of the post-restructuration target. The achievements that account for
these indicator values include (ii) 33,737 family latrines and 24,530 cesspools in urban areas built or
rehabilitated; (ii) 436 sanitation cabins built in urban areas; (iii) 9,641 family latrines built in rural areas,
including 1,500 for IDPs; and (iv) a community latrine management guide developed by June 30, 2024.
16.      The number of new sanitation cabins equipped with handwashing facilities built in schools,
health centers, and public places as of June 30, 2024 is 94, i.e. 2 percent of the post-restructuration
target. The low achievement rate as regards sanitation cabins and family latrines in rural areas clearly
indicates what remains to be done to provide sustainable solutions to sanitation issues in rural areas. In
addition, efforts should be made to ensure proper use and maintenance of the cabins built.
17.      Result area 3: as of June 30, 2024, the overall progress rate of PAEA stands at 46.97 percent,
which means that a large portion of achievements are expected to occur during the Additional Phase.
The following achievements should also be noted: the number of productive boreholes in the basement
aquifer drilled under the Program is 15, i.e. 30 percent of the target (this figure has yet to be submitted
to the Independent Verification Agency - IVA). Other activities were planned but were not carried out,
including geophysical survey rounds (all methods), and deep reconnaissance drilling equipped with
piezometers. Some activities were cancelled outright, namely the report on the geometry and lithology




                                                                                                               3
characteristics of the aquifers in the Western sedimentary basin, and the calibrated geological model;
the report on water withdrawals and calibrated hydrogeological model, and the updating of
hydrogeological maps.
18.     It was agreed to restructure the Program following the mid-term review that was held from
November 27 to December 3, 2021. The restructuration involved a revision of the Program’s results
framework and Disbursement-Linked Indicators matrix, which from then on has prioritized allocations
to the most advanced Result Areas (safe water and human capital), as announced in the previous
missions. As for the Result Area on sanitation, it should be closely monitored and its initial targets were
reduced by 33 percent as part of the restructuration. Due to the unprecedented nature of the activities
implemented in the area of water resources knowledge (drilling of deep boreholes of more than 500 m)
and taking into account the worsening security context, particularly in the regions of the North, the
Sahel, the East and in the Boucle du Mouhoun, it was agreed that the results could only be achieved
between 12 and 18 months after the Parent Program’s close-out date.3
19.      Implementation of the Parent Program’s environmental and social safeguards aspects: the
review of the Parent Program’s environmental safeguarding aspects showed that the six
recommended/planned measures had been carried out (Annex 1) and that the various related measures
are also being implemented. The actions include: (i ) awareness raising and training on environmental
and social safeguards and the procedures of the Environmental and Social Management Technical
Manual (ESMTM); (ii) support to the communes and structures implementing sub-projects to implement
the Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM); (iii) support to the National Environmental Assessment
Agency (ANEVE) through a collaboration and external assistance agreement, (iv) recruitment of
consultants to prepare simplified Environmental and Social Impact (ESIAs) and Resettlement Action
Plans (RAPs) for sub-projects; (v) implementation of mitigation measures contained in the
Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) and RAPs; and (vi) signing of a memorandum
of understanding between Burkina Faso’s Ombudsman (Médiateur de Faso) and the Higher Authority
for State Control and Corruption Control (ASCE-LC) to promote collaboration between the two focal
institutions in processing complaints and cases of Program funds mismanagement. Other measures were
added to the initial action plan, namely: (i) implementation of specialized and in-depth training on
monitoring and control of various environmental and social mitigation measures; (ii) development of
citizen engagement guidelines to ensure effective participation and consultation of local communities,
targeted beneficiary community, and vulnerable groups; and (iii) development of a gender action plan
for the water supply, sanitation and IWRM sectors.
20.      Occupational health and safety: As regards health and safety, the Program recorded accidents
that occurred on some construction sites, resulting in the death of five children, namely two deaths on
June 8, 2024 in the commune of Bagassi, one death on May 29, 2022 in the commune of Kougny in the
Boucle du Mouhoun Region, and three deaths on May 25,2021 in the commune of Ouagadougou in the
Center region. These accidents led to the development of a specific action plan agreed upon between the
Government and the World Bank following an environmental and social audit. The plan’s
implementation status was reviewed as of June 15, 2023. After this, updates on its implementation were
regularly conducted. The action plan includes: (i) corrective actions to be implemented before the
resumption of suspended work and (ii) corrective actions to be implemented during works (included in
the detailed report and in the complete action plan). An update on the implementation status of the action
plan prepared as part of the World Bank’s project support mission in July 2024 showed that: (i) of the
13 corrective measures required for lifting the suspension, 12 had been fully implemented and one
relating to “the full elimination of hazards linked to the remaining excavations and trenches after the
suspension of works in secure areas” has been implemented only in part due to insecurity; and (ii) of the
21 corrective actions to be implemented during works, 17 had been implemented, 2 were in progress,
and 2 had not yet been completed. Several strong measures were then applied, including the following:
(i) construction contractors and project managers working on the program’s construction sites had to
subscribe to an insurance; (ii) site security measures (marking out) were strictly enforced; (iii) a

3
 Aide-mémoire of the PAEA-PforR mid-term review mission, from November 27 to December 3, 2021, and
completed in the form of regular exchanges until September 2022.



                                                                                                         4
Hygiene, Health, and Environment (HHE) specialist was recruited within the PMU and contractors; and
(iv) awareness-raising and information actions were strengthened. Monitoring and reporting are
routinely performed in a satisfactory way.
21.     Environmental and social assessments: Environmental and social screenings and environmental
and social assessments such as Environmental and Social Prescriptions (ESP), simplified ESIA and
recommended RAPs have been carried out in accordance with the national texts in force. For instance,
as regards rural areas, it is noted that 149 environmental and social feasibility permits were received
from ANEVE for various sub-projects (construction of water supply systems, geophysical prospecting
in the sedimentary zone, water supply systems to be rehabilitated, etc.), subject to the preparation of
simplified ESIAs; 60 Environmental and Social Feasibility permits should be received soon. As for ESP,
they were developed for 1,100 HPP boreholes, 85,000 family latrines and 105,000 community latrines.
In urban areas, a total of 15 environmental and social feasibility permits were obtained (for the
construction of water production centers in Ouagadougou and in secondary urban centers, the
construction of safe water systems in several urban centers, etc.).
22.     Capacity building: Several capacity building actions targeting PAEA stakeholders were
conducted and addressed the following topics: (i) grievance redress and implementation of RAPs for
members of commune-level GRM committees; (ii) awareness-raising and information on E&S
safeguard measures for the staff of works contractors and works supervision firms; (iii) ESMTM and
E&S procedures for regional focal points and representatives of PAEA implementing structures (DGEP,
DGAEUE, ST-GIRE, DGRE); and (iv) development of ownership of hygiene, health, safety and
environmental provisions for E&S safeguard specialists as well as HHE officers of contractors and
technical contracting authorities.
23.      Gender equality and gender mainstreaming: Results with regard to gender equality under the
Parent Program have generally been satisfactory. Indeed, as of June 30, 2024, women represent 59
percent of the beneficiaries provided with access to an improved water source under the Program. These
achievements have had positive impacts on rural women and vulnerable people as regards supply of safe
water. These positive impacts include alleviation and reduction of time spent on water fetching,
alleviation of the water fetching workload, improvement of hygiene and schooling for girls (easy access
to water for proper menstrual hygiene management, for example), and improved capacity to develop
other activities with substantial income once access to safe water had become easier. Similarly, at the
same period, women represented 47 percent of the beneficiaries provided with access to improved
sanitation infrastructure under the Program. The Additional Funding would continue integrating gender-
sensitive interventions into its supported activities in a same way.
24.      Citizen engagement: The Parent Program has delivered relatively satisfactory results in terms
of citizen engagement and its Additional Funding should continue to integrate these principles and
approaches in the same way. The design and selection of structures funded under the Parent Program
were informed by planning processes that included the participation of the local population and local
authorities in the identification and selection of sites, the preparation of simplified ESIAs and RAPs,
and public consultations. This allowed for reflecting and taking into account the expectations, concerns
and views of the relevant stakeholders. This approach consisting in fully taking into account the views
of communities should be further expanded in all intervention areas and much strengthened under the
Additional Funding as 7 percent of the beneficiaries’ representatives stated that they had not been
adequately involved as shown by the reports of the field investigations carried out in preparation of the
Additional Funding. By the closing date of the Parent Program on 30 June 2025, it is planned to
strengthen the implementation of gender and citizen engagement actions specified in the related
documents. This will consist in updating the gender action plan and aligning it with the actions contained
in the citizen engagement guidelines.
25.     It is noted that the Parent Program’s environmental and social performance is rated Moderately
Satisfactory (see AM of July 2024). This performance results from ownership of the procedures by the
actors with the dissemination of and training on the provisions of the ESMTM as well as from the
application of the measures and actions included in the action plan ensuing from the environmental and




                                                                                                        5
social audit. It is very likely that this performance will improve with the implementation of the
Additional Funding.


B - Relevant legislative and procedural amendments
26.      The environmental and social system and procedures described in the environmental and social
system assessment report of the Parent Program are still applicable with regard to the laws, regulations,
standards as well as procedures and institutions involved in the effective implementation of such laws,
regulations and standards. The Additional Funding will not involve any change in terms of legislation
or procedures with regard to the nature and type of activities planned and to be implemented in the field
by the various Program stakeholders. The technical supervision of PAEA, initially ensured by the
Ministry of Water and Sanitation, is now within the Ministry of the Environment, Water and Sanitation
(MEEA). However, during the Parent Program, the Ombudsman (Médiateur du Faso4) was selected to
ensure social intermediation in the management of complaints and disputes between citizens and the
administration. This institution was dissolved by a decision of the Council of Ministers dated July 17,
2024 following the reforms that took place after the new bill revising the Constitution became effective
further to its adoption by the Council of Ministers in December 2023. To address this issue, the PMU is
considering handing this responsibility over to the Ministry of Humanitarian Action and National
Solidarity, which has experience in managing conflicts, complaints, and claims from citizens.


C - Environmental and social risks and impacts associated with the Additional Financing
27.    Prior to the analysis of the environmental and social risks and impacts associated with the
Additional Funding, a description of the planned activities is provided at the beginning of this section.
Result Area 1
Urban areas: Ouagadougou: supply of 13,675 complete connection kits, supply of 13,675 cold water
meters, creation of 13,675 social connections, construction of 90 standpipes, acquisition and installation
of 54 production meters in Ouagadougou.
Other towns: (Yako, Bousse, Gourcy) and (Kaya, Boussouma, Korsimoro), new centers (Gon-
Boussougou, Mogtédo, Béguédo and Tiébélé): works similar to those under the Parent Program (RA1)
will be carried out such as intake structures, pumping stations, piping between treatment/pumping
station, tank and extension pipes, water connections, and standpipes.
Rural areas: Equipment of 100 HPP boreholes, construction of 24 new SWS systems, rehabilitation of
4 SWS systems, rehabilitation of 60 old boreholes equipped with HPP, construction of 30 autonomous
water stations for IDPs, construction of 260 autonomous water stations in schools, connection of the
rural commune capital to the ONEA network in Ouagadougou and densification of its network.
It is also planned to carry out 60 socio-economic feasibility studies and ESIAs and to conduct social
intermediation for SWS.
Result area 2
Urban areas: Family sanitation - 2,500 latrines including 250 for host families of IDPs, Family
sanitation - 2,000 cesspools, construction of 50 sanitation cabins for IDPs.
It is also planned to carry out social engineering/training/supervision of craftsmen and
supervision/monitoring of works as well as to provide support for the organization of the sewage sludge
management sub-sector in Bobo-Dioulasso and Ouagadougou.
Rural areas: Construction of 10,000 family latrines. Other achievements are planned: 6,200 shower-
latrines blocks for IDPs, 560 laundry basins connected to a sump, acquisition and distribution of 1,500
hygiene kits, acquisition and distribution of 500 MHM kits, acquisition of 100 garbage bins, and 250

4
 The Médiateur du Faso was established by Organic Law #22/94/ADP dated May 17, 1994 and is governed by
Law # 017-2013/AN dated May 16, 2013 relating to attributions, organization and operation.



                                                                                                        6
maintenance kits for shower-latrines blocks for IDPs.
Result area 3
The planned activities include the acquisition of suitable equipment for gauging and training in its use;
support for carrying out gauging campaigns with a view to updating calibration curves; carrying out
magnetic and electrical geophysical survey rounds in the bedrock zone; and carrying out 50
reconnaissance drillings in the bedrock zone.
Other actions are planned to strengthen the technical and operational capacities of the DGRE’s water
analysis laboratory (upgrading of the building housing the laboratory, including standardization of
procedures, and acquisition of analysis equipment). Specifically, the following activities will be carried
out under the Additional Funding: (i) rehabilitation of the water analysis laboratory building to bring
the facilities (architectural elements, electrical network, etc.) and equipment into compliance; (ii)
acquisition of portable field analysis equipment and other laboratory equipment to strengthen rapid
response capabilities; and (iii) acquisition of an inductively coupled plasma atomic emission
spectroscopy (ICP-AES) to strengthen the laboratory’s capacity to screen for metals and other emerging
pollutants.
28.     The Additional Funding will not introduce significant changes in the scope and areas of
intervention compared to the Parent Program.
For rural areas, the initial intervention zone consisting of four regions (Boucle du Mouhoun, Cascades,
Hauts-Bassins, Sud-Ouest), will be extended to two new regions, namely Plateau Central and Centre.
From an environmental and social perspective, some constraints and issues must be addressed. Indeed,
the two new regions tend to be highly urbanized and the challenge will be to establish a new orientation
for land management. Also, there will be a need to reconcile emergency interventions aimed at meeting
the needs of IDPs with the requirement to conduct environmental and social assessments to ensure
sustainability of the interventions.
For urban areas, from an environmental point of view, the extension of the safe water network will
entail increasing the length of the network, which will lead to moderate environmental impacts and risks
on the biophysical and human environments (risks of accidents, dust emissions, etc.).
From a social point of view, the increase in the length of the network implies moderate social risks,
including the loss of private economic assets, with owners possibly refusing amicable transfer of their
lands for the construction of community infrastructure (safe water supply works).
A review of activities aimed at strengthening the technical and operational capacities of the DGRE water
analysis laboratory (upgrading the lab, including standardization of procedures, acquisition of ICP)
highlighted some impacts and risks that, though moderate, will require the adoption of mitigation
measures as follows: (i) organize awareness-raising and information sessions for workers, local
communities, and users on the risks associated with the work and operation of the laboratory; (ii) provide
workers with suitable Personal Protective Equipment (PPE); (iii) develop and operationalize a
laboratory waste management plan; and (iv) train workers on Occupational Health and Safety (OHS)
related to laboratory activities.
As such, the Additional Funding will not induce substantial negative environmental and social risks and
impacts. The institutions that manage environmental and social risks at the central, regional, commune,
and village levels are the same and are considered sufficiently strong to manage the changes associated
with the Additional Funding.
29.      The activities under the Additional Funding are not likely to have high and substantial impacts
on protected areas, or to significantly transform natural habitats or to irreversibly modify areas of
biodiversity and/or potentially important cultural resources. Overall, they should have a positive impact
in the long term. Indeed, they will improve the rate of access to safe water and sanitation, which will
promote better health outcomes and improvement of the living environment of rural and urban
communities; will contribute to eradicating waterborne diseases and improving living conditions; will
promote appropriate personal and food hygiene behaviors; and will reduce the prevalence of waterborne
diseases, etc.




                                                                                                        7
30.     To go into details, the negative environmental and social risks and impacts should be moderate
and overall will result from construction works specific to sites and to the type of works. They will
generally be limited to air pollution, water pollution, soil degradation (degradation of access roads to
construction sites due to truck traffic), poor waste management, destruction of vegetation cover and
wildlife habitats, occupational accidents, traffic accidents, increased risks of STIs/HIV/AIDS, likely
increase of gender-based violence, sexual harassment, sexual exploitation and abuse, etc. Similarly, risks
of social conflicts between local communities and construction site personnel may arise in the event
there is no recruitment of local labor. However, these negative environmental and social risks and
impacts are expected to be moderate, temporary, predictable, and easily mitigated with planned
measures.
31.      Land acquisition, physical and/or economic displacement: Overall, the most significant social
risks associated with the Additional Funding that are likely to occur remain the same as those under the
Parent Program and are linked to land acquisition, provision of land or temporary occupation of land.
As with the Parent Program, the Additional Funding will require providing land for the construction of
safe water supply systems (extension of existing water infrastructure) and sanitation systems. It will use
the existing footprint, land belonging to the Government or to the communes, or land belonging to
private landowners who would hand over such land for use by the Program through transfer or donation.
The later cases will be managed through procedures deemed satisfactory by national regulations as
reinforced by the World Bank. In this regard, there are risks of temporary or permanent loss of land or
portions of land due to works. Particular attention must be paid to the status of the land where works
would be implemented.
32.      Risks of poor siting or poor spatial coverage of the water or sanitation distribution network: As
the consultations carried out in the communes of Bobo-Dioulasso and Karangasso Vigué show, there
are persistent difficulties in finding appropriate sites for the construction of water infrastructure. While
looking for replacement sites offers an alternative, this would result in delays in the completion of
infrastructure. There are other risks that are less significant and are linked to nuisances/disturbances
caused by works such as access difficulties, traffic diversions, increased noise, vibrations, dust
emissions, etc. All of these may generate temporary disruptions in the day-to-day activities of
communities.
33.     Risk of disruption of the local hydrogeological regime due to the construction and operation of
boreholes for safe water supply systems in a large number of beneficiary localities: Hydrodynamic
events may occur in shallow water table catchment areas, especially for wells located near locations
where the drilling is done, and may result in drying up and/or polluting nearby wells.
34.     Risk of overexploitation of groundwater: The increase in the number of drillings for safe water
supply systems and especially the drilling of deep boreholes could lead to overexploitation of the
resource and may undermine the satisfaction of future needs. Indeed, the Program could have negative
impacts on groundwater where the use of boreholes carries a risk of overexploitation of water resources
and possibly a risk of progressive lowering of the groundwater level.
35.     Risk of cumulative impacts: The effects of climate change may gradually cause an increasingly
growing deficit in aquifer recharge, which could reduce the piezometric surface. This may affect the
availability of groundwater resources in the medium or long term, especially with the increase in the
number of safe water supply systems built through the Additional Funding. When implementing the
environmental and piezometric monitoring, special attention should be paid to the potential qualitative
and quantitative impacts associated with the Additional Funding linked to the exploitation of
groundwater that will come on top of impacts that naturally exist.




                                                                                                          8
D – Measures and recommendations for strengthening the environmental and social system
36.      To further strengthen environmental and social management, particularly for the Additional
Funding, the E&S risk and impact assessment table and the mitigation/compensation measures of the
Parent Program have been revised (see Annex 6) by integrating the mitigation measures for the new
risks identified. The main task will then consist in ensuring that the measures thus defined are effectively
implemented in a consistent way. Thus, based on the analysis carried out for this Addendum with respect
to the six fundamental principles, the action plan below is proposed. Table 2 below provides an overview
of the key actions to be taken to further improve the management of the new risks identified and reduce
the impact of old risks in the context of the Additional Funding. This action plan will complement the
Parent Program’s Environmental and Social Management Action Plan.


                                Table 1: Program Action Plan - Additional Funding

    Description of the          Deadline          Responsible   Additional implementation measures
    action                                                      proposed further to the Additional Funding

    Ensure the rehabilitation   During the        PMU           •   Organize awareness-raising and information
    of the lab in compliance    works phase       PSU               sessions for workers, local communities, and
    with national               and throughout    DGRE              users
    environmental and social    the               ANEVE         •   Provide workers with suitable PPE
    standards and good          implementation                  •   Develop and operationalize a waste
    practices                   of PAEA                             management plan
                                                                •   Operationalize a laboratory waste
                                                                    management plan
                                                                •   Train workers on Occupational Health and
                                                                    Safety (OHS) related to laboratory activities
    Continue and strengthen     Throughout the    PMU           •   Strengthen the involvement of HHE and
    the implementation of       implementation    PSU               social and environmental safeguards focal
    the strategy for resuming   of PAEA (at all   DREA              points at DREA and technical and social
    family latrine              phases of         Private           contracting authorities in charge of water
    construction works under    PAEA)             providers         supply systems in the monitoring of
    PAEA                                                            construction site ESMPs, RAPs, and HHE
                                                                    provisions
                                                                •   Ensure that these entities prepare E&S
                                                                    monitoring reports
                                                                •   Involve field technicians in HHE and E&S
                                                                    safeguards training sessions
    Ensure the functioning of From the            PMU           •   Raise awareness and inform stakeholders on
    grievance redress         validation of       PSU               the content of the revised GRM
    committees                the revised         DREA          •   Reform and formalize GRM committees: (i)
                              GRM and             Communes          village-level grievance redress committee
                              throughout the      Technical and     based on the Village Development Councils
                              implementation      social            (CVD5), (ii) communal grievance redress
                              of PAEA (at all     contracting       committees, (iii) national grievance redress
                              phases of           authorities       committee housed by the PMU;
                              PAEA)               CVD/COVED •       Provide the committees with material and
                                                                    financial resources for their operation;
                                                                •   Continue training committee members;
                                                                •   Ensure that ASCE-LC regularly forwards
                                                                    reports on the implementation of the GRM
                                                                    (fraud and corruption component)
    Strengthen the capacities                     PMU           •   Ensure that relevant environmental measures
    of stakeholders on                            PSU               are integrated into contractors’ bids and

5
  Law # 003-2023/ALT of March 25, 2023 establishing the Monitoring and Development Committees (COVED)
provides that the CVDs be replaced by the COVEDs



                                                                                                                 9
Description of the        Deadline          Responsible   Additional implementation measures
action                                                    proposed further to the Additional Funding

safeguards to promote                       ANEVE             contracts rather than preparing simplified
more effectiveness in                                         ESIAs;
actions (DREA,                                            •   Have the PSU carry out an inventory of the
communes, DGEP,                                               assets affected along the network length and
DGAEUE, ST/GIRE,                                              include the inventory as an Annex to the
DGRE, PSU, PMU)                                               initial Summary Relocation Plans/
                                                              Relocation Action Plans prepared with a
                                                              view to compensation
                                                          •   Continue training members of the ad hoc
                                                              Environmental and Social Management
                                                              Assistance Committees (CAGES) in other
                                                              centers once the budgets are available
                                                          •   Provide a support agent to strengthen the
                                                              PSU’s E&S safeguards staff;
                                                          •   Facilitate the performance of E&S
                                                              screening;
                                                          •   Continue implementing the agreement with
                                                              ANEVE for training support and external
                                                              monitoring of construction sites
Ensure monitoring and     Ongoing           PMU           •   Provide adequate financial resources for
control of the                              PSU               land acquisitions and compensation for
implementation of the                       ANEVE             investment sites;
site- ESMPs and the                                       •   Regularly organize site visits and
RAPs                                                          monitoring;
                                                          •   Prepare regular monitoring reports.
Continue the                                PMU           •   Ensure that inclusion, gender, and citizen
implementation of the                       PSU               engagement are addressed in the Program’s
gender action plan and                                        framework documents;
citizen engagement                                        •   Ensure that gender is addressed in the design
guidelines                                                    and construction of water supply and
                                                              sanitation works;
                                                          •   Conduct behavior change communication
                                                              campaigns;
                                                          •   Promote effective participation and
                                                              consultation of local communities, targeted
                                                              beneficiary communities, and vulnerable
                                                              groups;
                                                          •   Collect and build on gender-specific data
                                                              under the implementation of Additional
                                                              Funding activities.
Continue to document      Before the start PMU
the status of land        of the           PSU
planned for use before    Additional       Communes
starting any works        Funding works
relating to Additional
Funding and ensure
compensation for any
losses
Recruit consultants for   Before starting   PMU           •   Prepare the Terms of reference for the
the preparation and       works             PSU               recruitment of consultants in a timely way;
validation of sub-                                        •   Select authorized service providers;
projects ESIAs and                                        •   Prepare E&S clauses to be included in future
RAPs                                                          works tenders.




                                                                                                         10
 Description of the             Deadline           Responsible   Additional implementation measures
 action                                                          proposed further to the Additional Funding

 Finalize the three actions     As soon as         PMU           •   Continue periodic (annual) assessments of
 currently being carried        possible to                          HHE measures on Program sites through a
 out and carry out the two      close the                            specialist consultant until the end of the
 actions not yet initiated in   remaining                            Additional Funding.
 the environmental and          excavations in
 social audit action plan       insecure zones.
                                December 31,
                                2024 for other
                                actions.
 Enforce the security,          From the           PMU           •   Strengthen communication actions aimed at
 environmental and social       resumption of      PSU               service providers on compliance with risk
 measures referred to in        works on the       DREA              prevention measures on construction sites;
 the conclusion of the          Parent Project     Communes      •   Reinforce periodic awareness-raising actions
 detailed/updated report        until the end of   Technical and     in work areas, before the start, during works,
 on the implementation of       the Additional     social            and at the end of works;
 the action plan ensuing        Funding works      contracting   •   Strengthen supervision missions to verify
 from the September 2023                           authorities       compliance with environmental and social
 audit.                                            CVD/COVED         safeguard measures.


37.      In the meantime, a wide range of stakeholders participating in implementation will remain
involved in overall supervision to ensure that: (i) the results of the funding are reviewed and approved
at a high level; (ii) cross-sectoral coordination mechanisms remain in place; and (iii) key stakeholders
are appropriately represented at the strategic level and will also include environmental or social
specialists, as needed.
38.     Adequacy of applicable systems: The country’s systems’ strengths, weaknesses, opportunities,
and threats as seen in the light of the six fundamental principles applicable to the Parent Program remain
the same for the Additional Funding – and are as described in the Bank’s Policy and Guidelines for
PforR funding.


E- Stakeholder engagement, consultations and disclosure

39.      Stakeholder mapping: During the preparation stage, a list of stakeholders was prepared,
covering those who will be directly or indirectly impacted by the Program as well as those who will
directly and indirectly impact the Program. The main structures and institutions directly involved in the
implementation of the Additional Funding will be the same as for the Parent Program. The main
stakeholders include the PMU, the PSU, DGAEUE, DGEP, DGRE, ANEVE, ST/GIRE, ST/GUF,
DREA, local structures including communes/municipal offices, construction contractors, supervision
firms, and the communities benefiting from/affected by the Program. Consultations with government
officials, communes/municipal offices, construction contractors, supervision firms, and the affected
beneficiary communities were conducted face-to-face.
40.  Disclosure: The draft ESSA Addendum will be published online on the PMU’s website, the
MEEA’s website, and the World Bank’s external website.




                                                                                                                11
Annex 1: Review of the implementation of PAEA’s action plan for environmental and social aspects
         Designation         Unit       Amount                               Achievements                                         Comments
#
1    Awareness raising    Number     24 participants   Awareness-raising/training actions for stakeholders carried   Stakeholder participation is
     and training on                 (2 participants   out by the PMU and the PSU:                                   quantified as follows:
     environmental and               per               -   One training session held for regional focal points and   -   25 participants per session for the
     social safeguards               environmental         representatives of implementing structures (DGEP,             2020 sessions;
                                     unit and per          DGAEUE, ST-GIRE, DGRE) in 2020;                           -   130 participants for the February
                                     implementing      -   Two capacity building sessions for HHE, social and            2023 sessions;
                                     entity)               environmental safeguards managers and focal points in     -   240 participants for the February
                                                           February 2023 and for all safe water supply, SWSS             and March 2024 sessions.
                                                           managers, and safeguards focal points of the four
                                                           Regional Water and Sanitation Directorates (DREA),
                                                           DGEP, DGAEUE, and DGRE;
                                                       -   Two capacity-building sessions for HHE, social and
                                                           environmental safeguards officers, and focal points in
                                                           February and March 2024 and for all safe water supply
                                                           and SWSS managers and safeguards focal points of the
                                                           four DREAs, DGEP, DGAEUE, and DGRE.

2    Support to the       Number     79 participants   83 communes in the four regions in rural areas.               In total, 66 communes were initially
     communes in                     (75 communes                                                                    targeted for PAEA’s intervention.
     implementing the                and 4
     GRM                             implementing
                                     entities)
3    Support to sub-project Number   8 beneficiary     -   In all, 83 commune-level GRM committees, 4 regional       The complaints received were
     implementation                  structures (a         GRM committees, and one national GRM committee            recorded, and negotiation agreements
     structures in                   lump sum of           have been set up to date.                                 were signed with the complainants.
     implementing the                XOF 2 million     -   A tripartite agreement was concluded between PAEA,
     GRM                             per year for          the High Authority for State Control and Corruption       Due to the lack of available budget,
                                     each of the           Control (ASCE-CL), and the Ombudsman (Médiateur           the arrangements to pay for the costs
                                     structures            du Faso).                                                 incurred by committee members
                                     (DGEP, DGA,       -   A protocol between PAEA and ASCE-LC was                   (travel and communication expenses)
                                     SP/GIRE,              prepared in February 2024 and signed.                     could not been applied to date, which
                                     PSU/ONEA,                                                                       accounts for the non-functionality of




                                                                                                                                                            12
         Designation           Unit       Amount                              Achievements                                        Comments
#
                                      four DREAs)      -   In all, 388 complaints were recorded, mainly relating    the committees set up. However, the
                                                           to damage caused by contractors.                         training organized for HHE and
                                                       -   Out of these, 366 complaints have been resolved          social and environmental safeguards
                                                           (PAPs were compensated) and 22 are being processed.      focal points of the technical and
                                                                                                                    social contracting authorities for
                                                                                                                    SWSS&SWS on the GRM in
                                                                                                                    February and March 2024, enabled
                                                                                                                    these service providers to serve as
                                                                                                                    venues where complaints could be
                                                                                                                    filled in addition to the four DREAs.
4   Awareness-raising        Number   181 participants Four training sessions were held for regional focal points   In all, around 100 participants
    and training on the                                (four DREAs) and representatives of DGEP, DGA, SP-           benefited from these training
    ESMTM procedures                                   GIRE and addressed the ESM on the ESMTM,                     sessions, i.e. about 25 participants per
                                                       environmental and social assessments, on the ESMP and        session.
                                                       the monitoring and control of the various measures.
5   Support for BUNEE        Year     4 collaboration The agreement and implementation MoUs between the             As part of ANEVE’s missions,
    (the current ANEVE)               MoUs signed      PMU and ANEVE are as follows:                                several actions to ensure external
    through a MoU for                                  -   2019-2023 Framework Agreement signed in 2019;            monitoring of construction sites and
    each of the four years                             -   2020 MoU signed in February 2020;                        to build the capacity of stakeholders
                                                       -   2021 MoU signed in June 2021;                            were carried out.
                                                       -   2024-2027 Framework Agreement signed in March
                                                           2024;
                                                       -   2024 MoU awaiting signature.

                                                       Information can be provided on the amounts involved in
                                                       the signed MoUs
                                                       -   2020 MoU: XOF 23,657,740;
                                                       -   2021 MoU: XOF 87,857,800


6   Recruitment of         Number     -                -   Instruments developed for rural areas: 90 feasibility    No RAP has been prepared for works
    Consultants to prepare                                 permits obtained for the 90 ESIAs relating to the        in rural areas. Environmental and
    the sub-projects’                                      implementation of SSWS;                                  social screening was systematically




                                                                                                                                                            13
        Designation          Unit        Amount                         Achievements                                         Comments
#
    ESIAs and RPs                                 -   56 feasibility permits obtained for the 56 ESIAs          carried out for all PAEA sub-projects.
                                                      relating to the rehabilitation of SSWS;
                                                  -   3 feasibility permits obtained for the 3 ESIAs relating   In rural areas, private service
                                                      to geophysical prospecting in the sedimentary zone;       providers were recruited to prepare
                                                  -   ESP for 1,100 boreholes fitted with HPP;                  E&S safeguard instruments
                                                  -   ESP for 85,000 family latrines and 1,050 community        (ESIAs/RAP) and ESCPs.
                                                      latrines in rural areas.

                                                  Instruments developed for urban areas:
                                                  -   3 ESIAs/RAPs for works in Ouagadougou
                                                  -   1 ESIA/RAP for the WPCs of Toécé
                                                  -   1 ESIAs/RAP for the WPCs of Kaya
                                                  -   01 ESIA/RAP for the WPCs of Lac Dem
                                                  -   2 ESIAs/RAPs for the CPEs of Boussouma and
                                                      Korsimoro
                                                  -   4 ESIAs/RAPs for the 4 secondary centers (Mogtédo,
                                                      Tiébélé, Gon Boussougou, Béguedo)
                                                  -   4 ESIAs/RAPs for the 4 new cities (Bobo Dioulasso,
                                                      Koudougou, Dédougou and Nouna).
                                                  Environmental feasibility notice pending:
                                                  -   22 feasibility notices pending for the 49 reserve SSWS
                                                      sites;
                                                  -   ESP for 290 F1 boreholes;
                                                  -   ESP for 109 mini-WSS;
                                                  -   ESP of 50 drillings in the bedrock;
                                                  -   Feasibility study for 8 deep boreholes.
7   Implementation of       Number   -            The E&S measures are implemented by contractors            The PMU team also benefited from
    mitigation measures                           through as part of their site ESMPs. Joint monitoring      ANEVE’s support.
    (ESMP/RAP)                                    missions are carried out by E&S safeguard specialists and
                                                  the HHE specialist.
8   Provide specialized
    and in-depth training
    on monitoring and




                                                                                                                                                      14
         Designation         Unit   Amount                 Achievements                Comments
#
   control of various
   environmental and
   social mitigation
   measures
9 Develop citizen
   engagement
   guidelines to ensure
   effective participation
   and consultation of
   local communities,
   the targeted
   beneficiary
   community, and
   vulnerable groups
10 Develop a gender                          Implemented                  The sanitation component was
   action plan for the                                                    included by DGAEUE in the national
   water supply,                                                          sanitation framework.
   sanitation and IWRM
   sectors
11 Sign a MoU between                        Implemented                  New regional visits and workshops
   the Ombudsman and                                                      took place in May 2023, chaired by
   ASCE-LC to promote                                                     the Ombudsman. However, the
   collaboration between                                                  Ombudsman and ASCE-LC have not
   the two focal                                                          yet submitted reports from their visits
   institutions in the                                                    and workshops.
   processing of
   complaints and cases
   of Program funds
   mismanagement.




                                                                                                               15
 Annex 2: Report on consultations with municipal and institutional stakeholders as part of the
    preparation of the Addendum to the environmental and social system assessment report -
                    Additional Funding of the PAEA PforR in Burkina Faso

The first consultations with the Program stakeholders and beneficiaries took place from
September 4 to 17, 2024 in Ouagadougou and Bobo-Dioulasso with meetings by groups of
stakeholders. The consultations provided an opportunity to introduce the Program’s activities and
explain the approach to the Evaluation of Burkina Faso’s environmental and social management system.
On this occasion, preliminary information was collected on the processes relating to the management of
environmental and social safeguards aspects in the different structures. Using interview guides and in
reference to inputs on the environmental and social impacts of the Program, each structure was requested
to share information on mitigation and improvement measures as well as on existing grievance
management mechanisms. In this Additional Phase, consultations with the program stakeholders and
beneficiaries were renewed. A summary of the outcomes of consultations is provided in the table below.

Summary of public consultations
 Actors         Concerns/Fears                                       Suggestions/Recommendations
 Project        - Failure to take into account, non-application      - Ensure that contractors’ cost
 Support Unit     and/or poor application of E&S safeguard             proposal templates cover
 (PSU)/ONEA       measures mentioned as the main causes of             E&S aspects.
                  incidents and accidents on construction sites.     - Promote techniques that are
                - ANEVE’s failure to comply with the                   applicable in an emergency
                  deadlines for validating E&S safeguard               context to meet the demand
                  instruments, which hinders the startup of            of IDPs
                  certain projects                                   - Install automation devices for
                - Insufficient number of ESMP monitoring               the operation of structures
                  missions carried out by ANEVE                        located in areas affected by
                - Real impact of the security situation on the         serious security challenges to
                  activities of the Parent Program: in addition        limit the need for staff travel
                  to delays, the relocation of the Dem Lake          - Inter-commune collaboration
                  treatment plant to Kaya for security reasons         for wastewater and excreta
                  resulted in additional costs amounting to            management requires prior
                  XOF 300 million and required the                     studies to assess the benefits
                  installation of a tarpaulin system (costing          and costs to be borne by the
                  XOF 200 million); the situation is the same          beneficiary communities, and
                  for the Toécé water intake; the town of              the findings would feed into
                  Nouna could to benefit from investments in           decision-making.
                  sanitation due to security issues; the
                  installations of the Tiogo intake were
                  vandalized; and the staff could not travel to
                  areas affected by serious security challenges
                  to operate the drilling devices.
 Project        - Multiple bodies set up by the projects to          - Expand consultations to the
 Management       ensure the GRM function: this makes it               various RAs managers within
 Unit (PMU)       difficult to build on experiences and raises         the PMU
                  issues of coordination and monitoring.             - Include the issue of deep
                - What strategy should be selected to provide          drilling (RA3) in the
                  quality services to IDPs in emergency                interview with DGRE
                  situation under the Additional Phase?
 Directorate    - Poor involvement of experts                        - Ensure better involvement of
 General     of   (environmentalists and sociologists) from            DGEP E&S experts in the
 Drinking         DGEP in the operationalization of E&S                implementation of the E&S
 Water            procedures relating to PAEA activities: they         safeguards aspects of PAEA
 (DGEP)           get involved only after incidents occur and        - Streamline/harmonize the



                                                                                                     16
Actors            Concerns/Fears                                      Suggestions/Recommendations
                    the lifting of activity suspensions                 implementation of GRMs by
                  - Poor quality of some E&S safeguards reports         implementing a single
                    relating to SWS under PAEA                          framework for projects
                  - A large proportion of the construction            - Increase the amount allocated
                    contractors do not have adequate practical          to E&S safeguards in the
                    knowledge of site ESMPs.                            agreement between DGEP
                  - Big number of GRMs and implementing                 and the PMU
                    bodies (each project has its own GRM)             - Strengthen the operation of
                  - Low amount allocated to E&S safeguards in           GRMs
                    the agreement between DGEP and the PMU            - Develop a GRM for the
                                                                        national SWS with the
                                                                        project-specific GRMs being
                                                                        part of it
                                                                      - Strengthen synergy of action
                                                                        with ANEVE
                                                                      - Further involve the
                                                                        Directorate’s E&S specialists
                                                                        in the E&S safeguards
                                                                        aspects of PAEA
Directorate       - DGRE does not have specific skills in             - Take into account the fact
General of          environmental protection to appraise                that the issue of deep drilling
Water               investment subprojects funded by PAEA.              (RA3) is very specific and
Resources           However, the current staff, mainly made of          requires more time to be
(DGRE)              RM engineers, is likely to have benefited           completed compared to the
                    from training in environmental aspects as           other PAEA RAs. Thus, most
                    part of their pre-service training. Similarly,      of the RA3 activities will be
                    DGRE does not have a sociologist among its          carried out during the PAEA
                    staff (rather, social aspects are covered by        Additional Phase.
                    PMU).
                  - As regards the implementation of investment
                    subprojects, DGRE is not specifically
                    involved in complaints management.
                    Complaints are managed through the bodies
                    set up as part of PAEA.
                  - Land aspects must be taken into account in
                    deep drilling activities.
                  - While the water sector is usually affected by
                    the activities of other sectors, pollution from
                    this sector may also generate external costs
                    that can negatively impact the activities of
                    other sectors.
Technical         - In the Humanitarian, Development, and             - Update/rewrite planning
Secretariat for     Peace (HDP) nexus framework document                documents to address the
WASH                being drafted, complaints management must           HDP and climate change
Emergency           be documented and processed                         nexus (construction standards
Management        - The PAEA intervention zone (Boucle du               for structures, indicators,
(ST/GUW)            Mouhoun, Cascades, Sud-Ouest, Hauts                 monitoring and evaluation
                    Bassins) with the exception of Boucle du            system) at the national,
                    Mouhoun, does not match with the six                regional and local levels
                    priority emergency regions in Burkina             - Add flexibility to
                    (Boucle du Mouhoun, Nord, Centre Est,               procurement procedures to
                    Centre Nord, Est and Sahel). This raises an         provide rapid responses in
                    issue as regards the selection of WASH              emergency situations




                                                                                                     17
Actors        Concerns/Fears                                      Suggestions/Recommendations
                intervention zones. In the emergency              - Add flexibility to take into
                response guidance document sent to the              account emergency zones in
                PMU, the five crisis-affected regions               defining project intervention
                mentioned previously were proposed in               zones
                addition to Hauts-Bassins, Cascades and           - Facilitate the dissemination
                Sud-Ouest                                           of WASH tools in emergency
              - WASH activities can have E&S impacts that           context under development
                must be addressed: for example, emergency           projects and other
                latrines for rapid response that generally do       development initiatives
                not comply with conventional construction
                standards (e.g. laying plastic, and slabs for 6
                months) can cause negative E&S risks and
                impacts if, after use, they are not safely
                dismantled. Also, while it is possible to carry
                out sludge management activities and SSWS
                in a WASH intervention context, the
                procedure for doing so is more complex as it
                requires prior studies.
              - Involve all stakeholders in the management
                committees of the works set up (including
                IDPs).
PMU/PAE       - Occurrence of incidents/accidents on
                                                                  - Ensure that relevant
social          construction sites
                                                                    environmental measures are
safeguard     - Lack of environmental and social
                                                                    incorporated into contractors’
specialist      management capacity (monitoring, GRM
                                                                    bids and contracts instead of
PSU/ONEA        reporting, etc.) among some actors
                                                                    carrying out a ESIAs
environmental - Elimination of the position of Ombudsman
                                                                  - Have the PSU carry out an
protection      that was a key link in the GRM
                                                                    inventory of the assets
specialist
                                                                    affected along the network
                                                                    length concerned and include
                                                                    the inventory list as an annex
                                                                    to the initial SRPs/RAPs
                                                                    drawn up in view to
                                                                    providing compensation
                                                                  - Continue providing training
                                                                    for CAGES members in other
                                                                    centers once the budgets are
                                                                    available
                                                                  - Recruit a support agent to
                                                                    strengthen the PSU E&S
                                                                    safeguards staff
                                                                  - Formalize the creation of a
                                                                    complaints management
                                                                    unit/commission at the PMU
                                                                    level in order to specify its
                                                                    responsibilities and operation
                                                                    (memo or decision)
                                                                  - Require the setting up of a
                                                                    workers’ complaints
                                                                    management unit within
                                                                    contractors.
                                                                  - Strengthen/promote the use
                                                                    of the sociological experts of




                                                                                                18
Actors         Concerns/Fears                                    Suggestions/Recommendations
                                                                   the technical and social
                                                                   contracting authorities as
                                                                   entry points for complaints to
                                                                   make up for the difficulties
                                                                   encountered in
                                                                   operationalizing the
                                                                   committees set up at different
                                                                   levels.
Technical      - Innovative construction site management;        - Review the packaging of
contracting    - Failure by contractors to take environmental      contracts to allow for better
authority:       and social management into account from           control (each package is
Bognini Tout     the start of the project                          made up of several works.
Ing Group      - Difficulties in selecting reforestation sites     Some contractors do not have
(GBTI),        - Non-adherence of some contractors                 the technical and financial
Supervision                                                        resources to complete works
firm                                                               on time. Therefore, the
                                                                   number of works per package
                                                                   should be reduced even if this
                                                                   entails recruiting several
                                                                   contractors).
                                                                 - Include security forces in the
                                                                   project management team for
                                                                   securing work sites
                                                                 - Ensure rigorous application
                                                                   of the ESMP from the start of
                                                                   work
                                                                 - Integrate the selection of
                                                                   reforestation sites into studies
                                                                 - Expand E&S safeguards
                                                                   training to technicians to
                                                                   promote more awareness
ANEVE         - ESMP monitoring missions are often               - Sign the annual MoU no later
environmental   difficult to organize due to issues of             than the first quarter. For
and social      coordination between the Focal Point and the       example, the 2024 MoU is
safeguard       ESMP Monitoring unit, the two belonging to         not yet ready to date.
focal point     two different directorates.                      - Ensure that the Focal Point
              - There are no direct functional relationships       shares with the ESMP
                between the ESMP Monitoring Unit and the           Monitoring Unit (at DIAE)
                Focal Point other than common sense to             the list of activities to be
                collaborate.                                       monitored that was submitted
              - The processing time at ANEVE can be long,          by the PAEA PMU
                which can hinder E&S activities in the field     - Ensure that PAEA regularly
                as they require prior permits from ANEVE.          informs ANEVE of the
              - While there have been institutional changes        progress of activities on the
                at ANEVE, the financial chain remains rigid        ground to facilitate
                and does not contribute to the institution’s       monitoring
                technical operational efficiency.                - Help with the acquisition of
              - ANEVE lacks sufficient logistical resources        logistical resources, in
                (vehicles) to carry out field missions             particular, a vehicle for field
                                                                   missions
                                                                 - Help with the acquisition of
                                                                   data collection and




                                                                                                 19
Actors          Concerns/Fears                                    Suggestions/Recommendations
                                                                    processing equipment
                                                                    (computers and tablets)
PMU           - Inadequate capacities of some actors              - Continue and strengthen
environmental - Partnership with ST/WASH                            environmental and social
protection    - Integration of E&S aspects into the works           measures during the
specialist      tendering documents and consultancy                 Additional Phase
                documents                                         - Develop the partnership with
              - Complaints management                               ST/WASH to ensure better
                                                                    adaptation to emergency
                                                                    management and IDPs
                                                                  - Continue and strengthen the
                                                                    application of the new
                                                                    strategy for family latrine
                                                                    construction
                                                                  - Strengthen awareness-raising
                                                                    measures at the launch of
                                                                    works sites and during works,
                                                                    as a major focus for service
                                                                    providers.
DREA of                                                           - Strengthen the capacities of
                - The DREA of Hauts-Bassins does not have
Hauts-Bassins                                                       focal points through training
                  environmental and social safeguards
                                                                    leading to certification.
                  specialists.
                                                                  - Involve the technical services
                - Some sites are inaccessible due to the
                                                                    in charge of the Environment
                  security situation.
                                                                    in the implementation of
                - Difficulties in sourcing aggregates
                                                                    ESMPs and RAPs.
                - No contractors available in the field
                                                                  - Manage the financial
                - Poor mobilization of beneficiaries during
                                                                    liabilities related to the
                  awareness-raising sessions due to the lack of
                                                                    project before any works
                  contractors on the ground
                                                                    suspension.
                - Land acquisition through land transfer
                                                                  - Expand membership in the
                  reports
                                                                    commune-level GRM
                - It may be difficult to implement the strategy
                                                                    committee to any interested
                  due to the lack of controllers on the ground
                                                                    party.
                  during works. However, it is noted that
                                                                  - Conduct a mid-term
                  contractors on the ground follow the strategy
                                                                    evaluation of the commune-
                  despite the absence of controllers.
                                                                    level GRM committees.
                                                                  - Strengthen the operational
                                                                    capacity (logistical and
                                                                    financial means) of GRM
                                                                    committees.
                                                                  - Provide ongoing training for
                                                                    members of GRM
                                                                    committees.
                                                                  - Establish focal points at the
                                                                    district level, train them and
                                                                    provide them with material
                                                                    and financial resources
                                                                  - Set up a committee to review
                                                                    the level of security of land
                                                                    acquired on behalf of the
                                                                    MEEA.




                                                                                                20
Actors        Concerns/Fears                              Suggestions/Recommendations
IDPs from     - Consideration of IDPs in the Additional   - Consider IDPs host families
Soumousso       Phase.                                      as a specific group in the
(commune of                                                 implementation of the
Bobo)                                                       Program’s Additional Phase.
                                                          - Take into account the spatial
                                                            and temporal occupation of
                                                            land by IDPs when carrying
                                                            out activities under the
                                                            Additional Phase.
                                                          - Take into account the social
                                                            organization of IDPs in their
                                                            host environment.
                                                          - Take into account the sites
                                                            where humanitarians are
                                                            conducting WASH
                                                            interventions.
                                                          - Take into account other
                                                            vulnerable groups such as
                                                            IDPs in the Program’s
                                                            Additional Phase.




                                                                                       21
Annex 3: Attendance list of focus groups with beneficiaries and internally displaced persons
 1- Focus groups with beneficiaries




                                                                                               22
23
24
2- Attendance list: Focus groups with IDPs




                                             25
Photos taken during consultations




September 2024 - Meeting with representatives of IDPs settled in Soumousso/commune of Karangasso-Vigué




September 2024 - Meeting with the municipal technical services in the urban commune of Bobo-Dioulasso




                                                                                                         26
Annex 4: List of people met

 1- Working session with the PMU




                                   27
2- Individual interviews in the communes of Bobo Dioulasso and Karangasso Vigué (Hauts Bassins)
    region)




                                                                                                  28
3- Individual interviews in Ouagadougou




                                          29
4- List of people met (technical contracting authorities, social contracting authorities, contractors,
   supervision firms)




                                                                                                   30
Annex 5: Classification table of sub-projects under the Additional Program

Result Area 1 (RA1): Safe Water Supply (SWS)
       DGEP (SWS)
 No. Sub-projects                                                           ESIAs       ESP      RAP
 1     Rehabilitation of four safe water supply (SWS) systems6                          4
 2     Construction of twenty-five (25) new other SSWS                      257
 3     Construction of 260 Autonomous Water Stations (AWS)                              260
       in schools
 4     Construction of 60 boreholes equipped with human-                                60
       powered pumps (HPPs)
 5     Rehabilitation of 60 old boreholes equipped with HPP                             60
 6     Construction of 30 AWS                                                           30
 7     Connection of the municipal capital of Komsilga to the
       ONEA network of Ouagadougou; densification of its
       distribution network; and construction of 2,000 standpipes
       and 100 standpipes for an additional 42,000 people
       ONEA (SWS)
 No. Sub-projects                                                           ESIAs       ESP      RAP
 1     Implementation of 36,000 private connections (including                          x        Social
       25,000 in the city of Ouagadougou)                                                        assessment
                                                                                                 to be carried
                                                                                                 out by
                                                                                                 ONEA and
                                                                                                 annexed to
                                                                                                 the RAPs
                                                                                                 already
                                                                                                 prepared
    2      Construction of 65 standpipes (half of which are in the city                 x        Social
           of Ouagadougou) to serve an additional 262,000 people                                 assessment
                                                                                                 to be carried
                                                                                                 out by
                                                                                                 ONEA and
                                                                                                 annexed to
                                                                                                 the RAPs
                                                                                                 already
                                                                                                 prepared
    3      Strengthening the resilience of water production centers                     x        No site to
           (WPCs) through remote management (5 production                                        acquire, no
           centers located in areas affected by serious security                                 physical or
           challenges have been identified, namely Kaya (WPCs Lac                                economic
           Dem); Kongoussi, Tougan, Koudougou and Nouna)                                         displacement
    4      Construction of at least 30 additional standpipes that will                  x        Social
           be allocated to an additional 7,500 IDPs                                              assessment
                                                                                                 to be carried
                                                                                                 out by
                                                                                                 ONEA and
                                                                                                 annexed to
                                                                                                 the RAPs
                                                                                                 already
                                                                                                 prepared

6
    Rehabilitations that include extensions require ESIAs. Also, for the new SSWS, ESIAs must be obtained.
7
    Due to the planned extension works.



                                                                                                             31
Result Area 2 (RA2): Sanitation in rural and urban areas
       ONEA (Sanitation)
 No. Sub-projects                                                                      ESIAs ESP           BY
 1     Construction of 6,000 new family latrines                                             x
 2     Rehabilitation of 11,000 family latrines for an additional                            x
       170,000 people
 3     Construction of 100 community latrines for 5,000 IDPs                                      x
       DGAEUE (Sanitation)
 No. Sub-projects                                                                      ESIAs ESP           RAP
 1     Construction of 10,000 family latrines for an additional                              6
       100,000 beneficiaries8
 2     Construction of 6,500 shower-latrines blocks equipped with                                 6
       hand washing facilities for 130,000 IDPs

Result Area 3 (RA3): Knowledge of water resources
 ST/GIRE (RA3)
 Sub-projects            ESIAs                 ESP                 RAP
 Implementation of 8     8
 deep boreholes
 Strengthening the technical and operational capacities of DGRE’s water analysis
 laboratory
 Rehabilitation of the            X
    water analysis laboratory
    building to bring the
    installations (architectural
    elements, electrical
    network, etc.) and
    equipment into
    compliance.




8
 Generally, ANEVE groups ESPs by region, so the number of ESPs will be based on the number of regions where
the latrines will be built. For the moment, as regards rural areas, we have two new regions in addition to the four
previous ones, i.e. a total of six.



                                                                                                                32
Annex 6: Table on E&S risk and impact assessment for sub-projects under the Additional Program and compensation measures
Result Area 1: Improving access to water supply (urban areas: ONEA)
 Sub-projects                 Examples of environmental impacts/risks and mitigation measures                        Sample social impacts/risks and mitigation measures
                             Description of negative Mitigation measures                               Description of negative social impacts Mitigation measures
                             environmental impacts                                                     and risks
                             and risks
 Supplying 13,675            • Loss of vegetation,       • Identify trees with the Forest Services     • Conflict over the selection of sites for   •   Involve stakeholders in the selection
 complete connection         • Loss of wildlife and      • Take into account only those trees            works                                          of works sites
 kits, supplying 13,675        wildlife habitat            located in the footprints                   • Risk of work accident                      •   Mark out risk areas
 cold water meters,          • Pollution (hydrocarbon, • Develop groves in the green belt to           • Land acquisition disputes                  •   Provide adequate signage in the work
 creating of 13,675            plastic waste, other        compensate for trees that were cut          • Risk of falling and drowning in                area
 social connections in         waste)                    • Have a waste management plan                  excavations                                •   Raise awareness among local
 the city of                 • Noise pollution           • Water access roads and excavation work      • Risk of destruction of cultural heritage       communities about strictly keeping
 Ouagadougou                 • Risk of water table       • Comply with rest hours                      • Risk of HIV/AIDS transmission                  out of the works zones
                               pollution                 • Establish guidelines for rational           • Traffic disruption                         •   Carry out information and
                             • Instability of the ground   exploitation of the resource to ensure                                                       awareness-raising activities on the
                               structure                   the sustainability of boreholes and the                                                      land acquisition process
                             • Dust emissions              resource                                                                                 •   Conduct awareness campaigns on
                             • Risk of overexploitation • Raise awareness about the effects and                                                         HIV/AIDS
                               of the water table          impacts of water wasting and the
                                                           application of measures to reduce water
                                                           consumption in homes and industrial
                                                           units.
 Construction of 90          • Loss of vegetation          • Identify trees with the Forest Services   • Conflict over the selection of sites for   •   Involve stakeholders in the selection
 standpipes in the city of   • Loss of wildlife and        • Take into account only those trees          works                                          of works sites
 Ouagadougou                   wildlife habitat              located in the footprints                 • Risk of work accident                      •   Mark out risk areas
                             • Pollution (hydrocarbon,     • Set up groves to compensate for cut       • Land acquisition disputes                  •   Carry out information and
                               plastic waste, other          trees                                     • Risk of falling and drowning in                awareness-raising activities on the
                               waste)                      • Have a waste management plan                excavations                                    land acquisition process
                             • Noise pollution             • Water excavation work                     • Risk of destruction of cultural heritage   •   Conduct awareness campaigns on
                             • Risk of water table         • Respect rest hours                        • Risk of HIV/AIDS transmission                  HIV/AIDS
                               pollution                   • Raise awareness on compliance with        • Risks of vector-borne diseases             •   Raise awareness on compliance with
                             • Instability of the ground     hygiene measures around standpipes                                                         hygiene measures around standpipes
                               structure
                             • Tick proliferation




                                                                                                                                                                                            33
Sub-projects               Examples of environmental impacts/risks and mitigation measures                        Sample social impacts/risks and mitigation measures
                          Description of negative Mitigation measures                               Description of negative social impacts Mitigation measures
                          environmental impacts                                                     and risks
                          and risks
Strengthening the         • Increase in electronic  •   Establish an electronic equipment           • Cyberattacks (service interruption)        •     Prioritize equitable distribution of
resilience of water         waste production            recycling program                           • Loss of jobs and social tensions at the         water resources
production centers        • Increase in energy      •   Incorporate green energy                      local level                                •    Organize regular community
(WPCs) through remote       footprint               •   Implement advanced cybersecurity            • Disparities in access to safe water and         consultations
management (5             • Cyber-attacks or            systems                                       worsening of social inequalities.          •    Establish clear resource allocation
production centers          outages affecting water •   Prepare emergency response plans            • Loss of economic opportunities for              protocols. Involve all stakeholders
located in areas            management (flooding). •    Integrate rigorous, automated quality         small water distribution businesses             from the start of the project
affected by serious       • Water contamination         controls before any water discharge.        • Local resistance and sabotage of           •    Provide in-service training, adapted
security challenges         and public health                                                         facilities.                                     to different skill levels, to reduce
have been identified,       problems.                                                               • Difficulties encountered by less skilled        inequalities in the professional
namely Kaya (WPCs         • Discharge of untreated                                                    or older employees with new                     environment,
Lac Dem); Kongoussi,        or poorly treated water                                                   technologies.                              •    Train employees in technical skills
Tougan, Koudougou           into ecosystems                                                                                                           and integrate mixed solutions
and Nouna)                • Fire started by short                                                                                                     (automation + humans).
                            circuit




Construction of 90        • Loss of vegetation,         • Identify trees with the Forest Services   • Conflict over the selection of sites for   • Involve stakeholders in the selection of
standpipes, acquisition   • Loss of wildlife and        • Take into account only those trees          works                                        works sites
and installation of 54      wildlife habitat              located in the footprints                 • Risk of work accident                      • Mark out risk areas
production meters in      • Pollution (hydrocarbon,     • Set up groves to compensate for trees     • Land acquisition disputes                  • Carry out information and awareness-
Ouaga                       plastic waste, other          cut                                       • Risk of falling and drowning in              raising activities on the land acquisition
                            waste)                      • Have a waste management plan                excavations                                  process
                          • Noise pollution             • Water excavation work                     • Risk of destruction of cultural heritage   • Conduct awareness campaigns on
                          • Risk of water table         • Comply with rest hours                    • Risk of transmission of HIV/AIDS             HIV/AIDS
                            pollution                   • Raise awareness on compliance with        • Risks of vector-borne diseases             • Raise awareness on compliance with
                          • Instability of the ground     hygiene measures around standpipes                                                       hygiene measures around standpipes
                            structure
                          • Tick proliferation




                                                                                                                                                                                              34
Result area 1: Improving access to water supply (rural areas: DGEP)
 Sub-projects                   Sample environmental impacts/risks and mitigation measures                               Sample social impacts/risks and mitigation measures


                              Description of negative       Mitigation measures                         Description of negative social impacts         Mitigation measures
                              environmental impacts                                                     and risks
                              and risks

 Construction of 24 new     • Loss of vegetation          • Identify trees with the Forest Services   • Conflict over the selection of sites for   •   Involve stakeholders in the selection
 safe water systems,        • Loss of wildlife and        • Take into account only those trees          works                                          of works sites
 rehabilitation of 4 safe     wildlife habitat              located in the footprints                 • Risk of work accident                      •   Mark out risk areas
 water systems              • Pollution (hydrocarbon,     • Set up groves to compensate for trees     • Land acquisition disputes                  •   Carry out information and
                              plastic waste, other          cut                                       • Risk of falling and drowning in                awareness-raising activities on the
                              waste)                      • Have a waste management plan                excavations                                    land acquisition process
                            • Noise pollution             • Water access roads and excavation work    • Risk of destruction of cultural heritage   •   Conduct awareness campaigns on
                            • Risk of water table         • Comply with rest hours                    • Risk of HIV/AIDS transmission                  HIV/AIDS
                              pollution                   • Recruit and mobilize an environmental     • Complaints of actors                       •   Strengthening the capacities of social
                            • Instability of the ground     specialist.                                                                                management stakeholders
                              structure                   • Develop environmental documents                                                        •   Establish a complaints management
                            • Dust emissions                (ESMP, PHSS)                                                                               mechanism and make it known
                            • Difficulties in             • Strengthen the capacities of
                              implementing                  stakeholders in environmental
                              environmental                 management
                              protection measures
                            • Weak capacity of site
                              personnel to implement
                              environmental and
                              social measures
 Construction of 30         • Loss of vegetation,         • Identify trees with the Forest Services   • Risk of work accident                      •   Involve stakeholders in the selection
 AWS for IDPs,              • Minor pollution             • Take into account only those trees        • Risk of falling                                of works sites
 construction of 260          (hydrocarbon, plastic         located in the footprints                 • Risk of destruction of cultural heritage   •   Mark out risk areas
 AWS in schools,              waste, other waste)         • Have a waste management plan              • Risk of HIV/AIDS transmission              •   Carry out information and
 connection of the rural    • Noise pollution             • Water access roads and excavation work                                                     awareness-raising actions
 commune capital to the     • Risk of water table         • Comply with rest hours                                                                 •   Conduct awareness campaigns on
 ONEA network in              pollution                                                                                                                HIV/AIDS
 Ouagadougou and            • Dust emissions
 densification of its
 network
 Equipment of the 100       • Loss of vegetation,         • Identify trees with the Forest Services   • Conflict over the selection of sites for   •   Involve stakeholders in the selection
 boreholes with HPPs        • Loss of wildlife and        • Take into account only those trees          works                                          of works sites
                              wildlife habitat              located in the footprints                 • Risk of work accident                      •   Mark out risk areas
                                                                                                      • Land acquisition disputes




                                                                                                                                                                                           35
Sub-projects                   Sample environmental impacts/risks and mitigation measures                               Sample social impacts/risks and mitigation measures


                             Description of negative       Mitigation measures                         Description of negative social impacts         Mitigation measures
                             environmental impacts                                                     and risks
                             and risks

                           • Pollution (hydrocarbon,     • Set up groves to compensate for trees     • Risk of falling                            •   Carry out information and
                             plastic waste, other          cut                                       • Risk of destruction of cultural heritage       awareness-raising activities on the
                             waste)                      • Have a waste management plan              • Risk of HIV/AIDS transmission                  land acquisition process
                           • Noise pollution             • Water access roads and excavation work                                                 •   Conduct awareness campaigns on
                           • Risk of water table         • Comply with rest hours                                                                     HIV/AIDS
                             pollution                   • Comply with specifications
                           • Instability of the ground
                             structure
                           • Dust emissions
Rehabilitation of 60 old   • Pollution (hydrocarbon,     • Set up groves to compensate for trees     • Risk of work accident                      •   Involve stakeholders in the selection
boreholes equipped           plastic waste, other          cut                                       • Risk of destruction of cultural heritage       of works sites
with HPP                     waste)                      • Have a waste management plan              • Risk of HIV/AIDS transmission              •   Mark out risk areas
                           • Noise pollution             • Water access roads and excavation work                                                 •   Carry out information and
                           • Risk of water table         • Comply with rest hours                                                                     awareness-raising activities on the
                             pollution                                                                                                                land acquisition process
                           • Instability of the ground                                                                                            •   Conduct awareness campaigns on
                             structure                                                                                                                HIV/AIDS
                           • Dust emissions

Construction of 30         • Loss of vegetation,         • Identify trees with the Forest Services   • Conflict over the selection of sites for   •   Involve stakeholders in the selection
AWS                        • Loss of wildlife and        • Take into account only those trees          works                                          of works sites
                             wildlife habitat              located in the footprints                 • Risk of work accident                      •   Mark out risk areas
                           • Pollution (hydrocarbon,     • Set up groves to compensate for trees     • Land acquisition disputes                  •   Carry out information and
                             plastic waste, other          cut                                       • Risk of falling and drowning in                awareness-raising activities on the
                             waste)                      • Have a waste management plan                excavations                                    land acquisition process
                           • Noise pollution             • Water access roads and excavation work    • Risk of destruction of cultural heritage   •   Conduct awareness campaigns on
                           • Risk of water table         • Comply with rest hours                    • Risk of HIV/AIDS transmission                  HIV/AIDS
                             pollution
                           • Instability of the ground
                             structure
                           • Dust emissions
Connection of the          • Loss of vegetation,         • Identify trees with the Forest Services   • Conflict over the selection of sites for   •   Involve stakeholders in the choice of
municipal capital of       • Loss of wildlife and        • Take into account only those trees          works                                          work sites
Komsilga to the ONEA         wildlife habitat              located in the footprints                 • Risk of work accident                      •   Mark out risk areas
network of                                                                                           • Land acquisition disputes




                                                                                                                                                                                            36
Sub-projects                Sample environmental impacts/risks and mitigation measures                              Sample social impacts/risks and mitigation measures


                          Description of negative       Mitigation measures                        Description of negative social impacts         Mitigation measures
                          environmental impacts                                                    and risks
                          and risks

Ouagadougou;            • Pollution (hydrocarbon,     • Set up groves to compensate for trees    • Traffic disruption                         •   Provide adequate signage in the work
densification of its      plastic waste, other          cut                                      • Risk of falling and drowning in                area
distribution network;     waste)                      • Have a waste management plan               excavations                                •   Carry out information and
and construction of     • Noise pollution             • Water access roads and excavation work   • Risk of destruction of cultural heritage       awareness-raising activities on the
2,000 standpipes and    • Risk of water table         • Comply with rest hours                   • Disruption of water supply                     land acquisition process
100 standpipes for an     pollution                                                              • Risk of HIV/AIDS transmission              •   Information and awareness raising
additional 42,000       • Instability of the ground                                                                                               for stakeholders,
people                    structure                                                                                                           •   Conduct awareness campaigns on
                        • Dust emissions                                                                                                          HIV/AIDS




                                                                                                                                                                                    37
Result Area 2: Improving access to sanitation in urban areas (ONEA)
 Sub-projects                 Sample environmental impacts/risks and mitigation measures                           Sample social impacts/risks and mitigation measures
                         Description of negative Mitigation measures                                 Description of negative social impacts Mitigation measures
                         environmental impacts and                                                   and risks
                         risks
 Family sanitation -     • Loss of vegetation          • Identify trees with the Forest Services     • Conflict over the selection of sites for   •   Involve stakeholders in the selection
 2,500 latrines          • Loss of wildlife and        • Take into account only those trees            works                                          of work sites
 including 250 for         wildlife habitat              located in the footprints                   • Risk of work accident                      •   Mark out risk areas
 IDPs host families,     • Pollution (hydrocarbon,     • Have a waste management plan                • Risk of falling and drowning in            •   Carry out information and
 Family sanitation -       plastic waste, other waste) • Water access roads and excavation work        excavations                                    awareness-raising actions
 2,000 cesspools,        • Noise pollution             • Comply with rest hours                      • Risk of destruction of cultural heritage   •   Conduct awareness campaigns on
                         • Risk of water table                                                       • Risk of HIV/AIDS transmission                  HIV/AIDS
                           pollution                                                                                                              •   Awareness raising on keeping out of
                         • Instability of the ground                                                                                                  the footprint of works
                           structure
                         • Dust emissions

 Construction of 50      • Loss of vegetation            • Identify trees with the Forest Services   • Conflict over the selection of sites for   •   Involve stakeholders in the selection
 sanitation cabins for   • Loss of wildlife and          • Take into account only those trees          works                                          of work sites
 IDPs.                     wildlife habitat                located in the footprints                 • Risk of work accident                      •   Mark out risk areas
                         • Pollution (hydrocarbon,       • Set up groves to compensate for trees     • Land acquisition disputes                  •   Carry out information and
                           plastic waste, other waste)     cut                                       • Risk of falling and drowning in                awareness-raising activities on the
                         • Noise pollution               • Have a waste management plan                excavations                                    land acquisition process
                         • Risk of water table           • Water access roads and excavation work    • Risk of destruction of cultural heritage   •   Conduct awareness campaigns on
                           pollution                     • Comply with rest hours                    • Risk of transmission of HIV/AIDS               HIV/AIDS
                         • Instability of the ground                                                                                              •   Awareness raising on keeping out of
                           structure                                                                                                                  the footprint of works
                         • Dust emissions




                                                                                                                                                                                          38
Result Area 2: Improving access to sanitation in rural areas (DGAEUE)
 Sub-projects              Examples of environmental impacts/risks and mitigation measures                       Examples of social impacts/risks and mitigation measures
                         Description of negative Mitigation measures                                 Description of negative social impacts Mitigation measures
                         environmental impacts and                                                   and risks
                         risks
 Construction of         • Loss of vegetation          • Take into account only those trees          • Conflict over the selection of sites for   •   Involve stakeholders in the selection
 10,000 family           • Loss of wildlife and          located in the footprints                     works                                          of work sites
 latrines for an           wildlife habitat            • Set up groves to compensate for trees       • Risk of work accident                      •   Mark out risk areas
 additional 100,000      • Pollution (hydrocarbon,       cut                                         • Risk of falling and drowning in            •   Carry out information and
 beneficiaries             plastic waste, other waste) • Have a waste management plan                  excavations                                    awareness-raising actions on keeping
                         • Noise pollution             • Water access roads and excavation work      • Risk of destruction of cultural heritage       out of the footprint of works
                         • Risk of water table         • Comply with rest hours                      • Risk of transmission of HIV/AIDS           •   Conduct awareness campaigns on
                           pollution                                                                                                                  HIV/AIDS
                         • Instability of the ground
                           structure
                         • Dust emissions

 6,200 shower-           • Loss of vegetation            • Identify trees with the Forest Services   • Conflict over the selection of sites for   •   Involve stakeholders in the selection
 latrines blocks for     • Loss of wildlife and          • Take into account only those trees          works                                          of work sites
 IDPs, 560 laundry         wildlife habitat                located in the footprints                 • Risk of work accident                      •   Mark out risk areas
 basins connected to a   • Pollution (hydrocarbon,       • Set up groves to compensate for trees     • Land acquisition disputes                  •   Carry out information and
 sump, acquisition,        plastic waste, other waste)     cut                                       • Risk of falling and drowning in                awareness-raising actions on keeping
 and distribution of     • Noise pollution               • Have a waste management plan                excavations                                    out of the footprint of works
 1,500 hygiene kits,     • Risk of water table           • Water access roads and excavation work    • Risk of destruction of cultural heritage   •   Carry out information and
 acquisition and           pollution                     • Comply with rest hours                    • Risk of transmission of HIV/AIDS               awareness-raising activities on the
 distribution of 500     • Instability of the ground                                                                                                  land acquisition process
 MHM kits,                 structure                                                                                                              •   Conduct awareness campaigns on
 acquisition of 100
                         • Dust emissions                                                                                                             HIV/AIDS
 garbage bins, and
 250 maintenance kits
 for emergency
 latrines.




                                                                                                                                                                                         39
Result Area 3: Improving access to reliable information on water resources (ST/GIRE)
 Sub-projects               Sample environmental impacts/risks and mitigation measures                            Sample social impacts/risks and mitigation measures
                        Description of negative Mitigation measures                                 Description of negative social impacts Mitigation measures
                        environmental impacts and                                                   and risks
                        risks
 Acquisition of         • Point pollution          • Have a waste management plan                   • Conflict over the selection of sites for   •   Involve stakeholders in the selection
 suitable equipment       (hydrocarbons, plastic   • Water access roads                               works                                          of work sites
 for gauging and          waste, other waste)      • Comply with rest hours                         • Risk of work accident                      •   Mark out risk areas
 training in its use,   • Noise pollution                                                           • Land acquisition disputes                  •   Carry out information and
 support for carrying   • Risk of water table                                                       • Risk of falling and drowning in                awareness-raising activities on the
 out gauging              pollution                                                                   excavations                                    land acquisition process
 campaigns with a       • Dust emissions                                                            • Risk of destruction of cultural heritage   •   Conduct awareness campaigns on
 view to updating                                                                                   • Risk of HIV/AIDS transmission                  HIV/AIDS
 calibration curves


 50 additional          • Loss of vegetation,           • Identify trees with the Forest Services   • Conflict over the selection of sites for   •   Involve stakeholders in the selection
 productive boreholes   • Loss of wildlife and          • Take into account only those trees          works                                          of work sites
 in the hard rock         wildlife habitat                located in the footprints                 • Risk of work accident                      •   Mark out risk areas
 aquifer by             • Pollution (hydrocarbon,       • Set up groves to compensate for trees     • Land acquisition disputes                  •   Carry out information and
 undertaking a multi-     plastic waste, other waste)     cut                                       • Risk of falling                                awareness-raising activities on the
 criteria analysis to   • Noise pollution               • Have a waste management plan              • Risk of destruction of cultural heritage       land acquisition process
 identify 50 areas      • Risk of water table           • Water access roads and excavation work    • Risk of HIV/AIDS transmission              •   Conduct awareness campaigns on
 favorable for            pollution                     • Comply with rest hours                                                                     HIV/AIDS
 productive drilling,   • Instability of the ground     • Comply with specifications
                          structure
                        • Dust emissions




                                                                                                                                                                                         40
Result Area 3 (DGRE): Strengthening the technical and operational capacities of the DGRE water analysis laboratory (upgrading the lab, including
standardization of procedures, acquisition of ICP)

       Activities                                                               Negative Impacts and E&S Risks
                                                             Construction                                          Operation
 No.

                                                                                                                                                  Measures
   1   Renovate the water analysis laboratory building to    •   Dust emissions                                                         •   Organize awareness-
       bring the installations (architectural elements,      •   Noise and vibration pollution                                              information sessions for
       electrical network, etc.) and equipment into          •   Soil degradation/pollution                                                 workers, local
       compliance                                            •   Damage to the health and safety of                                         communities, and users
                                                                 workers and users                                                      •   Provide workers with
                                                             •   Restricted access to the service for                                       suitable PPE
                                                                 workers and users                                                      •   Develop and
                                                             •   Proliferation of solid waste (packaging,                                   operationalize a waste
                                                                 rubble) and liquid waste (waste water,                                     management plan
                                                                 used oils)
   2   Acquire portable field analysis equipment and other   •   Damage to the health and safety of         •   Damage to the health    •   Provide laboratory
       laboratory materials to strengthen rapid response         workers                                        and safety of workers       workers with suitable
       capabilities                                          •   Disruption of services provided to         •   Proliferation of            PPE
                                                                 laboratory users                               packaging waste         •   Operationalize a
                                                             •   Proliferation of packaging waste           •   Proliferation of            laboratory waste
                                                             •   Proliferation of electronic waste (used        sample waste                management plan
   3   Acquire an ICP-AES to screen for metals and other         spectrometers, etc.)                                                   •   Train workers on OHS
       emerging pollutants.                                  •   Risk of biological and chemical                                            related to laboratory
                                                                 contamination                                                              activities




                                                                                                                                                                       41
