Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                  BURKINA FASO

                                      WATER SUPPLY AND SANITATION PROGRAM

                               ___________________________________________________



                                           PROGRAM FOR RESULTS (PforR)




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                               ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SYSTEM ASSESSMENT (ESSA)

                               ____________________________________________________

                                                Report prepared by




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                       Draft




                                                   April 10, 2018
                                                               TABLE OF CONTENTS

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ......................................................................................... iv

SECTION I. INTRODUCTION .................................................................................................................1

       I.1 BACKGROUND .................................................................................................................................. 1

       I.2 ESSA GOALS AND APPROACH .......................................................................................................... 1

       I.3 METHODOLOGY ............................................................................................................................... 2

SECTION II. DESCRIPTION OF THE PROGRAM ......................................................................................4

       II.1 CONTEXT ......................................................................................................................................... 4

       II.2 MAIN CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROGRAM .................................................................................. 4

       II.3 ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL IMPACTS / RISKS OF THE PROGRAM ............................................ 5

       II.4 OVERVIEW ..................................................................................................................................... 14

       II.5 PRIOR EXPERIENCES OF THE INSTITUTIONS INVOLVED IN THE PROGRAM .................................. 16

SECTION III. DESCRIPTION OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SYSTEM ........................................ 17

       III.1 ENVIRONMENTAL SYSTEM ........................................................................................................... 17

       III.2 SOCIAL ASPECT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM ..................................................................................... 21

SECTION IV. ASSESSMENT OF INSTITUTIONAL CAPACITY AND PERFORMANCE .................................. 25

SECTION V. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT ACTION PLAN ......................................... 31

CONCLUSION ................................................................................................................................... 34

ANNEXES .................................................................................................Error! Bookmark not defined.

Annex 1 : Main Legislative Arrangements ......................................................................................... 35

Annex 2 : Legislation and Regulations Relevant to the Program ......................................................... 36

Annex 3 : Expropriations and Compensations in Burkina Faso ........................................................... 39

Annex 4 : Organizational Chart of the Ministry of the Environment, Green Economy, and Climate
Change ............................................................................................................................................ 42

Annex 5 : Examples of main potential hazards associated to the Program.......................................... 43




                                                                          page ii
 Annex 6 : Simplified Socio-environmental Screening Form ................................................................ 45

 Annex 7 : Environmental and Social Management Plan and Resettlement Action Plan ....................... 52

 Annex 8 : Letter from the Minister in charge of the Environment relating to the Reclassification of
 Water Supply Systems in Urban Areas .............................................................................................. 54

 Annex 9 : List of Main Documents Consulted .................................................................................... 55

 Annex 10 : Public Consultations ........................................................................................................ 56

 Annex 11 : Account of the National Public Consultation .................................................................... 58




 List ffList of Tables

Table 1 : Core Principles................................................................................................................................ 26

Table 2 : Environmental and Social Management Action Plan ..................................................................... 33




                                                                          page iii
                           LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AEP       Drinking Water Supply (Approvisionnement en Eau Potable)
AFD       French Development Agency (Agence Française de Développement)
AMBF      Association of Burkina Faso Municipalities (Association des Municipalités du Burkina Faso)
AMOC      Assistance to Communal Project Ownership (Assistance à la Maîtrise d'Ouvrage Communale)
ATC       Municipal Technical Agent (Agent Technique Communal)
BUNEE     National Office for Environmental Assessments (Bureau National des Evaluations Environnementales)
CCFV      Commission of Village Land Conciliations (Commission de Conciliations Foncières Villageoises)
CFV       Village Land Commission (Commission Foncière Villageoise)
CVD       Village Land Commission (Comité Villageois de Développement)
DGA       General Directorate of Sanitation (Direction Générale de l’Assainissement)
DGFOMR    General Directorate of Land Tenure, Training and Organization of the Rural areas (Direction Générale
          du Foncier, de la Formation et de l’Organisation du Monde Rural)
DGIH      General Directorate of Hydraulic Infrastructure (Direction Générale des Infrastructures hydrauliques)
DGPC      General Directorate of Protection of Culture (Direction Générale de la Protection de la Culture)
DGPE      General Directorate of Preservation of the Environment (Direction Générale de la Préservation de
          l’Environnement)
DREA      Regional Directorate of Water and Sanitation (Direction Régionale de l’Eau et de l’Assainissement)
DREEVCC   Regional Directorate of the Environment, Green Economy, and Climate Change (Direction Régionale de
          l’Environnement, de l’Economie Verte et du Changement Climatique)
DTPEAAP   Technical Directorate of Cleanliness, Sanitation and Landscape Management (Direction Technique de la
          Propreté, de l’Eau, de l’Assainissement et des Aménagements Paysagers)
DTUCFC    Technical Directorate of Urban Development, Construction, and Municipal Land Tenure (Direction
          Technique de l’Urbanisme, de la Construction et du Foncier Communal)
IDA       International Development Association
ILO       International Labor Organization
LAQE.     Environment Quality Analysis Laboratory (Laboratoire d’Analyse de la Qualité de l’Environnement)
MAAH      Ministry of Agriculture and Hydraulic Developments (Ministère de l’Agriculture et des Aménagements
          Hydrauliques)
MATD      Ministry of Territorial Administration and Decentralization (Ministère de l’Administration du Territoire
          et de la Décentralisation)
MEA       Ministry of Water and Sanitation (Ministère de l’Eau et de l’Assainissement)
MEDD      Ministry of the Environment and Sustainable Development (Ministère de l’Environnement et du
          Développement durable)
MEEVCC    Ministry of the Environement, Green Economy, and Climate Change (Ministère de l’Environnement, de
          l’Economie Verte et du Changement Climatique)
MTGES     Technical Manual for Environmental and Social Management
NIES      Environmental and Social Impact Statement (Notice d’Impact Environnemental et Social)



                                               page iv
NGO       Non-governental Organization
ONEA      National Office of Water and Sanitation (Office National de l’Eau et de l’Assainissement)
RAP       Resettlement Action Plan
PCD-      Plan Communal de Développement -AEPA
AEPA
PCU       Program Coordination Unit
PforR     Program for Results
PGES      Plan de Gestion Environnementale et Sociale
PN-AHA    Programme national des Aménagements hydrauliques
PNDD      National Sustainable Development Program (Politique nationale de Développement durable)
PNDES     National Economic and Social Development Plan (Plan national de Développement économique et
          social)
PNE       National Environmental Plan (Politique nationale d’Environnement)
PNGE      Programme National de Gouvernance de l’Eau
PN-GIRE   Plan National de Gestion intégrée des Ressources en Eau
RAF       Agrarian and Land Reform (Réorganisation agraire et foncière)
SFC       Municipal Land Service (Service foncier communal)
SFR       Service of Rural Land (Service du Foncier Rural)
SNIE      National Water Information System (Système National d’Information sur l’Eau)
UCP       Unité de Coordination du Programme




                                                page v
                                             SUMMARY

                          __________________________________________

I. OBJECTIVE AND BACKGROUND

1. This Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) was undertaken by the World Bank as
   part of the preparation of the Program for Results (PforR) for the Water Supply, Sanitation, and
   Water Resource Information Program in Burkina Faso.

2. The Program supports the Government of Burkina Faso priorities for providing universal access to
   water supply services, sanitation services, and strengthening water resources management. Based
   on the objectives and actions proposed by the Government Sector Programs, the Program to be
   supported by this IDA operation will finance a subset of investments and key actions included in the
   National Water Supply Program (Programme national d’approvisionnement en eau potable 2016–
   2030, PN-AEP), the National Sanitation and Sewerage Plan (Programme National d’Assainissement
   des Eaux Usées et Excreta 2016–2030, PN-AEUE); and the National Program for IWRM (Programme
   National pour la Gestion Intégrée des Ressources en Eau 2016–2030, PN-GIRE).

I. GENERAL PRESENTATION OF THE PROGRAM

3. The PforR development objectives are to improve access to water supply and sanitation services in
   targeted areas.

Result Area 1. Improved Access to water supply
4. The Program will support the development of priority infrastructure to improve water supply and
   enhance its operational efficiency. Geographically, the PforR will cover urban areas including
   Ouagadougou and 12 additional secondary centers and rural areas of four selected regions.

Result Area 2. Improved access to sanitation
5. The PforR will support sustainable access to sanitation services. In urban areas, the Program will
   support the construction of 85,000 household latrines and 350 public latrines with male/female
   compartments (in schools and markets), benefiting about 850,000 people. In rural areas, the
   Program will support the construction of 50,000 household latrines and 900 public latrines with
   male/female compartments (in schools, health centers, and markets), benefiting about 500,000
   people.

Result Area 3. Improved access to reliable information on water resources
6. The Program aims at strengthening water resources management by upgrading, optimizing, and
   modernizing surface and groundwater resources observation networks for surface water and
   groundwater sources; strengthening water resources knowledge; and operationalizing the SNIEau).
   For knowledge and monitoring of surface water, the PforR will support the optimization and
   modernization of the existing hydrometric network of Burkina Faso, by acquiring and installing the
   equipment and software required, and by equipping and training the staff of the departments in
   charge of data collection. Also, the Program will support the operationalization of the already
   created SNIEau to make water-related data publicly available for users and policy-makers.

Institutional Arrangement



                                                page vi
7. At the institutional level, the PforR will be implemented by two implementing agencies: the Ministry
   of Water and Sanitation (MEA) and the National Office of Water and Sanitation (ONEA). The
   Program Coordinating Unit (PCU) of the MEA will have overall responsibility for coordinating the
   Program activities, M & E and reporting and management. Within ONEA, a Program Support Unit
   (PSU) will support the divisions responsible for the implementation of water and sanitation activities
   in urban areas.

8. IDA will finance US$300 million of the total estimated cost of the PforR, which will be implemented
   over a five-year period, through an IDA credit of US$50 million and US$250 from the IDA Scaling-up
   Facility. The Government will be responsible for counterpart funding to cover, among other things,
   certain operating costs, land acquisition and any compensation owed to persons affected by the
   Program.

IV. MAIN ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS

➢ Result Area 1 – Improved access to water supply

In Urban Areas :
    • In Ouagadougou the Program will support: (a) the increase in the storage capacity of 8,000 m3,
       (b) the extension of the network of 725 km, (c) the installation of 70,000 social connections and
       the construction of 100 standposts, (d) the installation of water supply systems in two informal
       neighborhoods of the city; and (e) a comprehensive study that identifies alternative sources of
       water, to ensure water supply to the city beyond 2030.

    •   In secondary centers the Program will support significant water supply system enhancements. In
        response to the increasing water demand in the centers of Yako, Gourcy and Boussé, the
        Program will increase the water production capacity (with 500 m3/h), expand distribution (163
        km of network) and increase connections (2,575 connections and 50 standposts). Similarly, the
        Program will support the extension of the Kaya system to include the Korsimoro and Boussouma
        secondary centers and adding production capacity (200 m3/h), the increase in the storage
        capacity of 2,600 m3, the extension of the network of 125 km, and the installation of 3,100
        social connections and 60 standposts. Finally, the Program will support the creation of four
        stand-alone water supply systems in Gon-Boussougou, Mogtédo, Béguédo, and Tiébélé with a
        total combined production capacity of 6,330 m3 per day; a storage capacity of 1,200 m3; and
        the installation of 92 km of network, 6,210 social connections, and 123 standposts. In addition
        to infrastructure works, the Program will support the development of master plans based on the
        priorities established by the PN-AEP.

In Rural Areas :
    • Completion of 1,100 boreholes equipped with Human Motor Pumps (PMH), of which 700 ones
        in community places and 400 ones in health centers and schools;

    •   Construction of 90 drinking water supply systems;

    •   Rehabilitation of 60 Simplified Drinking Water Supply Systems.

➢ Result Area 2 – Improved access to sanitation
9. In both rural and urban areas, latrines are planned to be built, namely:



                                                 page vii
   •     Completion of 135, 000 household latrines ;

   •     Equipment of 1,200 schools, health centers with adequate sanitation facilities (blocks of latrines
         with separate boys/ girls blocks with a cabin for disabled users in each block in the case of
         schools) and public places.

➢ Result Area 3 Activities
10. The Program will support the strengthening of knowledge and of monitoring systems of surface and
    groundwater resources and support the operationalization of SNIEau.

11. These activities overall have positive impact as knowledge and water information acquisition
    contributes to improving decision-making processes. However, potential excavation work may result
    in partial destruction of vegetation and in some instances result in loss of portions of land and
    disruption of socio-economic activities.

12. The Program has low adverse environmental and social risks. This is mainly due to the following
    aspects:



             ➢ Exclusion, by the very nature of a PforR, of any investment involving major
                   environmental and social risks;

             ➢ Type and nature of the planned improvements and infrastructure;

             ➢ Absence, in accordance with the nature of development works and operations, of major
                  cases of air or noise pollution or of significant degradation of the inhabited areas or
                  of significant destruction or reduction of vegetation;

             ➢ Existence of various manageable and effective measures to mitigate potential risks and
                   monitor impacts;

             ➢ Existence of institutions that are capable of managing most environmental and social
                   aspects of the Program and of an appropriate institutional and legal framework.



Positive Environmental Impacts
13. The Program investments will have positive environmental impacts - both directly and indirectly,
    temporarily and permanently. Indeed, the Program will contribute, among other things, to:

        Reduce the frequency and incidence of waterborne diseases and improve hygiene and
         sanitation conditions;
        Build ONEA network capacity;
        Improve the management system of the water supply systems in selected rural municipalities
         of targeted four regions.


Negative Environmental Risks



                                                  page viii
14. The main environmental risks associated to the Program are related to the following aspects:

      Destructuration of soil texture caused by deep excavations and trenching;
      Noise nuisance for neighboring populations and for construction site workers (related to the
       use of construction machinery);
      Accidents for workers and nearby residents associated to the circulation of construction
       machinery and possible non-compliance with the safety instructions;
      Accidents and safety problems, especially for the most vulnerable people (children, elderly
       people, women, disabled people) could be significant risks;
      Damage to objects of local cultural and religious heritage.


Beneficial Social benefits
15. The proposed activities by their very nature should bring advantages to the beneficiary populations.
    These advantages include, among others:

      Improvement of living, healthiness and hygiene conditions;
      Establishment of regular interactions between the population and those responsible for
       improvements;
      Socio-economic development of urban and rural areas;
      Fight against poverty and reduction of unemployment;
      Reduction of medical costs resulting from the treatment of diseases associated with water
       pollution and lack of sanitation measures;
      Implementation of investments (e.g. latrines) that have been strategically identified and that
       address the needs of all social categories, including women and girls, people with disabilities;
      Reduction of the time usually spent by women for finding drinking water and increasing the
       time devoted to childcare and leisure;
      Citizen participation, through strengthened mechanisms for access to information,
       consultation of citizens, as well as grievance management and implementation of measures to
       establish the right of petition and monitoring satisfaction among water services users;
      Compensation of any losses in a fair and prior manner through the respect of the provisions of
       social safeguards;
      Establishment of regular interactions with the population and the people responsible for
       improvements.

Negative Social Risks
16. The construction phase will see the opening of construction sites for works and development, which
    will have negative social risks, insofar as they may:

    Require private land acquisition in part or totaly and, consequently, possible expropriation for
     public utility reasons and involuntary resettlement of households or businesses;

    Generate temporary disruptions in craft and economic activities of individuals and households,
     causing loss of income (shortfalls);

    Generate temporary difficulties in access of residents to their homes, shops and other public
     establishments (schools, dispensaries, etc.);

    Cause accidents on or around construction sites;


                                                page ix
     Require temporary deviations for car traffic or restricted pedestrian crossing, and generate
      disruption in activities;

     Contribute to an increase of violence and possible sexual harassment of women and increased
      sexually transmitted diseases and HIV/AIDS due to labor influx

     Generate conflicts and acts of sabotage linked to the non-use of local labor

17. Moreover, given that these social risks will mainly occur during the works, the latter will be organized
    accordingly and alternative access routes will be put in place and the affected people will be duly
    informed. These points will be the object of specific clauses in the Requirement specifications (Cahier
    des charges) of firms and a regular follow-up will be provided by the regional operators and the
    Commune. Arrangements will also be made for the fair and prior compensation of the property that
    will be affected by the works. Taking into account the above and past experience, the foreseeable
    social risks of the work are considered moderate.

OVERVIEW

18. The Program will have moderate environmental and social impacts. This is mainly due to the fact
    that the Program, designed as a PforR, excludes any investment involving major environmental and
    social risks.

         Thus, in accordance with this policy, the Program will automatically exclude any activity
            posing a potentially significant environmental and social risk and significant negative
            impacts.

19. Therefore, any sub-project will be considered non-eligible as long as they involve the following:

     Construction or rehabilitation of works that would require social risks, i.e., a significant physical
      displacement of persons or the acquisition of large areas of private land or the demolition of a
      large number of single-family houses or else significant restricted access to economic and
      natural resources;

     Construction or rehabilitation of structures that could create or exacerbate existing land-based
      social conflicts;

     The realization of structures/works that could have an irreversible impact on physicalcultural
      resources of an archaeological or historical nature or places of worship;

     The realization of works having a high and irreversible impact on any zone classified as a site of
      biological or ecological interest.

20. Various controllable and effective measures will help to mitigate the potential risks of eligible
    subprojects, and monitor their impact, during both the works phase and the operation of the works.

V. EVALUATION OF THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS

THE ENVIRONMENTAL SYSTEM
Political Framework



                                                  page x
21. In Burkina Faso, environmental protection is one of the priority areas for policies having to
    contribute to achieving the goals of sustainable development. Among these policies, the most
    important ones are:

         The National Economic and Social Development Plan (PNDES) aims at reforming institutions
          and modernizing the administration, developing the human capital and boosting buoyant
          sectors for the economy and employment.

         The National Sustainable Development Policy (PNDD) presents a vision for sustainable
          development by 2050.

         The National Environmental Policy (PNE) marks the government will to create a frame of
          reference for taking environmental issues into account in development policies and
          strategies.

         The overall goal of the Water Policy and Strategies is to contribute to sustainable
          development through appropriate solutions to water-related issues.

         The purpose of the National Sanitation Policy and Strategy is to contribute to sustainable
          development by providing adequate solutions to water related problems, in order to
          improve the living and housing conditions of the populations, to preserve their health and
          protect natural resources.


Legislative and Regulatory Framework

22. The Burkinabé Constitution, promulgated on 11 June 1991, defines the basic rights and obligations
    of citizens, determines the form of state organization, and organizes the implementation of the
    universal republican principle of the separation of powers. The constitution of the IVth Republic
    contains many environmental references.

Environnemental Code

23. The Environmental Code, adopted through Law No.006-2013/AN of 02 April 2013, is devoted to the
    Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA), the Study and the Notice of Impact on the Environment
    (EIE, NIE).

Water management

24. Law No. 002-2001 / an of 8 February 2001 on water management and implementing legislation
    provides in Article 39 for the EIA / NIE prior to the issuance of the carrying out of installations,
    works, works likely to present dangers to the health and public safety, to reduce water resources, to
    modify substantially the level, the mode of flow or the regime of the waters.

Pubic health

25. Law No. 23/94 / ADP of 19 May 1994 on the Public Health Code deals with health protection of the
    environment (air and water pollution).




                                                 page xi
26. Law 2005-022 on Public Hygiene Code governs public health in Burkina Faso, including hygiene on
    public roads and squares, hygiene of swimming pools and bathing areas, housing, foodstuffs, water,
    industrial and commercial facilities, schools, preschools and sanitary buildings, public buildings and
    the natural environment and the fight against noise.

Sustainable Development

27. Law No. 008-2014/AN of 8 April 2014 on the Orientation Law on Sustainable Development aims to
    create a unified national reference framework to ensure the coherence of the interventions of the
    actors through legal, political, and institutional reforms.

Decentralization

28. Law No. 021-2006/AN of 14 November 2006, on the General Code of Territorial Communities
    states that territorial authorities contribute to the administration of the territory, to economic,
    social, educational, health, cultural, and scientific development, as well as the improvement of the
    living environment.

Institutional Actors in charge of the environment

 The Ministry of the Environment, Green Economy, and Climate Change (MEEVCC) provides the
  implementation and monitoring of the Government policy on the environment and sanitation of the
  living environment. The MEEVCC includes several directorates, among which: the General
  Directorate for the Preservation of the Environment and the Directorate for the Prevention of
  Pollution and Environmental Risks.

 The National Office for Environmental Assessments (BUNEE) is responsible for coordinating the
  implementation and monitoring of the national environmental assessments policy.

 The MEA, whose mandate is the definition and implementation of the national policy on water and
  sanitation, wastewater and excreta.

 The ONEA, under the supervision of the Ministry of Water and Sanitation (MEA), aims to: (i) create,
  manage and protection of facilities for collecting, supplying, treating, and distributing drinking water
  for urban and industrial purposes; and (ii) create, promote and improve and manage collective,
  individual or autonomous sanitation facilities for the disposal of wastewater and excreta in urban
  and semi-urban areas.

 The environmental units, created by decree N ° 2008-125 / PRES / PM / MECV of March 7, 2008,
  constitute operational entities in the field of environment in the various ministerial departments,
  the administrative regions and the public and private companies.

SOCIAL ASPECTS MANAGEMENT SYSTEM

National Legal Framework

29. The legislatif and regulatory context relates to land legislation, public participation, land acquisition,
    resettlement and land restructuring mechanisms.




                                                   page xii
30. From the legal point of view, according to Law No. 034-2012/AN of 02 July 2012 on Agrarian and
    Land Reform (RAF) in Burkina Faso, there are three types of land ownership regimes in Burkina Faso:
    (i) Legal State ownership regime; (ii) Local authority ownership regime; and (iii) Land tenure rights of
    individuals.

Right to Property

31. The Constitution of Burkina Faso guarantees the right to private property for all, its protection and
    expropriation. No one shall be deprived of their enjoyment except for reasons of public utility and
    on condition of just compensation determined in accordance with the law. This compensation is a
    prerequisite to the expropriation, except in case of emergency or force majeure.

Institutional Actors

32. In terms of land management in Burkina Faso, management organizations or structures are defined
    by the RAF and Law No. 034-2009/AN on rural land tenure and priority implementation texts. These
    organizations are found at four levels: national, regional, municipality and village.

     At the national level: With reference to Law No. 034, a national body is set up for consultation,
      monitoring and evaluation of rural land policy and legislation bringing together all public,
      private and public sector, and civil society stakeholders. Currently this instance is not yet
      operational.

     At the regional level: The competent deconcentrated technical services of the State are the
      ones in charge of providing support to the Rural Land Services (SFR) of local authorities as
      stipulated by Law No. 034 on rural land tenure.

     At the municipality level: the Rural Land Service (SFR) at the level of each rural municipality is
      responsible for all the activities of management and security of the land area of the
      municipality and activities of land tenure security of the rural land property of individuals on
      the municipal territory.

     At the village level: A Village Land Commission, created in each village and composed of
      customary and traditional village authorities in charge of land, is responsible for contributing to
      securing and managing the estate.

Constitutional Appeal Bodies

33. The Office of the Ombudsman of the Republic of Faso was established by Organic Law No.
    22/94/ADP of 17 May 1994. The Ombudsman is an independent administrative authority, which
    receives no instruction from any political, administrative, legislative, or judicial authority, and which
    receives the grievances of the citizens relating to the working of State administrations, municipal
    authorities, public institutions and any other organization entrusted with a public service mission.


Conclusion

     In the areas of environmental and social management, most Burkinabe institutions are in
      place and their mandate is clearly defined. The national environmental impact assessment


                                                  page xiii
       system is based on a well-rounded process of diagnosis and assessment of the nature of impacts
       and preparation of appropriate environmental and social safeguards

    However, the institutions have limited human resources with a strong need for capacity
     building. Moreover, they do not have enough financial resources to function in a suitable way.

    Administrative procedures are generally slow and do not allow for rapid and timely decision-
     making (see, for example, long delays in obtaining the Environmental Compliance Advice from
     project proponents).

    Public consultations only concern ESIAs in public inquiries, whereas these should extend to NIES.

    Public inquiries are often public information sessions and do not result in meaningful public
     consultations that promote stakeholder participation in decision-making.

    The complaints management system is not operational, especially in the context of interventions
     in rural areas.

VI. ADEQUACY OF APPLICABLE SYSTEMS

34. The strengths, gaps, risks and opportunities of country systems are presented in the light of the
    Fundamental Principles applicable to the Program - as described in the Bank Policy and Directive on
    the Financing of Programs for Results (PforR).
     Core Principle 1: Overall principle of environmental and social impact assessment and
        management.. This Principle is applicable to the Program. to the Program. Indeed, the work
        funded under the Program could entail negative impacts at low to moderate risk. The ESES has
        been prepared and its recommendations will be integrated into the overall action plan of the
        program.

        With regard to strengths: Burkina Faso has adequate regulatory andlegal frameworks to
         appropriately manage the environmental and social impacts of the Program and an
         institution in charge of environmental assessments (BUNEE).

        With regard to weaknesses and gaps : At the institutional level, coordination between the
         central and the regional levels is not adequate (for example, between the BUNEE and the
         regional directorates), the sharing of information is not efficient and this state of affairs
         does not facilitate monitoring of the implementation of project ESMPs. Institutions in charge
         of environmental and social management need human capacity building and do not have
         enough financial resources to function in a suitable way

        With regard to actions and opportunities : Organization of initiatives to raise awareness
         among all actors and stakeholders about the problems of environmental management, of
         impact. Initiated measures to strengthen more appropriately the capacities of central and
         local officials in environmental and social safeguard procedures.

        With regard to risks: Poor implementation of environmental and social management rules
         and procedures. Failure to enforce current environmental regulations in a timely manner.

    Core Principle 2: Natural Habitats and Physical and Cultural Resources


                                               page xiv
This principle is not applicable to the Program. Indeed, no program activity will take place within
biodiversity protection areas. No investment will be eligible if it threatens fragile ecosystems. No
investment will be eligible if it directly threatens the cultural and religious heritage of a region.

     Core Principle 3: Public and Workers Safety

This principle is applicable. Indeed, the work undertaken under the Program could have an impact on
the safety of the public and construction site workers. Site workers may be exposed to work-related
accidents/injuries, water pollution, air pollution, noise, vibration, solid waste, and toxic or hazardous
materials on the site. The population in areas close to the sites could also be exposed to the same
dangers.

        With regard to strengths: The legislatif system of Burkina Faso includes provisions on safety
         on building sites. The safety of workers is ensured by the Labor Inspectorate. There are
         national policies and guidelines concerning the public and workers safety and health.

        With regard to weaknesses and gaps: The provisions on worker safety are not always
         included in civil works contracts. The insufficient number of screening officers does not
         allow for regular monitoring of the application of site provisions.

        With regard to opportunities: Presence at the local level of branches of the Labor
         Inspectorate

        With regard to risks: Inability to enforce the current environmental, social and security
         regulations in a timely manner. Non-involvement of Labor Inspectorate officials.

     Core Principle 4: Land Acquisition

This principle is applicable. Indeed, the works could involve temporary or permanent and physical or
economic displacements of residential households or businesses and require the acquisition of private
land and, consequently, expropriation for reasons of public utility and involuntary resettlement of
residential households or businesses.

        With regard to strengths: The indemnities or compensation to the affected people are
         defined by the existing land regime in Burkina Faso

        With regard to weaknesses and gaps: National land acquisition procedures are unclear and
         incomplete as regard the Bank requirements. Informal occupants are not recognized by the
         Burkinabe law. Customary land ownership is recognized but must be confirmed before being
         compensated.

        With regard to opportunities: Provide a compensation system, including for informal
         occupants. Provide fair and prior compensation. Provide adequate follow-up of the affected
         people so that they recover at least the ex-ante project conditions and that they do not
         become poor anymore.

            With regard to risks: Lack of human resources and financial means at the level of
             national and local institutions in charge of enforcing laws and arrangements. Lack of
             coordination among the relevant institutional actors.


                                                page xv
     Core Principle 5: Social Considération: Indigenous Peoples and Vulnerable Groups

This principle is applicable (with the exception that there are no indigenous peoples in Burkina Faso, as
defined by the Bank's related policy).

              With regard to strengths: Surveys aim to inform the populations on the realization of
               the project and to collect their observations; information posters are posted for this
               purpose in public places.

              With regard to weaknesses and gaps: The Burkinabé legislation does not provide for
               specific measures for vulnerable groups. The local complaint management system is not
               operational

              With regard to opportunities: Define and implement a stakeholder engagement
               strategy as part of the outreach program, targeting in particular vulnerable groups.
               Specify any form of support to the most vulnerable groups. Ensure the functionality of
               the complaint management system

              With regard to risks: Lack of clarity and coherence regarding the mechanism for
               implementing public consultations and stakeholder engagement could alienate the poor
               and vulnerable groups.

     Core Principle 6: Social Considerations – Social Conflict

This principle is not applicable. Indeed, the program is not implemented in conflict areas.

Conclusion

35. From the previous analysis of the legal and institutional framework for the environmental and social
    management in Burkina Faso, a number of conclusions can be drawn:

     Most institutions are in place and their mandate has been defined. However, their actions are
      not sufficienty coordinated and they lack human and financial resources.

     There is no efficient coordination between central level and regional level for environmental
      and social management.

     Administrative procedures are slow and do not allow for quick and timely decision-making.

     Public consultations conducted in the framework of public inquiries concern only ESIAs whereas
      these should also extend to NIES

     The complaints management system is not operational, especially under rural interventions.

36. These gaps will need to be address by appropriate reforms and arrangements. Together with the
    community of technical and financial partners, the World Bank is already playing and could play
    further an important role in supporting the needed improvements.




                                                 page xvi
37. However, as of now, in keeping with this PforR, it is possible to seize the opportunity to improve
    certain technical and administrative aspects, to create a new dynamic, to specify and consolidate
    partnerships and synergies among stakeholders, and strengthen the institutional capacity of all
    stakeholders involved in environmental and social safeguards at the national, regional, communal
    and village levels.


     In light of the Burkina Faso environmental and social management systems previously analyzed,
        the proposed is considered adequate for Program for Results (PforR) financing.

VII. ACTION PLAN FOR ENVIRONMENTALL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT

38. The Program will support specific measures to improve the conditions for the performance of the
    environmental and social management system in the implementation and monitoring of the
    Program activities. The actions included in the PAP are as follows:

39. Preparation of a Technical Manual for Environmental and Social Management (Manuel technique
    pour la gestion environnementale et sociale, MTGES) of the Program investments for MEA and
    ONEA and all technical services, as well as all stakeholders, who will be involved at national, regional
    and local level in the implementation of the Program, so that environmental and social management
    procedures are duly understood, perfectly owned and followed. This Manual will be an integral part
    of the Program Operations Manual. The Manual will include, among other things, the following:

    •   Procedure for the screening of sub-projects
    •   Procedure for the elaboration of Environmental and Social Management Plans and
        Environmental and Social Impact Studies
    •   Procedure for the elaboration of social assessment and Resettlement Action Plans
    •   Procedures for land acquisition
    •   Standard elements (environmental and social clauses, minimum staff, price details) for the
        contracts of (a) works contractors, (b) engineering consultant, (c) regional private operators
    •   Citizen engagement mechanism
    •   Good practices guidelines for environmental and social management
    •   Control & monitoring procedures

40. Training at MTGES. A training program will be developed for the implementation of the MTGES for
    all the different stakeholders involved in the implementation of the Program, in particular: the
    members of the environmental units of the MEA, ONEA, and of the other ministries involved, the
    members of the communal "Environment and local development" commissions and of the "Land
    and Land Development" commissions, of BUNEE, and of Regional Directorates of the Ministry of the
    Environment, the Green Economy and Climate Change.

41. Adoption of an interinstitutional Convention between MEA and ONEA, on the one hand, and
    preparation and enforcement of an interinstitutional cooperation agreement between MEA and the
    BUNEE, on the other hand. The content of this agreement will establish the conditions for
    collaboration (awareness raising; information and training; rapid review and certification of sub-
    projects; environmental and social control and monitoring; etc.).




                                                 page xvii
42. Appointment of Environmental and Social Management Specialists within MEA PCU and ONEA PSU.
    Recruitment or appointment by MEA and ONEA of a dedicated social specialist and a dedictaed
    environmental specialist within the PCU and PSU (respectively), who will be employed full-time
    throughout the implementation of the Program.

43. Specialized Training in monitoring and control of environmental and social mitigation and reporting
    measures. This more in-depth training in monitoring and control of environmental and social
    mitigation and reporting measures will be provided to representatives of all local, regional and
    national institutions (including contractors) involved in collecting, processing and analyzing
    information regarding the implementation of mitigation measures.

44. WB’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS). Communities and individuals who believe that they are
    adversely affected because of a Bank supported PforR operation, as defined by the applicable policy
    and procedures, may submit complaints to the existing Program grievance redress mechanism or
    the WB’s GRS. The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed to address
    pertinent concerns. Affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the WB’s
    independent Inspection Panel which determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, because of
    WB non-compliance with its policies and procedures. Complaints may be submitted at any time
    after concerns have been brought directly to the World Bank’s attention, and Bank Management has
    been given an opportunity to respond. For information on how to submit complaints to the World
    Bank’s corporate GRS, please visit http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For information on how to
    submit complaints to the World Bank Inspection Panel, please visit www.inspectionpanel.org.

45. All the costs for these elements of the ESM/AP will be included in the overall budget of the
    Program. Conversely, the cost of environmental and social mitigation measures will be incorporated
    into the budgets of the investment sub-projects themselves.




                                               page xviii
          ________________________________________



The World Bank organized the public consultation with representatives of key
stakeholders, civil society organizations and the private sector to present and
discuss the draft ESSA, on March 27, 2018.

Throughout the duration of the Program, the Burkinabe party will be
responsible for organizing consultations on the specific activities (investment
sub-projects) of the Program.

The final revised version of ESSA will be publicly disseminated through the
MEA/ONEA website and also the World Bank external website.
Hard copies will be available at national and regional levels with the
institutions involved.



        ____________________________________________




                                 page xix
                                      SECTION I. INTRODUCTION

I.1 BACKGROUND

This Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) was undertaken by the World Bank as part of
the preparation of the Program for Results (PforR) for the Water, Sanitation and Integrated Water
Resource Management Sector in Burkina Faso.

The Program supports the Government of Burkina Faso priorities for providing universal access to water
supply services, sanitation services, and strengthening water resources management. Based on the
objectives and actions proposed by the Government Sector Programs, the Program to be supported by
this IDA operation will finance a subset of investments and key actions included in the National Water
Supply Program (Programme national d’approvisionnement en eau potable 2016–2030, PN-AEP), the
National Sanitation and Sewerage Plan (Programme National d’Assainissement des Eaux Usées et
Excreta 2016–2030, PN-AEUE); and the National Program for IWRM (Programme National pour la
Gestion Intégrée des Ressources en Eau 2016–2030, PN-GIRE).

I.2 ESSA GOALS AND APPROACH

ESSA reviews the program's environmental and social management systems to assess their compliance
with the provisions of the Bank's PforR funding policy. The aim is to make sure that it does not involve
significant environmental and social risks and that the systems put in place make it possible to identify
and manage potential risks. In particular, the ESSA identifies and analyzes gaps that would exist between
the national systems and the basic principles applying to the program, and recommends actions to
improve the coherence of environmental and social management systems with the requirements of the
Bank.

Unlike conventional investment programs or projects, the PforR supports a government program by
underscoring the following objectives: (i) to finance the borrower specific program expenditures; (ii) to
link the disbursement of funds directly to the achievement of specific results; (iii) to use and, where
appropriate, strengthen the systems to make sure that the funds are used in an appropriate manner
with adequate consideration of the environmental and social impact of the program; and (iv) to build
institutional capacity allowing to achieve the expected results.

The World Bank's PforR funding policy outlines the basic principles of environmental and social
management that must be respected in the ESSA. The coherence of the Program's systems is considered
by the Program based on: (i) the systems defined by laws, regulations, procedures, etc. ("the system as
defined"); and (ii) the ability of Program institutions to effectively implement the systems ("the system
as applied in practice"). It identifies and analyzes the gaps between the national systems and the basic
principles of the Program at the two levels indicated above. It should thus be emphasized that, by virtue
of the nature of the programmatic interventions, ESSA focuses on the system as such, by giving only
guidance on the type, nature and characteristics of the activities implemented under the Program.

The basic principles that must be respected in the assessment of environmental and social systems are
as follows:

     Promoting environmental and social sustainability in program design;




                                                 page 1
    Avoiding, minimizing or mitigating or compensating negative impacts, and promoting informed
     decision-making about the environmental and social impacts of the program;

    Avoiding, minimizing or mitigating or compensating negative impacts on physical cultural
     resources resulting from the program;

    Protecting public and worker safety against the potential risks associated with: (i) the
     construction and/ or operation of facilities under the program; (ii) exposure to toxic chemicals,
     hazardous waste, air pollution and noise pollution under the program; and (iii) reconstruction or
     rehabilitation of infrastructure within the urban perimeter;

    Managing the potential acquisition of private land and the loss of access to economic goods and
     services in a manner that avoids or reduces physical and economic displacement, and helps
     affected people to improve, or at least restore, their livelihoods and standard of living;

    Taking account of cultural relevance and equitable access to the benefits of the program, by
     paying particular attention to the rights and interests and needs and concerns of all social
     categories, including vulnerable groups;

    Helping to prevent, reduce or even eradicate social conflicts.

Thus, the program's approach excludes any activity posing a potentially significant environmental and
social risk and various negative, varied, irreversible and unprecedented negative impacts.

ESSA aims to identify the strengths and weaknesses of the environmental and social system applicable
to the program with a view to identifying the actions needed to improve its performance. Specific
measures to address identified weaknesses or gaps are also proposed as part of an Environmental and
Social Management Action Plan, which is an integral part of the Program's Action Plan as such, with a
view to improving current practices and procedures to make them more in line with the Bank's
arrangements.

I.3 METHODOLOGY

The preparation of ESSA and the development of measures to strengthen environmental and social
management systems has benefited from various information and a process of consultation with
institutional actors, especially:

    The review of available documents and data on national environmental and social procedures
     and the related political, institutional and regulatory frameworks, analysis of the environmental
     and social safeguards capacities of institutions involved in the Program; and World Bank
     documentation on PforRs and ESSAs (see Annex 9 for the list of documents consulted) ;

    Interviews and working meetings with representatives of state and non-state institutions
     involved in the Program and key stakeholders and field visits;

    Consultations with representatives of key stakeholders and civil society organizations to better
     explain ESSA expectations, identify environmental and social issues of the Program, assess
     technical assistance and capacity building needs (see Annex 10 for the record of these
     consultations).


                                                page 2
 A National Public Consultation was held on March 27th, 2018, with the participation of
  representatives from all stakeholders, development partners, civil society organizations and the
  private sector. Comments from the workshop have been incorporated into the revised version
  of the ESSA (with a complete list of participants) see Annex 11.

 The ESSA report will be publicly disseminated in the country, through the website of the Ministry
  of Water and Sanitation (MEA), as well as on the World Bank's external website. Public
  comments will be solicited during the defined period.




                                            page 3
                              SECTION II. DESCRIPTION OF THE PROGRAM

II.1 CONTEXT

Burkina Faso is one of the poorest countries in the world, with more than 40 per cent (or 7.7 million) of
the population living below the poverty line in 2014, with about 90 per cent of the poor living in rural
areas. Members of poor households remain almost totally excluded from several basic services and
access to infrastructure. Per capita gross national income was US$750 in 2014. The country was ranked
185 out of 188 countries on the 2015 Human Development Index.

II.2 MAIN CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROGRAM

The PforR's development objectives are to improve access to water and sanitation supply services in
targeted areas and to strengthen water information.

Result Area 1. Improved access to water supply
In Ouagadougou the Program will support: (a) the increase in the storage capacity of 8,000 m3, (b) the
extension of the network of 725 km, (c) the installation of 70,000 social connections and the
construction of 100 standposts, (d) the installation of water supply systems in two informal
neighborhoods of the city; and (e) a comprehensive study that identifies alternative sources of water, to
ensure water supply to the city beyond 2030.

In secondary centers the Program will support significant water supply system enhancements. In
response to the increasing water demand in the centers of Yako, Gourcy and Boussé, the Program will
increase the water production capacity (with 500 m3/h), expand distribution (163 km of network) and
increase connections (2,575 connections and 50 standposts). Similarly, the Program will support the
extension of the Kaya system to include the Korsimoro and Boussouma secondary centers and adding
production capacity (200 m3/h), the increase in the storage capacity of 2,600 m3, the extension of the
network of 125 km, and the installation of 3,100 social connections and 60 standposts. Finally, the
Program will support the creation of four stand-alone water supply systems in Gon-Boussougou,
Mogtédo, Béguédo, and Tiébélé with a total combined production capacity of 6,330 m3 per day; a
storage capacity of 1,200 m3; and the installation of 92 km of network, 6,210 social connections, and
123 standposts. In addition to infrastructure works, the Program will support the development of
master plans based on the priorities established by the PN-AEP.

Result Area 2. Improved acces to sanitation
The PforR will support sustainable access to sanitation services. In urban areas, the Program will support
the construction of 85,000 household latrines and 350 public latrines with male/female compartments
(in schools and markets), benefiting about 850,000 people. In rural areas, the Program will support the
construction of 50,000 household latrines and 900 public latrines with male/female compartments (in
schools, health centers, and markets), benefiting about 500,000 people

Result Area 3. Improved access to reliable information on water resources
The PforR will support sustainable access to sanitation services. In urban areas, the Program will support
the construction of 85,000 household latrines and 350 public latrines with male/female compartments
(in schools and markets), benefiting about 850,000 people. In rural areas, the Program will support the
construction of 50,000 household latrines and 900 public latrines with male/female compartments (in
schools, health centers, and markets), benefiting about 500,000 people



                                                  page 4
Regarding knowledge and monitoring of surface water, the PforR will support the optimization and
modernization of the existing hydrometric network of Burkina Faso, by acquiring and installing the
equipment and software required and by equipping and training the personnel of the departments
responsible for data collection.

With regard to groundwater, the PforR will support the organization and updating of existing
groundwater resources data and the rationalization of the piezometric network for better knowledge
and monitoring of groundwater sources. In particular, the Program will support studies to estimate
aquifer recharge and runoff, assess water withdrawals in the sector (industrial, agricultural, mining, and
household consumption) to accurately estimate exploitable reserves and a comprehensive study of the
largest aquifer in the country. In addition, the Program will support the optimization of primary and
secondary piezometric monitoring networks.

For the SNIE, the Program will support the operationalization of the SNIE that has already been
established to make water-related data publicly available to users and decision makers, and improve its
coherence and quality. This includes support to the development of the SNIE platform to be used for
data dissemination; the drafting and adoption of a decree for the institutionalization of the SNIE; the
establishment of data exchange protocols for the SNIE; and publicize the water data repository.
Emphasis will be placed on improving the quality and access to water information and expanding public
access beyond the data to the analytical results (trends, water balance, etc.).

Institutional Arrangement
At the institutional level, the PforR will be implemented through two implementing agencies: the
Ministry of Water and Sanitation (MEA) and the National Office of Water and Sanitation (ONEA). The
Program Coordinating Unit (PCU) of the MEA will have overall responsibility for the coordination of
Program, monitoring and evaluation and reporting and management activities. Within ONEA, a Program
Support Unit (PSU) will support the divisions responsible for the implementation of water and sanitation
activities in the urban environment

IDA will finance US$300 million of the total estimate cost of the PforR, which will be implemented over a
five-year period, through an IDA credit of US$50 million and US$250 from the IDA Scaling-up Facility.
The Government will be responsible for counterpart funding to cover, among other things, certain
operating, land acquisition costs, and any compensation due to persons affected by the Program.

II.3 ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL IMPACTS / RISKS OF THE PROGRAM

Overall Impact of the Program. Les activités prévues dans le cadre du Programme porteront
essentiellement sur les aspects suivants :

➢ Result Area 1 Activities

In Urban Areas :
    • In Ouagadougou the Program will support: (a) the increase in the storage capacity of 8,000 m3,
       (b) the extension of the network of 725 km, (c) the installation of 70,000 social connections and
       the construction of 100 standposts, (d) the installation of water supply systems in two informal
       neighborhoods of the city; and (e) a comprehensive study that identifies alternative sources of
       water, to ensure water supply to the city beyond 2030.




                                                  page 5
    •   In secondary centers the Program will support significant water supply system enhancements. In
        response to the increasing water demand in the centers of Yako, Gourcy and Boussé, the
        Program will increase the water production capacity (with 500 m3/h), expand distribution (163
        km of network) and increase connections (2,575 connections and 50 standposts). Similarly, the
        Program will support the extension of the Kaya system to include the Korsimoro and Boussouma
        secondary centers and adding production capacity (200 m3/h), the increase in the storage
        capacity of 2,600 m3, the extension of the network of 125 km, and the installation of 3,100
        social connections and 60 standposts. Finally, the Program will support the creation of four
        stand-alone water supply systems in Gon-Boussougou, Mogtédo, Béguédo, and Tiébélé with a
        total combined production capacity of 6,330 m3 per day; a storage capacity of 1,200 m3; and
        the installation of 92 km of network, 6,210 social connections, and 123 standposts. In addition
        to infrastructure works, the Program will support the development of master plans based on the
        priorities established by the PN-AEP.1

In Rural Areas :
    • Completion of 1,100 boreholes equipped with Human Motor Pumps, of which 700 ones in
        community centers and 400 ones in health centers and schools;

    •   Completion of 90 drinking water supply systems;

    •   Rehabilitation of 60 Simplified Drinking Water Supplies.

➢ Result Area 2 Activities
In rural and urban areas, latrines are planned, namely:

    •   Construction of 135,000 household latrines;

    •   Equipment of 1,340 schools and health centers with adequate sanitation facilities (latrine blocks
        with separate boys/girls blocks with a cabin disabled for disabled users in each block in the case
        of schools) and public places.

➢ Result Area 3 Activities
Activities will have positive impacts as they will contribute to the improvement of decision-making
processes. However, potential excavation work may result in part in destruction of vegetation, and in
some instances, result in loss of portions of land and disruption of socio-economic activities. These
works are subject to simple environmental and social Requirements - in accordance with national
arrangements (see Box in Section II).

Positive impacts. The Program activities will have major benefits for both the environment and the
population (access to drinking water, less hardship in drinking water supply and time saving for women,
reduction of water-borne diseases, improvement of living conditions, improvement of hygiene, fight
against poverty, reduction of unemployment, etc.). These positive effects are numerous and should be
maintained over the long term.




1
 A letter from the Minister in charge of the Environment dated 26 February 2018 authorized the realization of
NIES on all drinking water supply projects in urban areas (see copy of this letter in Annex 8).


                                                   page 6
Core Principles. This ESSA was prepared in accordance with the six key principles outlined in paragraph
8 of the World Bank Policy on PforR Financing, with the objective of managing program risks and
promoting sustainable development. These principles are:



        Core Principle 1- Environment : Promoting environmental and social sustainability in program
         design, avoiding, minimizing or mitigating undesirable impacts, promote information-based
         decision-making about the environmental and social impacts of the program

        Core Principle 2- Natural Habitats and Cultural Resources: Avoiding, minimizing or mitigating
         adverse impacts on natural habitats and cultural resources resulting from the program

        Core Principle 3- Public and Workers Safety: Protecting the safety of the public and workers
         from the potential risks associated with: (i) construction and/or works of infrastructure or other
         work depending on the program; (ii) exposure to toxic chemicals, hazardous wastes, noise,
         vibrations, and other hazardous materials dependent on the program; (iii) reconstruction or
         rehabilitation of infrastructure located in areas subject to natural hazards

        Core Principle 4- Land Acquisition: Managing land acquisition and loss of access to natural
         resources in a way that avoids or minimizes displacements, and assists affected people by
         promoting, or at least, by restoring their livelihoods and their living conditions.

        Core Principle 5- Vulnerable Groups: Paying particular attention to the cultural relevance of,
         equitable access to, program benefits, granting special attention to the rights and interests and
         needs and concerns of vulnerable groups. Vulnerable groups will include thez elderly, women
         heads of family, and people living with disabilities.

        Core Principle 6- Social Conflict: Avoiding exacerbating social conflict, especially in fragile states,
         post-conflict areas, or disputed territorial areas.

II.3.1 ENVIRONMENTAL RISKS OF THE PROGRAM

The negative environmental and social impacts of investments will generally be limited, of low to
medium magnitude, reversible and easily controllable and manageable. The associated risks are
considered moderate. They will be easy to identify in advance, to prevent and minimize and compensate
with simple good practices and effective mitigation measures.

Environmental and social screening of the various sub-projects that will be subject to funding will make
it possible to identify both the scale of the potential negative impacts and the required planning tools,
as well as the control and monitoring systems required (by means of a simple and efficient screening
system).2

The Program will have limited adverse environmental and social impacts and risks. This is mainly due to
the following aspects:




2
    See Box in Section II.


                                                      page 7
           ➢ Exclusion, by the very nature of a PforR, of any investment involving major
                 environmental risks (namely World Bank Class A projects) ;

           ➢ The type and nature of the planned improvements and infrastructure (generally small,
                 well located and over a relatively limited spatial extent, and involving reduced
                 surface excavation works) ;

           ➢ The very nature of the planned activities, based on the results of previous diagnostic
                 studies, based on specific social, economic and environmental parameters;

           ➢ The nature of works and development operations that should not generate major cases
                 of air or noise pollution or significant degradation of the inhabited environment or
                 significant destruction or reduction of green spaces;

           ➢ The existence of various controllable and effective measures making it possible to
                mitigate potential risks and provide impact monitoring, during both the construction
                phase and the works' operation;

           ➢ The existence of institutions capable of managing most of the environmental and social
                 aspects of the Program;

           ➢ The existence of an appropriate institutional and legal framework making it possible to
                 effectively manage all aspects of the Program's Environmental and Social
                 Management (ESM).

Positive Environmental Impact

Without doubt, the Program's investments will have a positive environmental impact - both directly and
indirectly, temporarily and permanently. Indeed, the Program will contribute, among other things, to:

      Significantly improve people's access to drinking water;
      Improve access to improved sanitation facilities;
      Reduce the frequency and incidence of waterborne diseases;
      Improve hygiene and healthiness conditions;
      Build the ONEA network capacity;
      Reinforce the water supply system of centers already served by ONEA by increasing existing
       water storage capacities as well as in new centers;
      Improve the water supply management system in four targeted regions;
      Support the implementation of the Roadmap for Assistance to the Municipal Project
       Ownership (AMOC) by strengthening the capacities of the 125 municipalities and setting up
       the Municipal Technical Agents;
      Improve the institutional capacities of the actors involved.

Negative Environmental Risks during the Preparation Phase
During the preparation phase, the main risk consists in negligence in the preparation of tender
documents for the environmental and social aspects and their low consideration in carrying out the
technical studies and/or the preparation of unsatisfactory environmental and social studies. This risk
may be aggravated if technical (sub)project design alternatives have not been rigorously considered and



                                                page 8
the information and public participation aspects are not taken into account in a culturally appropriate
and socially acceptable manner.

On the other hand, the structural interventions envisaged under the Program should not raise particular
risks in terms of public safety and worker safety. Protection against these risks will be provided in
accordance with applicable national and international rules. Measures to mitigate these risks will mainly
involve: (i) public and stakeholder consultation during site selection and preparation and validation of
studies; (ii) quality control and the implementation of validation procedures for environmental and
social studies and their dissemination; and (iii) site supervision by environmental and social experts.

The main mitigation measures recommended during this phase mainly consist in screening all the sub-
projects, according to agreed parameters, as well as establishing an evaluation sheet of the impacts of
activities prior to their completion and the inclusion in the Scopes of Work of calls for bid of a section on
compliance with environmental and social clauses and site safety.

Environmental Risks during the Works
The phase of works will see the opening of construction sites, which could generate solid waste (bags of
cement and other types of packaging, residues of drinking water system materials, workers' household
waste, etc.), include nuisances associated with vehicles and machinery (dust, noise, emissions and
accidental spills of hydrocarbons and used oils) or involve adverse effects (tree pulling, reduction of
green spaces, etc.).

Despite the fact that they are not permanent (since they cease with the closure of the worksites), the
effects of these impacts can nevertheless persist (in particular the effects of solid wastes and probable
spills of used oils and machinery greases) if sites conduct and closure are not accompanied by
environmental respect procedures. In particular:

         Destructuration of soil texture caused by deep excavations and trenching
         Noise nuisance for neighboring populations and for construction site workers related to the
          use of construction machinery
         High level of air pollution (related to dust emission) associated to the circulation of machines
          and vehicles;
         Accidents for workers and nearby residents associated to the circulation of construction
          machinery and possible non-compliance with the safety instructions;
         GHG emissions related to exhaust fumes of construction vehicles;
         Accidents and safety problems, especially for the most vulnerable people (children, elderly
          people, women, disabled people) could be significant risks;
         Disturbances in population daily activities during construction, rehabilitation or extension
          because of deviations in car traffic or restricted pedestrian access and housing access;
         Pollution of some drinking water sources and contamination of the groundwater during
          construction works;

         Tree and vegetation cutting or pulling;

         Inconvenience for the local population, and especially the most vulnerable people, because
          of the noise and the dust emission on the building sites;

         Accidents and safety problems especially for the most vulnerable people (children, elderly
          people, women).


                                                   page 9
The mitigation measures that accompany this work phase consist in the rigorous implementation of the
measures proposed in the Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMP) and in a regular
monitoring of the application of the site guidelines as defined. in the Scopes of work of firms, the
establishment of non-ccompliance cases and the identification of corrective measures as well as the
follow-up of their implementation.

Negative Environmental Risks during the Operation Phase
The adverse environmental impacts associated with this phase for structural investments could be due
to inadequate design, lack of maintenance and upkeep, inadequate use of structures, deterioration of
infrastructure or inadequate application of safety measures. They can cause a malfunction or a
deterioration of the works and generate some negative impacts.

The mitigation measures recommended at this level are good works site management practices. They in
general consist in putting in place emergency measures in case of accidental contamination.

1. The environmental monitoring system that will accompany the operation phase will have to make it
   possible to identify these malfunctions in real time in order to make the necessary corrections.

II.3.2 SOCIAL IMPACTS OF THE PROGRAM

The negative social impacts of the Program - particularly those associated with private land acquisition -
will be time-limited and restricted in space owing to the relatively low land needs in the various
investments planned under the Program. Most PAPs will be temporarily affected by civil works. Some
may have to move permanently. However, the number of PAPs will be very small due to the nature of
the activities. Land acquisition needs are minimal. As the investment sites are not yet precisely defined,
it is not possible to determine the number of PAPs at the current stage, although they will most likely
limited.

The sites for carrying out the water supply activities are located either in the field of ONEA, town halls or
on off subdivison private land plots which are also subject to negotiation with the owners. With regard
to administrative reserves, they can be resettled if they are occupied by third parties.

Indeed, it is unlikely that any form, even temporary, of involuntary resettlement of residential
households or businesses proves necessary. However, at this stage, social hazards associated with
private land acquisition cannot be ruled out. The PforR activities that will be implemented, will observe
the laws applicable to expropriation, namely the law on agrarian and land reform, as well as the law on
rural land tenure. Indeed, property rights are a fundamental right defined and guaranteed by the
Constitution (Annex 3 presents the main national laws and procedures on expropriation and
compensation).

Positive Social Impacts
2. The proposed activities by their very nature should be advantageous to the beneficiary populations.
    These benefits among others include:

      Improvement of living conditions, healthiness and hygiene of populations;
      Socio-economic development of urban and rural areas;
      Fight against poverty and reduction of unemployment;
      Reduction of medical costs resulting from the treatment of diseases associated with water
       pollution and lack of sanitation measures;


                                                  page 10
          Implementation of investments (e.g. latrines) that have been strategically identified and that
           address the needs of all social categories, including the most vulnerable categories, especially
           women and girls;
          Reduced time usually spent by women in fetching drinking water and increased time devoted
           to childcare and leisure;
          Citizen participation, through the strengthening of mechanisms for access to information,
           consultation of citizens, as well as grievance management and implementation of measures to
           establish the right of petition and satisfaction monitoring of water services users;
          Compensation for any losses in a fair and prior manner;
          Establishment of regular interactions with the population and people in charge of the
           implemntation of the activities of the Program.

3. With the promotion of private connections in households, the responsibility for the payment of
     drinking water by women is actually transferred to the head of household, which reduces the
     financial burden for the woman. The multiplication of private connections in households will also
     promote the preservation of water quality. The increase in the number of fire hydrants makes it
     possible to improve the service twice because the density of the users increases from 1,000 to 500
     per fountain and consequently greatly reduces the waiting time for the water withdrawal. Thus, the
     level of service will reduce the financial burden and the water chore for the woman
In order to ensure the social benefits of the Program, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) must be
prepared by each structural investment sub-project requiring any physical movement of persons, any
land acquisition and/or loss of access to economic assets or workplaces (even for persons without
official title deeds). The purpose of a RAP is to assess the social impacts associated with the temporary
or permanent resettlemet of individuals and to propose compensation for losses and support, in
consultation with affected persons. Populations affected by resettlement will have to benefit fully from
the allowances and support measures to which they are entitled before the start of works.3

Social Risks during the Preparation Phase
In general, the most significant social hazards that are likely to be observed are related to temporary
land acquisition or occupation. However, other smaller magnitude hazards may be related to
disturbances caused by work such as access difficulties, traffic deviations, noise, vibrations, dust, etc.
that could cause disruptions in the day-to-day activities of neighborhoods. Depending on the type, scope
and extent of eligible work under the Program, the social hazards will be those that are typically related
and limited to the construction phase, and which are generally site-specific. Nevertheless, if the ESMP or
RAP are poorly designed and badly implemented, this could have negative impacts on public health and
safety and create social tensions.4

During the preparation phase, the main social hazard is potentially associated with works that may
require some land acquisition.

To avoid private land acquisitions or demolition of individual houses, the Program will always seek
alternative solutions, without forcing land transfers.




3
    See also Box, Section II.

4
    Annex 6 presents the procedure related to the preparation and implementation of RAPs.


                                                      page 11
Where private land acquisition or demolition of an individual house cannot be avoided, the acquisition
procedures must favor the acquisition by mutual agreement, after consultation and informed and
documented consent on the transfer and the amount of compensation, which must be remitted to the
beneficial owner before any work is started.

In case physical displacement cannot be avoided, owing to the absence of technical and/or land related
alternatives, the social impacts associated with the acquisition of land will have to be duly identified,
analyzed and mitigated. A specific screening process first and foremost will make it possible to exclude
from the Program financing any subprojects with a major social impact (Category A activities requiring a
thorough ESSA according to the Burkina Faso nomenclature), which would require the displacement of
residential households or commercial activities and/or the involuntary acquisition of large areas of land,
and subsequently, in the case of moderate impacts, the implementation of initiatives to inform affected
persons and compensation measures, even before start of work

For any sub-project submitted for approval to the designated bodies, it will be important, upstream,
that the PCU safeguard specialists systematically verify that the populations concerned have been well
informed and consulted, especially when the proposed works require any form of temporary or
permanent displaceemnt of persons or land acquisition or restricted access to resources or
infrastructure or economic goods or interruptions of public services as a result of the works.

         Public consultations will have to be conducted in the appropriate language (s) by the
            companies in charge of the works, take into account the time constraints and the availability
            of the persons consulted. If necessary, separate meetings for men and women in order to
            allow all participants to express themselves appropriately. It is also important to ensure that
            the most vulnerable populations are fully consulted in order to minimize the risks of elite
            capture of program benefits.

         A redress mechanism will have to be developed to handle complaint cases. The
            requirements to be met are (i) to allow non-literate persons, to be able to submit their
            complaints, (ii) not to be forced to move from their locality, (iii) to have the choice to refer
            to several instances and (iv) ) to expect an answer within a known time period. The
            complaints processing circuit and the response times will be adequately documented.



Social Risks during the Works
The construction phase will see the opening of construction sites for structures and development, which
will have negative social impacts, insofar as they can:

     Require obstructed temporary access to residential households or businesses (in the case of
      investments in reinforcement of existing structures) ;

     Require the private land acquisition in part or totally and, as a result, possible expropriation for
      public purposes and involuntary resettlement of residential households or businesses;

     Generate temporary disruptions in craft and economic activities of individuals and households,
      causing loss of income (shortfall) ;




                                                  page 12
     Create temporary difficulties for residents to access their homes, shops and other public
      establishments (schools, dispensaries, etc.) ;

     Lead to interruptions of drinking water and electricity services and temporary closure of public
      institutions (schools, dispensaries, hospitals) and community facilities (e.g., markets,
      slaughterhouses, etc.) ;

     Cause accidents and safety problems, especially for users without protection) ;

     Cause accidents on or around construction sites;

     Require temporary deviations to car traffic or restricted pedestrian crossing and generate
      disruptions in activities;

     Contribute - because of the presence of foreign construction workers - to increased violence and
      possible sexual harassment acts against women and increased sexually transmitted diseases and
      HIV/AIDS;

     Generate conflicts and acts of sabotage related to the misunderstanding of the inhabitants on
      the choice of the sites of implementation of the works ;

     Generate conflicts and acts of sabotage linked to the non-use of local labor;

     Damage objects of local cultural and religious heritage.

In addition, given that these social hazards will mainly occur during the works, the latter will be
organized accordingly and alternative access routes will be put in place and affected persons will be duly
informed. These points will be the object of specific clauses of the Scopes of Work of firms and a regular
follow-up will be provided by the regional operators and the Commune. Taking account of the above
and the past experience, the foreseeable social hazards of the work are considered moderate and
manageable, provided adequate measures are applied.

Social Risks during the Operation Phase
As with environmental effects, the social risks of the operation phase could be due to inadequate
design, lack of awareness raising among the population, lack of maintenance and upkeep, or
inappropriate use or infrastructure degradation or insufficient enforcement of safety measures.

4. The environmental and social monitoring system that will accompany the operation phase will have
   to make it possible to identify these malfunctions in real time in order to make the necessary
   corrections. Companies responsible for the works must be well informed of all their social
   obligations and provide regular monitoring.


Note about Child Labor

     Child labor is prohibited in the Burkinabe Law since Order No. 539 / ITLS/HV of 29 July 1954 on
        child labor. This ban was renewed after independence in the various Labor Codes (of 1992,
        1998, 2004, and 2008).




                                                 page 13
     Burkina Faso ratified ILO 182 Convention in 2001 (regarding, inter alia, works which, by their
        nature or the conditions in which it operates, are likely to affect child health, safety, or
        morality).

II.4 OVERVIEW

In light of the elements of the previous subsections, it can be emphasized that the Program will have
moderate environmental and social impacts. This is mainly due to the fact that the Program, designed as
a PforR, excludes, as a matter of principle, any investment involving major environmental and social
risks.

         Thus, in accordance with this policy, the Program will automatically exclude any activity
            posing potentially significant environmental and socialrisk and significant negative,
            irreversible, diverse, varied and unprecedented impacts.

Therefore, any sub-project will be considered non eligible as it involves the following:

     Construction or rehabilitation of works that would require social risks, namely a significant
      physical displacement of persons or the acquisition of large areas of private land or the
      demolition of a large number of individual houses or else, restricted significant access to
      economic resources;

     Construction or rehabilitation of structures that could exacerbate existing land-based social
      conflicts;

     Construction or rehabilitation of structures that could exacerbate existing land-based social
      conflicts;

     Realization of structures/works that could have an irreversible impact on physical cultural
      resources of an archaeological or historical nature or places of worship; 5

     Realization of works having a high and irreversible impact on any zone classified as a site of
      biological or ecological interest.

In Section IV, the strengths, weaknesses and gaps, actions and opportunities and risks of the national
system are presented in the light of the Key Principles that are applicable to the Program, and as
described in the Bank policy and the Directive for the financing of the Program for Results

Various controllable and effective measures will make it possible to mitigate the potential risks of
eligible subprojects, and monitor their impact, during both the works phase and the operation of the
structures. These measures correspond to those generally implemented in site monitoring and will be
included in the Scopes of Work of the contracting firms and the monitoring of their application is carried
out using tools (monitoring sheets).



5
  In the event that excavation works identifed archaeological or cultural properties, regulatory preventive
measures would be taken, with the involvement of the Directorate General of Cultural Heritage (DPC) in
accordance with the provisions contained in Articles 4, 5, 6 and 6. 7 of the UNESCO Convention on the Protection
of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage – ratified by Burkina Faso in 1984).


                                                    page 14
   Burkina Faso has both an appropriate legal arsenal to effectively manage all aspects of the
   environmental and social management of the Program and specialized agencies, capable of managing
   most environmental and social aspects of the Program.

   Finally, it is opportune to recall that, under the Bank's policy for PforRs, any structures/works are also
   excluded when their estimated cost could be higher than certain specific amounts (high-value
   contracts) and that they would require a mandatory review by the Operations Procurement Review
   Committee (OPRC) of the World Bank.

   About Potential Social Conflicts
   The Program does not operate in a conflict-affected context. Nevertheless, its design, and in particular
   its component on improving citizen participation, precisely aims at enabling citizens (including women,
   young people and the most vulnerable populations) to have access to information, to be consulted, to
   have easy access to appropriate complaints mechanisms.

   In addition, the Program aims to support in each Participating Municipality the establishment of petition
   procedures and mechanisms that citizens can use. In this sense, the Program should help to mitigate
   social tensions and promote greater social cohesion.

   Environmental and Social Management Instruments
    All sub-projects to be funded by the Program will need to be reviewed using appropriate screening
   instruments (see Box 1 below). Environmental and social diagnoses will be conducted for each of the
   (sub)projects to determine the type of planning tool required based on the scale and significance of the
   environmental and social impacts.

   Box 1 : SCREENING OF SUB-PROJECTS AND ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT
   INSTRUMENTS


In accordance with the environmental assessment procedures in Burkina Faso and the requirements of the World Bank's PforR
funding policy, all sub-projects subjet to Program funding will be subject to a screening or selection process, according to the following
principles:
According to Burkinabe procedures (Decree No. 2015-1187) for works in the water sector:

        An Environmental and Social Prescription will be prepared for « Category C » work with insignificant impact;

        An Environmental and Social Impact Notice (NIES) will be prepared for « Category B » activities with a moderate impact, to
  obtain an Environmental Compliance Notice from the Minister in charge of the environment.

        An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) will be prepared for « Category A » activities with a significant
  environmental and social impact, to obtain an Environmental Compliance Advice from the Minister in charge of the environment.

       The impact study must be supplemented by a public inquiry, the purpose of which is to collect the opinions, the counter-
  proposals of the parties involved in relation to the EIA that is presented

        A resettlement action plan (RAP) will be prepared when the number of involuntary physical and/or economic displacements
  is more than 200 people

       A succinct resettlement plan will be prepared when the number of involuntary physical and/or economic displacements is
  between 50 and 199 people.

        When the number of physical and/or economic involuntary displacements is less than 50 people, the measures and




                                                                page 15
  modalities of resettlement are included in the report of the Environmental and Social Impact Statement

The Contractual requirements (Caher des charges) of the contractors and regional operators responsible for the execution of the
works will imperatively contain all the technical devices and environmental and social mitigation measures planned, as well as a
monitoring and control system that meets the standards in force (including the safety of construction site workers and local
people).

All environmental and social safeguard instruments prepared for subprojects will have to be subject to appropriate public disclosure.

Local beneficiaries will need to be informed of the commitments contained in these instruments and have access to a complaints
management mechanism in the event of non-observance of these commitments.

   II.5 PRIOR EXPERIENCES OF THE INSTITUTIONS INVOLVED IN THE PROGRAM

   5. ONEA already has proven experience in environmental and social safeguards, particularly in the
      implementation of the Urban Water Sector Project (PSEU) (P149556).

   6. In the context of community investment projects, MEA has also assumed responsibilities for
      environmental and social safeguards.

   7. In the context of another PforR - the Public Administration Modernization Program (PPA) (P132216)
      - the Ministry of the Public Service of Labor and Social Security and the ministries of Justice and
      education have acquired experience in environmental and social safeguards. This program is still
      being implemented in Burkina Faso, with the involvement of BUNEE.

   8. All these experiences are assets for a good consideration of environmental and social safeguards in
      the implementation of this PforR.




                                                              page 16
                  SECTION III. DESCRIPTION OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SYSTEM

III.1 ENVIRONMENTAL SYSTEM

Political Framework 6

9. In Burkina Faso, environmental protection is one of the priority areas for policies having to
   contribute to achieving the sustainable development objectives. Among these policies, the most
   important ones are the following:

10. The National Economic and Social Development Plan (PNDES), adopted by the Governement on 20
    July 2016, is built around three strategic axes and aims at reforming the institutions and
    modernizing the administration, developing the human capital and boosting buoyant sectors for
    economy and employment. It plans to use a participatory approach, a national economic and social
    development referential to make it possible to define and implement sectoral and regional priority
    actions over the 2016-2020 period. It builds on the "Burkina 2025" vision, the orientations of the
    Presidential Program and takes account of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), as well as the
    new emerging areas. Through its Axis 2 "developing human capital", the specific objective OS 2.5 "to
    improve the living environment, access to water, sanitation and quality energy services" aims to
    ensure that everyone's access to a decent living environment, to quality water and sanitation is
    guaranteed.

11. The National Sustainable Development Policy (PNDD), adopted in 2013, sets out a vision for
    sustainable development by 2050, in which "all sector strategies, all development plans and
    programs contribute to improving the populations level and quality of life, especially the poorest
    ones ". The protection of the environment, in addition to the preservation of natural resources, aims
    to provide a better living environment to the populations. Aiming at ensuring the environmental
    sustainability of any national initiative, the PNDD is part of promoting a healthy living environment
    through the sanitation of the natural environment.

12. The National Environmental Policy (NEP), adopted in 2007, reflects the Government's will to create a
    reference framework for taking environmental issues into account in the development policies and
    strategies. Environmental concerns involve, on the one hand, the natural resources (including water
    resources) which are threatened by accelerated degradation under the combined effects of climatic
    and anthropogenic factors, and on the other hand, the living environment in which the problems
    arise in terms of pollution and various nuisances. With particular reference to domestic wastewater
    and excreta, it notes that in urban areas, existing management systems consist mainly of traditional
    latrines and catch basins, and that a part of the population still does not have infrastructure for
    sanitation. These facilities are sources of odor nuisances and proliferation of insects and pests.

13. The overall objective of The Water Policy and Strategy, adopted by the Council of Ministers at its
    meeting on 1 July 1998, is to "contribute to sustainable development by providing appropriate
    solutions to water-related problems so that water does not become a limiting factor for socio-
    economic development. " This policy covers all uses of water. The consideration of sanitation issues
    thus comes from the penultimate guidance on the preservation of a healthy environment. The policy



6
    See also Annex 1.


                                                page 17
       and strategy document devotes its guidance No. 4 to the actual implementation of the sanitation
       strategy and resource protection measures.

14. The objective of the National Sanitation Policy and Strategy, adopted in July 2007, is to contribute to
    sustainable development by providing appropriate solutions to sanitation problems in order to
    improve the living and housing conditions of populations, to preserve their health and to protect
    natural resources.

15. Other related policies are linked with the water and sanitation sector. These include, in particular,
    the National Public Hygiene Policy, the National Gender Policy, the National Health Policy, and the
    National Social Protection Policy (2013-2022).

Legislative and Regulatory Framework 7

16. The Constitution of Burkina Faso defines the fundamental rights and obligations of citizens,
    determines the form of state organization, and organizes the implementation of the universal
    republican principle of the separation of powers. The constitution of the Fourth Republic
    promulgated on 11 June 1991 contains many environmental references. Thus its preamble affirms
    the Burkinabè people's awareness of "... the absolute necessity of protecting the environment ...".
    The constitution recognizes (Article 29) to Burkinabè citizens the right to a healthy environment,
    while indicating that "the protection, the defense and the promotion of the environment are a duty
    for all". Also, its Article 14 states that natural resources "belong to the population" and "must be
    used for the improvement of their living conditions". It starts from these provisions that many
    policies and strategies have developed for the protection of the environment.

17. Adopted by Law N°006-2013/AN of 02 April 2013, the Code of the Environment is devoted to the
    Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA), the Study and the Impact Notice on the Environment
    (EIE, NIE) in its Articles 25 to 34. According to Article 25 of this Law, the activities likely to have
    significant effects on the environment are subject to the prior opinion of the Minister of the
    Environment. The opinion is based on a Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA), an
    Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) or an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS).

18. Law No. 002-2001 / an of 8 February 2001 on water management and implementing legislation
    provides in Article 39 for the EIA / NIE prior to the issuance of the carrying out of installations,
    works, works likely to present dangers to the health and public safety, to reduce water resources, to
    modify substantially the level, the mode of flow or the regime of the waters.

19. Law No. 23/94 / ADP of 19 May 1994 on the Public Health Code deals with health protection of the
    environment (air and water pollution).

20. Law 2005-022 on Public Hygiene Code governs public health in Burkina Faso, including hygiene on
    public roads and squares, hygiene of swimming pools and bathing areas, housing, foodstuffs, water,
    industrial and commercial facilities, schools, preschools and sanitary buildings, public buildings and
    the natural environment and the fight against noise.




7
    See also Annex 2.


                                                 page 18
21. Law No. 008-2014/AN of 08 April 2014 on the Sustainable Development Orientation Law aims to
    create a unified national reference framework to ensure the coherence of actors' interventions
    through appropriate legal, political, and institutional reforms; to ensure economic efficiency,
    environmental sustainability and social equity in all development actions. Several implementing
    decrees have been passed by the Government to strengthen it. Annex 2 presents all these legal
    provisions, including the following aspects: the forest code, the public hygiene code, the public
    health code, the agrarian and land reform and the law relating to water management.

22. Law No. 021-2006/AN of 14 November 2006, on the General Code of Territorial Collectivities,
    states that the territorial collectivities co-operate with the State in the administration of the
    territory, in economic, social, educational, health, cultural, and scientific development, as well as
    the protection, development of natural resources and the improvement of the living environment.
    In Section 3 of the Code (which deals with the environment and natural resources), Article 89
    confers on the urban commune, among others, the following competences: (i) elaboration of
    municipal action plans for the environment; (ii) participation in the protection and management of
    groundwater and surface water resources; (iii) sanitation; and (iv) fight against insalubrity, pollution
    and nuisances.

Institutional Actors in charge of the Environment

23. Ministry of the Environment, Green Economy, and Climate Change (MEEVCC). The Ministry
    provides the implementation and monitoring of the Government's policy in terms of environment
    and sanitation.

       In environmental matters, it is responsible for: (i) the protection of the environment and the
        monitoring of international environmental conventions ratified by the country; (ii) the
        development and monitoring of environmental education programs; and (iii) the coordination of
        activities to combat desertification and other causes of environmental degradation.
       In the area of sanitation of the living environment, it is responsible for: (i) initiating,
        coordinating, regulating and monitoring actions related to cleansing the environment and
        improving the living in both rural and urban areas; (ii) developing a national policy for
        landscaping and beautification; (iii) developing regulatory texts in the fight against pollution and
        nuisances; (iv) supporting local government for public healthiness; (v) developing and controlling
        standards; and (vi) recycling and treating solid waste.

24. MEEVCC includes several directorates, amongst which the following:8

       The General Directorate for the Preservation of the Environment (DGPE). Accordig to Order
        No.2017-099/MEEVCC/SG/DGPE on the organization, powers and operation of the General
        Directorate for the Preservation of the Environment of 16 March 2017, the mission of the DGPE
        is to coordinate the implementation and the monitoring of the national policy in terms of
        improving the living environment, environmental education, fight against pollution and other
        nuisances and landscaping. It in addition has experience in raising awareness of environmental
        and health risks and impacts of human activities, monitoring the quality of water around mining,



8
    Annex 4 presents the whole organizational chart of the MEEVCC.


                                                      page 19
        industrial, and artisanal sites, water analysis for the benefit of individuals, and of water analysis
        in cases of pollution.

     The Directorate of Prevention of Pollutions and Environmental Risks (DPRE) and the
        Environmental Quality Analysis Laboratory (LAQE) which, in their missions, provide support for
        the operationalization of BUNEE missions.
25. Ministry of the Environment and Sustainable Development (MEDD) : National Office for
    Environental Assessments (BUNEE). Article 2 of Order No. 2015-123 MERH/SG/ UNEE of 30 July
    2015 specifies the tasks, organization and working of the National Office of Environmental
    Assessments (BUNEE). The mission of BUNEE is to coordinate the implementation and monitoring of
    the national environmental assessment policy. In this capacity, it is responsible for:
     Implementing national strategies in strategic environmental assessment, environmental impact
        assessment and environmental audit and environmental inspection;

     Promoting the practice of environmental assessments in collaboration with other structures of
      the Ministry;

     Validating environmental assessment reports;

     Issueing environmental requirements;

     Organizing the sessions of the Technical Committee on Environmental Assessments;

     organizing validation sessions for rehabilitation and closure plans for establishment or project
      sites;

     Conducting public inquiries regarding the validation of environmental impact assessment
      reports;

     Following-up and monitoring in environmental terms projects and programs that have been
      subject to an environmental assessment;

     Preparing draft compliant feasibility or environmental compliance advices for the signature of
      the Minister of the Environment;

     Analyzing plans for the disinterestedness and resettlement of populations affected by project or
      program implementation;

     Participating in the work of interministerial structures responsible for environmental issues;

     Organizing and conducting environmental inspections over the whole national territory;

     Collecting revenue from BUNEE provided services.9



9
 To perform these missions, the BUNEE currently has a staff of 64 agents, 15 of whom are senior managers, i.e., a
ratio of 23.43%. The following profiles make up the team of executives: social affairs administrators (1), medical
biologist (1), lawyer (1), geology (1), environmental inspector (1) and certified teacher of senior and junior high
schools (1). These executives are engaged in analyzing the ESIA / NIES reports, monitoring Environmental and


                                                     page 20
26. The Ministry of Water and Sanitation (MEA), the mandate of which is the definition and
    implementation of the national policy in terms of drinking water and sanitation. The MEA
    supervises the National Office for Water and Sanitation (ONEA). The objects of the Office are: (i)
    establishing, managing and protecting drinking water collection, supply, treatment and distribution
    facilities for urban and industrial purposes; and (ii) creating, promoting and improving, as well as
    managing collective, individual or autonomous sanitation facilities for the disposal of wastewater
    and excreta in urban and semi-urban areas. The relations between the State and ONEA are governed
    by a three-year contract and scopes of work that set the conditions for creating, operating and
    protecting water and sanitation infrastructure under ONEA management.

III.2 SOCIAL ASPECT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM

III.2.1 National Legal Framework

27. The legal and regulatory context relates to land legislation (laws applicable to land tenure, land
    status), public participation, land acquisition, resettlement and land restructuring mechanisms.
    Other social aspects such as the social protection of the vulnerable ones, the management of the
    workers, the work of the under age people, the abuses on the communities living in the works
    execution zones will be considered. 10

28. From the legal viewpoint, according to Law No. 034-2012/AN of 02 July 2012 on Agrarian and Land
    Reform (RAF) in Burkina Faso, there are three types of land ownership regimes in Burkina Faso:


       •   Legal State Ownership Regime. The national land estate is a common heritage of the nation
           and the State, as guarantor of the general interest, organizes its management in accordance
           with the principles set out in Article 3 of the same law. The law thus confers to the State the
           ownership of all the lands of the National Land Area (DFN) with the exception of those ceded
           by the State.

       •   Local Authority Ownership Regime. Local authorities have their own land, consisting of the
           parts of the national land estate ceded as State property.11 All lands located within the
           territorial limits of a territorial collectivity are of right the property of this territorial
           collectivity.

       •   Land Tenure Rights of Individuals. The right to private ownership of land is recognized by law.
           The RAF in its Article 30 stipulates that the land heritage of individuals shall consist of: all land
           and other immovable property belonging to them in full ownership; rights of enjoyment on
           the lands of the unallocated real estate private estate of the State and local authorities and on




Social Management Plans (ESMP) and conducting environmental inspections and possibly environmental audits in
accordance with the regulations for the whole country.

10
     Annex 3 presents the main laws and procedures involving expropriations.

11
  This is stipulated by the RAF and subsequently by Law No. 055-2004/AN of 21 December 2004 on General Code
of Territorial Collectivities (CGCT) in Burkina Faso (and implementing texts) in its Article 80.


                                                       page 21
        the land heritage of individuals; rural land holdings; and rural land use rights. Thus the
        surrendered or acquired lands cease to be the property of the State.

29. The customary land tenure system is the accepted and dominant form of enjoyment of land tenure
    rights in rural Burkina Faso. In general, rural populations do not in fact recognize state ownership of
    land. Even though land and resources, particularly in conservation sites, protected areas or public
    utility areas, have been declared State property, they remain subject to the customary land
    management regime on a daily basis. Generally in the villages, landowners, in particular the village
    chiefs or the land chiefs or the lineage chiefs are the ones who are in charge of the land
    management.

Right to property

30. The Constitution of Burkina Faso guarantees to all the right to private property, its protection, as
    well as to expropriation. The right of property is guaranteed, but it cannot be exercised contrarily
    to social utility or in such a way as to prejudice the safety, freedom, existence or property of
    others. It can only be infringed in cases of public necessity established in the legal forms. No one
    shall be deprived of its enjoyment except for reasons of public utility and on the condition of just
    compensation determined in accordance with the law. This compensation must be prior to
    expropriation, except in case of emergency or force majeure».

31. Other laws provide that the national land property is the property of the State and therefore
    recognize the State's right of expropriation for reasons of public utility in the context of
    developments or achievements for the general interest in the different sectors of production.12 The
    RAF is somewhat explicit about the conditions, measures and modalities for evaluating
    compensation. According to the terms of the RAF, "the national land property is automatically
    owned by the State", and therefore the State may proceed with expropriations for public purposes.

32. The right of expropriation for the benefit of the State for public utility reasons provides for the
    repair of property and assets losses of the populations living in the area of a public utility zone.
    Compensation is the value for repairing losses. On the issue of compensation, the provisions of
    Articles 323 to 326 of the RAF define the methods of fixing compensations. Indeed, Article 319
    states that "The compensation for expropriation is set either amicably or by the Judge. It is
    established in accordance with Article 323, taking account in each case of: (i) the status of the
    present value of the property, (ii) the gain or loss that results, for the party of such non-expropriated
    property, of the execution of the proposed work ". Also, it specifies that "the compensation of
    expropriation must include only the current and certain damage directly caused by the
    expropriation; it cannot extend to uncertain, eventual or indirect damage. Expropriation may give
    rise to in- kind compensation ". The above legal provisions are what regulates the legal mechanisms
    of expropriation for utility purposes in Burkina.

33. In the context of this program, in the case of physical or economic displacement of persons, all
    categories of PAPs will have to be taken into account in the RAP. For PAPs holding appropriate land



12
  See the following laws : La No. 034-2009/AN of 16 June 2009, La No. 034- 2002/AN of 14 November 2002, and
Law No. 002-2001/AN 08 February 2001. These laws pose the principle of expropriation and compensation and
refer to the RAF with regard to compensation measures.


                                                  page 22
     titles prior to the works, the procedure of expropriation for reasons of public utility in force in
     Burkina will have to be followed and the compensation will have to include the costs of obtaining
     land titles. Although national resettlement systems are flawed in relation to Bank policy, the
     chances of people being resettled as a result of the project are minimal. The program excludes
     activities that will cause the displacement of a large number of people.

Institutional Actors

34. In terms of land management in Burkina Faso, the management organizations or structures are
    defined by the RAF and Law No. 034-2009/AN on rural land tenure and priority implementing texts.
    These organizations are at four levels: national, regional, communal and village.

      At national level: At national level: With reference to Law No. 034, a national body for
       consultation, monitoring and evaluation of rural land policy and legislation is set up bringing
       together all public, private and public sector, civil society stakeholders concerned with the
       rational, equitable, peaceful and sustainable management of land in rural areas, including
       representatives of customary authorities, local authorities, research institutions and centers of
       excellence. Currently this instance is not yet operational.

      At regional level: At the regional level: The competent deconcentrated technical services of the
       State are those which are in charge of providing support to the Rural Land Services (SFR) of
       local authorities as stipulated by Law No. 034 on rural land tenure.13

      At municipal level: the Rural Land Service (SFR) at the level of each rural municipality is
       responsible for all the activities of management and security of the land area of the
       municipality (including local areas of natural resources for common use ) and activities to
       secure land tenure of the rural property of individuals in the municipality. In conjunction with
       the village commissions, the SFR regularly holds the rural land registers (register of rural land
       holdings, register of rural land transactions, register of local land charters, register of rural land
       conciliations). There is also, at the communal level, a local land consultation body that each
       rural commune can create to examine all issues relating to land tenure security for local actors,
       local land management and governance, land equity issues and sustainable use of rural lands
       and make any proposals they deem appropriate. This body has an advisory role. All these land
       management structures at the municipal level, as provided for by Law No. 034 on rural land
       tenure, are not operational in all communes, since not all the implementing texts have yet
       been adopted.

      At village level: A Village Land Commission, created in each village and composed of customary
       and traditional village authorities in charge of land, is responsible for contributing to the
       security and management of land.




13
  This support focuses on capacity building, technical assistance of the regions in the establishment of their
regional land offices, management of their own land domain as well as in the development and the concerted and
participative implementation of their regional land use planning scheme.


                                                   page 23
35. In addition to these land management structures, Law No. 034 defines intermediary institutions and
    services to support the management and securing of rural land (such as the competent
    deconcentrated technical services of the State, responsible for providing their support to rural land
    services in managing the land area of local authorities and securing the rural land assets of
    individuals).

Constitutional Appeal Body

36. The Office of the Ombudsman of the Republic of Faso was established by Organic Law No.
    22/94/ADP of 17 May 1994. The Ombudsman is an independent administrative authority, which
    receives no instruction from any political, administrative, legislative, or judicial authority, and which
    receives the grievances of the citizens relating to the working of State administrations, municipal
    authorities, public institutions and any other organization entrusted with a public service mission.




                                                  page 24
             SECTION IV. ASSESSMENT OF INSTITUTIONAL CAPACITY AND PERFORMANCE

37. From the previous analysis of the legal and institutional framework for environmental and social
    management in Burkina Faso, a number of conclusions can be drawn:

     In the areas of environmental and social management, most Burkinabe institutions are in place
      and their mandate is clearly defined. The national environmental impact assessment system is
      based on a well-rounded process of diagnosis and assessment of the nature of impacts and
      preparation of appropriate environmental and social safeguards

     However, the institutions have limited human resources with a strong need for capacity
      building. Moreover, they do not have enough financial resources to function in a suitable way.

     Administrative procedures are generally slow and do not allow for rapid and timely decision-
      making (see, for example, long delays in obtaining the Environmental Compliance Advice from
      project proponents).

     Public consultations only concern ESIAs in public inquiries, whereas these should extend to NIES.

     Public inquiries are often public information sessions and do not result in meaningful public
      consultations that promote stakeholder participation in decision-making.

     The complaints management system is not operational, especially in the context of interventions
      in rural areas.

38. It has to be recognized that these gaps wille ventually to be bridged by appropriate reforms and
    arrangements. Together with the community of technical and financial partners, the World Bank is
    already playing and could play further an important role in supporting the needed improvements.

39. However, as of now, in keeping with this PforR, it is possible to seize the opportunity to improve
    certain technical and administrative aspects, to create a new dynamic, to specify and consolidate
    partnerships and synergies among stakeholders, and strengthen the institutional capacity of all
    stakeholders involved in environmental and social safeguards at the national, regional, communal
    and village levels.

40. The strengths, weaknesses and gaps, actions and opportunities and risks of national systems are
    presented in Table 4 below, in the light of the Key Principles that are applicable to the Program, as
    described in the World Bank Policy and the guideline for Financing Programs for Results.




                                                 page 25
 Table 1 : Core Principles

Core Principle 1: General Principle of Environmental and Social Assessment and Management


Bank Policy for PforR            Bank's Guidelines for PforR Financing: The program procedures will:
Financing     Environmental
                                    Operate within an appropriate legal and regulatory framework to guide program-wide
and social management
                                     environmental and social assessment
procedures and processes
are intended to            (a)
promote       environmental         Incorporate elements of good environmental and social assessment practice including (i)
and social sustainability in         preliminary screening of potential effects ; (ii) consideration of the strategic and technical
program design (b) avoid,            aspects involved, as well as potential cumulative and transboundary impacts.; (iii) identification
minimize      or    mitigate         of measures to mitigate undesirable environmental and social impacts that cannot be avoided
undesirable impacts; and             or minimized; (iv) a clear articulation of institutional responsibilities and resources to support
(c)    promote      decision-        the implementation of plans; and (v) responsiveness and accountability through stakeholder
making          on        the        consultation, periodic reporting of program information,
environmental and social
effects of the program              The establishment of a conflict management mechanism oriented towards: (i) conflict
                                     resolution, (ii) systematic recording of grievances through appropriate channels; (iii) periodic
                                     reporting of the grievance management situation - specifying the nature of the grievances
                                     resolved and the status of unresolved grievances and the reasons for the non-resolution.


Applicable : The work funded under the Program could indeed have low to moderate negative impacts.

The ESSA has been prepared and its recommendations will be incorôrated into the overall action plan of the program.

By following the principles presented in the ESSA, a NIES or an ESMP will be imperatively prepared for any individual investment
project which, according to the initial diagnosis and the screening system put in place, would have a moderate impact.
STRENGTHS

    The country has adequate legislatifs and regulatory frameworks to appropriately manage the environmental and social
     impacts of the Program.

    The country has an institution in charge of environmental assessments (BUNEE)

    The national environmental impact assessment system is based on a well-rounded process of diagnosis and assessment of the
     nature of impacts and preparation of appropriate environmental and social safeguards

WEAKNESSES AND GAPS
 Environmental and social project management procedures follow a centralized logic – by concentrating responsibilities at the
   BUNEE level.

    Despite the existence of the regulatory framework, the institutions in charge do not have the human resources or the
     financial means to enforce the laws.

    Timelines for obtaining Environmental Compliance Advices from project proponents are relatively long.

ACTIONS AND OPPORTUNITIES
 Organization of awareness-raising initiatives of all actors and stakeholders about the problems of environmental management

    Launch of training initiatives aimed to strengthen more appropriately the capacities of central (especially BUNEE) and local
     officials in environmental and social safeguard procedures




                                                              page 26
   Opportunities for institutional actors to strengthen the dialogue with users and their social accountability as service providers

   The forthcoming decentralization reform of BUNEE

   The on-going development of a national compensation reference system for PAPs

   Individuals and communities who think they have been harmed as a result of the Program need to be informed about how to
    approach the existing National Recourse Mechanism or the World Bank Grievance Redress Service (GRS) - so that their
    complaints are reviewed promptly to address relevant concerns.

RISKS
 Poor implementation of environmental and social management rules and procedures.

   Failure to enforce current environmental regulations in atimely manner.

Core Principle 2: Natural Habitats and Physical Cultural Resources
The Bank's Policy for Financing      The Bank's guideline for funding PforRs as relevant to be supported by the program:
PforRs: Environmental and            include appropriate measures for the identification and preliminary screening of potentially
Social Management Procedures         important resources of biodiversity and cultural sites;
and Processes are designed to
                                     support and promote the conservation, maintenance and rehabilitation of natural habitats;
avoid, minimize or reduce
undesirable impacts on Natural       avoid the significant conversion or degradation of critical natural sites and if this is not
Habitats and Cultural Resources      technically feasible, include measures to mitigate the impacts of program activities;
resulting from the Program.          take into account the adverse impacts on physical cultural property and, if justified, take
                                     measures, adequate to avoid, minimize or mitigate such impacts.
Non applicable : No program activity performed within biodiversity areas. No investment will be eligible if it threatens fragile
ecosystems. No investment will be eligible if it directly threatens the cultural and religious heritage of a region.
Core Principle 3: Public and Workers Safety
The Bank's PforR financing policy:             Bank Guideline for Financing PfrRs:
Environmental and social management            promote the safety of the community, individuals and workers through proper
procedures and processes are designed to       design, securing operations for constructing and maintaining infrastructure and
ensure the safety of the public and            activities that may depend on such infrastructure, inspection or taking corrective
workers against potential risks associated     measures, if necessary, of associated works;
with: (a construction and / or
                                               promote the use of good practices in the production, management, storage,
management of facilities or other
                                               transport and disposal of hazardous materials from the construction or operations of
operational practices developed under
                                               the program;
the program;
                                               promote the adoption of integrated pesticide management practices to manage or
(b) exposure to chemical materials or
                                               reduce disease vectors; provide training to workers involved in the production,
hazardous waste; and
                                               supply, storage, transportation, use, and disposal of hazardous chemicals in
(c) reconstruction or rehabilitation of
                                               accordance with international guidelines and conventions;
infrastructure located in areas near
hazardous natural areas                        integrate measures to avoid, minimize or reduce community, individual or worker
                                               risks when program activities are located in hazardous natural areas such as floods,
                                               hurricanes, earthquakes, and other severe weather or climate events.
Applicable. The work undertaken under the Program could have an impact on the safety of the public and construction site
workers. Worksite workers could be exposed to work-related injuries, water pollution, air pollution, solid waste, and toxic or
hazardous materials on the site. People in areas near the sites could also be exposed to the same dangers.
STRENGTHS
Burkina Faso's legal system includes safety provisions on construction sites. The safety of workers is ensured by the Labor
Inspectorate.
There are national policies and guidelines regarding the safety and health of the public and workers. These cover a range of key
aspects, including the control of environmental pollution; labor law ; regulations on occupational health and safety; and standards
for emissions and releases in the work environment.



                                                               page 27
WEAKNESSES AND GAPS
Worker safety provisions are not always included in civil works contracts.
The insufficient number of screening officers does not allow for regular monitoring of the application of site provisions
The national EIA system does not include all aspects of public and workers safety.
There is a general lack of awareness of public health and safety issues, particularly with regard to exposure to hazardous materials
or safety aspects at work
ACTIONS AND OPPORTUNITIES
Information and training on safety measures in construction sites.
Role of the Labor Inspectorate at the local level.
RISKS
Not entirely efficient enforcement of current environmental regulations.
Non-involvement of Labor Inspectorate officials
Core Principle 4: Land Acquisition
The Bank's PforR financing policy:         The Bank's guideline for financing the PforR: if relevant to be borne by the Program:
Acquisition of land and loss of access     avoid or minimize land acquisition and associated undesirable impacts;
to natural resources is managed to
                                           identify and address the economic and social impacts caused by land acquisition or loss
avoid or minimize displacements, and
                                           of access to natural resources, including the affected populations who may not have
to make sure that the affected people
                                           legal rights to the assets or resources that they use or occupy;
are assisted in improving or, at least,
rehabilitating their livelihoods and       provide sufficient compensation to purchase replacement assets of equivalent value to
their living conditions                    those lost and to support any transition expenses paid before the acquisition of the land
                                           or the restriction of access;
                                           take additional measures to improve or restore livelihoods if the acquisition of the land
                                           has caused the loss of income-generating opportunities (e.g. loss of crop production, or
                                           employment); and
                                           restore or replace the public infrastructure or community services that would be
                                           affected.
Applicable. The work could: (i) involve temporary physical displacements of residential households or businesses; (ii) require the
acquisition of private land and, consequently, expropriation for public purposes and involuntary resettlement of residential
households or businesses; and (iii) temporarily disrupt local craft and economic activities.
By following the principles presented in the ESSA, a PAR will be imperatively prepared for any individual investment project which,
according to the social assessment and the screening set up, would have a moderate social impact.
STRENGHTS
The indemnities or compensation of affected persons are set through the existing land tenure system in Burkina Faso .
In terms of complaints and conflict management, the Burkinabe law recognizes the recourse to the competent courts in the event
of refusal by the Compensation Commission.
WEAKNESSES AND GAPS
The national land acquisition procedures are unclear.
The minimization of the movement of persons is not explicitly provided for by national legislatio
The legislation on expropriation for public utility purposes in Burkina Faso does not specifically deal with certain matters, such as
loss of income and livelihood, restriction of access to material goods, natural resources (economic resettlement).
Informal occupants are not recognized by the Burkinabe law
According to national procedures, in the event of disagreement, payment of the compensation to the affected persons is made
after the decision of the court or after the decision of the court of cassation. But appeals are not suspensive of work.
Customary land ownership is recognized, but must be confirmed before being compensated and informal title deeds are not
recognized by national legislation
There are no specific measures for assisting resettlement.
Monitoring/evaluation is not provided for by national law in the event of resettlement.
ACTIONS AND OPPORTUNITIES




                                                              page 28
Provide a system of compensation in kind and/or in cash, as the case may be.
Make sure that informal occupants receive compensation and assistance for their resettlement as well as recovery of their
economic situation.
Provide adequate follow-up of the affected people so that they recover the ex-ante project conditions and do not become poorer
Set up a relocation assistance system
Establish a genuine joint administration/civil society mechanism for handling and following up complaints
Provide for indicators for monitoring social compliance with national standards.
Exclude from the program investments that cause the displacement of a large number of people.
RISKS
Non-observance of the existing legislation.
Lack of human resources and financial means at level of national and local institutions in charge of enforcing laws and
arrangements.
Lack of coordination among the institutional actors involved - which results in a lack of clarity and complementarity in the actions
and a low capitalization of lessons learned.
Core Principle 5: Social Considerations: Indigenous Peoples and Vulnerable Groups
Bank Policy for PforR Funding:       The Bank's PforR Financing Guideline: if relevant to be covered by the Program:
Adequate attention to cultural       engage in free, prior and informed consultation if indigenous peoples are potentially affected
relevance, and equitable access      (positively or negatively) to determine whether the Program has a comprehensive community
to program benefits, with            support component;
special attention to the rights
                                     make sure that indigenous peoples can participate in defining the opportunities they can
and interests of indigenous
                                     benefit from operating customary resources or endogenous knowledge
peoples and the needs and
concerns of vulnerable groups.       pay attention to groups that are vulnerable, in difficulties, or disadvantaged, including, if
                                     relevant, poor people, disabled, women and children, elderly people, or marginalized ethnic
                                     groups.
                                     If necessary, special measures will be taken to promote equitable access to the benefits of the
                                     program.
Applicable (with the exception of the fact that there are no indigenous peoples in Burkina Faso).
The program includes specific measures favoring vulnerable groups: the establishment of water price equity, its accessibility by the
rural poor and the total subsidy for vulnerable people of sanitation infrastructure. The identification of vulnerable groups will be
done by the community on reliable and consensual criteria.
STRENGTHS
Surveys are aimed at informing the population about conducting the project and to gather their observations; information posters
are posted for this purpose in public places. The law provides for the services of the Ombudsman of Faso in favor of vulnerable
persons.
The social action services present in all project regions are willing to provide support to the program (identification of vulnerable
people among others)
WEAKNESSES AND GAPS
Burkinabe law does not provide for specific measures for vulnerable groups.
The complaint management systemat local level is not operational.
ACTIONS AND OPPORTUNITIES
Define and put in place a strong strategy for stakeholder engagement (awareness raising and consultation, information disclosure
and grievance mechanism) as part of the outreach program, targeting in particular vulnerable groups.
Specify any form of support to the most vulnerable groups through appropriate compensation.
Ensure the functionality of the complaint management system
Ensure subsidies for sanitation infrastructure for the benefit of vulnerable people
Respect the equity of water price and its accessibility by the poor in rural areas
Inform and sensitize the beneficiary populations on the consideration of gender and vulnerable people in the program, as well as
on the grievance management mechanism




                                                               page 29
RISKS
Lack of clarity and coherence regarding the mechanism for implementing public consultations and stakeholder engagement could
alienate poor and vulnerable groups.
Core Principle 6 : Social Considerations – Social Conflict
The Bank's Policy for Financing the PforR:       The Bank's Guideline for Financing PforR) pays particular attention to conflict risks
Avoid exacerbation of social conflict,           including distributional equity and cultural sensitivities.
especially in fragile states, in post-conflict
areas or areas subject to territorial
disputes
Non applicable. The Program is not implemented in a conflict zone.




                                                                page 30
                SECTION V. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT ACTION PLAN
The Program will support specific measures to improve conditions for the performance of the
environmental and social management system in the implementation and monitoring of Program
activities. These measures are proposed as part of an Environmental and Social Management Action
Plan (ESM/AP) - this Plan is part of the overall Program Action Plan as such.

   ➢ First Component of the AP/ESM: Strengthening of the Program's environmental and social
     management system for investment. Ce volet comprend les éléments suivants :

        Technical Manual. Preparation of a Technical Manual for Environmental and Social
         Management (MTGES) of investment for the Ministry of Water and Sanitation (MEA) and its
         National Office for Water and Sanitation (ONEA) and all technical services, as well as all
         stakeholders, who will be involved at national, regional and local level in the
         implementation of the Program, so that environmental and social management procedures
         are duly understood, perfectly appropriate and followed. This Manual will be an integral
         part of the Program Operation Manual (Special Annex).

This Manual will be useful not only for the implementation of the Program, but also for the other
projects of the Ministry of Water and Sanitation (MEA) and its National Office of Water and Sanitation
(ONEA).

It will be in compliance with both national environmental and social assessment procedures and the
World Bank's PforR funding policy. In particular, the Manual will present the procedures and tools for
the preparation of an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) for structural sub-projects
with moderate environmental risks and a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). for structural subprojects with
moderate social risks.

The Manual will particularly address the gaps identified in the national systems (see above). In
particular, the Manual will aim to define and set up the complaint and grievance management system at
the local level - in parallel with the agreed procedures (including in relation to the services of the
Ombudsman and the grievances submitted to the Grievance Settlement Service (GRS) of the World
Bank).

        Interinstitutional Convention between the Ministry of Water and Sanitation (MEA),
         National Office for Water and Sanitation (ONEA), on one hand, and the National Bureau of
         Environmental Assessments (BUNEE), on the other hand. The content of this agreement will
         establish the conditions for collaboration (awareness raising, information and training, rapid
         review and certification of sub-projects, environmental and social control and monitoring,
         etc.). This convention could be completed with collaboration protocols with other well-
         targeted institutions

   ➢ Second Component of the AP/ESM: Capacity building in terms of environmental and social
     management for key actors and representatives of Program stakeholders. This component
     includes two distinct types of activities:

        Human Resources of the PCU for Environmental and Social Management. Recruitment or
         appointment by MEA and ONEA of a social specialist and an environmental specialist within




                                                page 31
            the PCU, who will be employed full-time throughout the implementation of the Program
            and have:

                •   Basic training in environmental and/or social sciences;

                •   A minimum of years of experience in conducting environmental and social
                    management of similar programs / projects.

These specialists, in close collaboration with all the stakeholders, will be responsible for ensuring: (i) the
coordination and monitoring of the implementation of all the actions relating to the environmental and
social management of the Program; (ii) the organization of all training, information and awareness
raising initiatives on the environmental and social risks of the Program; (iii) the collection and
centralization of all information relating to the monitoring of mitigation measures; (iv) the monitoring
and evaluation of the implementation of mitigation measures and the integration of data at the
information system level (in accordance with the principles described and presented in the MTGES); (v)
the monitoring of the implementation and operation of the complaint management system; and (vi) the
preparation of reports on the environmental and social aspects of the Program.

         Training to MTGES. A training program will be developed for the implementation of the
          MTGES for all the different stakeholders involved in the implementation of the Program, in
          particular: the members of the environmental units of the MEA, ONEA, and of the other
          ministries involved, members of the "Environment and local development" communal
          commissions, of the "Territorial and Land Development"commissions, BUNEE, and the
          Regional Directorates for the Environment, Green Economy and Climate Change (DREEVCC),
          of social action, etc.

This training will aim to sensitize and inform a fairly broad audience on the content of the Program
MTGES. This will include, in particular: (i) understanding of MTGES and its procedures and practices; and
(ii) control of environmental and social management tools, namely: Screening Form, EIA, ESMP and
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), which will be prepared for individual sub-projects, according to the
extent of their respective environmental and social risks, in accordance with the national arrangements
and the World Bank's policy on PforR funding. It should be noted that these initiatives will support the
establishment and operation of the citizen engagement and complaint management system.

         Specialized training in monitoring and control of GES mitigation and reporting measures:
          This more in-depth training in monitoring and control and reporting will be provided to
          representatives of all local, regional and national institutions (including contractors)
          involved in the collection, processing and analysis of information regarding the
          implementation of mitigation measures. The Monitoring Sheets (contained in the MGTES),
          once completed by the contracting firms, will be verified and validated by the local and
          regional authorities, before being sent to the environmental and social protection specialists
          of the PCU, to be recorded at the level of integrated information and monitoring evaluation
          system. The monitoring reports will include, as a matter of priority, the monitoring of the
          implementation of the environmental and social mitigation measures for each of the
          approved and completed sub-projects.

Table 2 summarizes all the elements of the ESM Action Plan, an integral part of the overall Action Plan of
the Program:



                                                   page 32
               All costs of these elements of the ESM Action Plan will be included in the Program overall
                budget

               Conversely, the cost of environmental and social remedies will be included in the
                investment budgets of sub-projects themselves.

    Table 2 : Environmental and Social Management Action Plan

                                                                                                                Completion
Action Description                                     DLI*   Due Date                      Responsible Party
                                                                                                                Measurement
Environmental and Social
Prepare a Technical Manual for Environmental                  Effectiveness                 MEA, with inputs    POM submitted to
and Social Management of the Program                                                        from ONEA           the Bank, including
investments (MTGES). This Manual will be an                                                                     the MTGES
integral part of the POM
Develop a training program for the                            120 days after                MEA and ONEA,       Stakeholders
implementation of the MTGES for the various                   effectiveness                 with inputs from    involved in the
stakeholders involved in the implementation of                                              the BUNEE           implementation of
the Program, and train stakeholders accordingly                                                                 the Program
                                                                                                                trained on the
                                                                                                                MTGES
Adopt an interinstitutional convention between                90 days after effectiveness   MEA and ONEA        Interinstitutional
MEA, ONEA, and BUNEE. The content of this                                                   with BUNEE          convention
agreement will establish the conditions for                                                                     submitted to the
collaboration (awareness, information and                                                                       Bank
training initiatives; rapid review and certification
of sub-projects, environmental and social control
and monitoring, etc.).
Provide specialized, in deep training in                      120 days after                MEA and ONEA        Trained provided
monitoring and control of various environmental               effectiveness                 with BUNEE
and social mitigation measures
Develop citizen engagement guidelines to ensure               120 days after                MEA and ONEA        Citizen
the effective participation of and consultation               effectiveness                                     engagement
with local people, targeted beneficiary                                                                         guidelines
community, and vulnerable groups                                                                                submitted to the
                                                                                                                Bank




                                                              page 33
CONCLUSION
The World Bank organized a public consultation with representatives of key stakeholders, civil society
organizations and the private sector to present and discuss the draft ESSA (see Minutes in Annex 10).

Throughout the duration of the Program, the Burkinabé party will be responsible for organizing
consultations on the specific activities (investment sub-projects) of the Program.

The final revised version of ESSA will be publicly disseminated through the World Bank external
website and also on the MEA and ONEA websites.

Hard copies will be available at national and regional branches of the relevant institutions.




                                                page 34
Annex 1 : Main Legislative Arrangements
 POLICY DOCUMENTS AND PLANNING DOCUMENTS                     Assesment
 National Economic and Social Development Plan (PNDES)
 National Policy for Sustainable Development (PNDD)
 National Environmental Policy (PNE)                         Create a reference framework for the consideration of
                                                             environmental issues in development policies and
                                                             strategies.
 National Territory Development Policy adopted by Decree     Three fundamental orientations: i) economic
 No. 2006-                                                   development; ii) social integration; iii) sustainable
 362/PRES/PM/MEDEV/MATD/MFB/MAHRH/MID/MECV of                management of the natural environment
 20 July 2006
 National Gender Policy (PNG) of Burkina Faso                Promote a participatory and equitable development of
                                                             men and women in respect of their fundamental rights.
 National Climate Change Adaptation Plan (PNA)               This law inter alia provides for :
                                                             - preserving water resources and improving access to
                                                             sanitation;
                                                             - protecting people and property against extreme
                                                             weather events and natural disasters
                                                             - protecting and improving populations health.
 National Rural Land Security Policy (PNSFMR)                Provide the effective mobilization and actual
                                                             development of rural lands, water resources, forests,
                                                             wildlife and fisheries resources.
 National Water Policy                                       The main objective is to "contribute to the sustainable
                                                             development of the country, by providing appropriate
                                                             solutions to water-related problems, in an environment
                                                             particularly affected by climate change and in
                                                             observance of an integrated water resources
                                                             management »
 National Sanitation Policy and Strategy (July 2007)         The overarching objective of the policy is to contribute
                                                             to sustainable development by providing appropriate
                                                             solutions to sanitation-related problems in order to
                                                             improve living and habitat conditions of populations,
                                                             preserving their health and protecting natural
                                                             resources.
 National Public Hygiene Policy (PNHP) (Decree No. 2004-     The following main objectives: (i) to provide the
 538/PRES/PM/MS/MFB/MATD)                                    indispensable conditions for survival; ii) to prevent
                                                             diseases and intoxications; (iii) to keep an enabling
                                                             climate for productivity of human activities; iv)
                                                             guarantee comfort and pleasure of life.




                                                       page 35
Annex 2 : Legislation and Regulations Relevant to the Program

LAWS AND REGULATIONS        Evaluation
The Constitution of         According to the provisions of Article 15 of the Constitution, property rights are guaranteed
Burkina Faso                for all and can only be infringed in cases of public necessity established in legal forms. No one
                            shall be deprived of their enjoyment except for reasons of public utility and on the condition
                            of just compensation determined in accordance with the law. This compensation must be
                            prior to expropriation except in case of emergency or force majeure.
The 1804 Civil Code         The Code provides that "No one may be compelled to surrender their property, except for
                            reasons of public utility, and with just and prior compensation".
Law No. 008-2014/AN of 08   Guaranteeing economic efficiency, environmental sustainability and social equity in all
April 2014 on orientation   development actions
on sustainable
development in Burkina
Faso
Law 034-2012/AN of 02       Article 300 of this law provides that "Expropriation for public purposes is a form of involuntary
July 2012 on Agrarian and   transfer of actual real estate rights allowing the authorities, in the respect of the rights of the
Land Reform (RAF) in        holders of real property rights, to mobilize the land resources for the needs of territory
Burkina Faso                development operations, recognized as being of public utility "..
                            Despite the adoption of Decree No. 2014-481 / PRES / PM / MATD / MEF / MHU of 3 June
                            2014 determining the terms and conditions of application of the RAF Law, there remains to
                            date a legal vacuum because the specific question of compensation scales for those affected is
                            not dealt with.
Law 034-2009/AN of 16       It applies to rural land. The State as guarantor of the general interest organizes the actual
June 2009 on Rural Land     legal recognition of legitimate local land rights on rural lands, ensures the guarantee of
Regime                      property rights and enjoyment regularly established on land (Article 4). Article 33, which deals
                            with compensation arrangements in the case of expropriation for reasons of public utility,
                            refers to a decree issued by the Council of Ministers. There is also a legal vacuum at this level
                            because the said decree has not been taken to date.
                            The law also provides the recognition and protection of customary land rights formalized
                            through an administrative act called Certificate of Rural Land Ownership (APFR). Other
                            relevant provisions fall within the framework of the grievance mechanism and take account of
                            vulnerable groups, namely, the obligation to attempt conciliation in the case of rural land
                            disputes before referral to the competent courts, the formulation of specific provisions on
                            land for the benefit of women and young people.
Law 055-2004/AN of 21       The Code does not contain provisions directly dealing with the subject of compensation for
December 2004 on General    reasons of public utility. However, the administrative bodies that are local authorities are
Code of Territorial         involved in the process of expropriation for reasons of public utility.
Collectivities, set of
changes
Law 006-2013/AN of          This law establishes in Article 25 the principle according to which the activities likely to have
2/04/2013 on Code of the    significant impacts on the environment are subjected to the preliminary opinion of the
Environment in Burkina      Minister in charge of the environment. The opinion is based on a Strategic Environmental
Faso                        Assessment (SEA), an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) or an Environmental Impact
                            Statement (EIS).


                            Several implementing decrees are relevant for the protection of the environment and the
                            rights of individuals. They are:
                            Decree No. 2008-125/PRES/PM/MECV of 7 March 2008 on the establishment, roles and
                            responsibilities, organization and operation of environmental units in the various ministerial
                            departments, administrative regions and public and private enterprises;
                            Decree No.2015-1187/PRES-TRANS/ PM/ MERH/ MATD/ MME/ MS/ MARHASA/ MRA/ MICA/
                            MHU/ MIDT/ MCT of 22 October 2015, laying down the conditions and procedures for
                            carrying out and validating the strategic environmental assessment, the study and the
                            environmental and social impact statement
                            Decree No.2015- 1203 /PRES-TRANS/PM/ MERH/MATD/MJDHPC on terms and conditions for




                                                         page 36
LAWS AND REGULATIONS        Evaluation
                            organizing and conducting the environmental inspection
                            Decree No.2001-185/PRES/PM/MEE of 07 May 2001, setting the pollutant discharge standard
                            in the air, the water and the soils
                            Decree No.2015-1205 establishing water discharge standards;
                            Decrer No.98-322/PRES/PM/MEE/MIHU/MATS/MEF/MEM/MCC/MCIA of 28 July 1998
                            establishing dangerous, unhealthy and inconvenient establishment opening conditions
                            Decree No.2006- 232 PRES/PM/MECV/MFB/MJ/MATD of 30 May 2006 defining the
                            procedures and scales of transactions applicable to infringements of the Code of the
                            environment in Burkina Faso
Law No.23/94/ADP of 19      It deals with the protection of the environment (air and water pollution)
May 1994 on Public Health
Code
Law No. 022-2005/AN on      It deals with public health, including access to and protection of drinking water
Public Healths in Burkina
Faso
                            It regulates working conditions through its relating provisions (Articles 149 and 153) to the
                            prohibition of discrimination in employment and labor as well as the worst forms of child
Law 28-2008/AN of 13        labor. Also, according to Article 36 of this same law, the employer is obliged on the site, "to
May 2008 on Labor Code in   comply with the hygiene and safety conditions to the standards provided by the regulations in
Burkina Faso                force"
Law 017-2006/AN of 18       Respect of the provisions of the law through the Master Plans of Development and Urbanism
May 2006 on Code of         (SDAU) and Plans of Land Use (POS) in the project intervention areas. According to Articles 84
Urban Development and       and 85 of this law, in addition to the common law procedures that are amicable transfer,
Construction and its        exchange, purchase, donations and legacies, the property in escheat, the modes of land
implementation Decrees      acquisition in view of the developments provided for by this law are mainly expropriation for
                            public purposes and the right of pre-emption.
Law 002-2001/AN of 06       The law provides for and refers to decrees, the determination of the terms of compensation
/02/2001 on Law of          of landowners and other owners of land rights who have suffered a direct, material and
Orientation relating to     certain harm due to the classification of their land among the dependencies of the public
Water Management and its    domain of water as a result of a change in the limits of the latter, that such change results
implementation texts        from the provisions of this Law or from an artificial or natural change in water course or
                            regime.
                            Relevant implementation decrees help to ensure the sustainable management of water
                            resources:
                            Decree No.2005-185/PRES/PM/MAHRH/MCE of 04 April 2005 determining the nomenclature
                            of installations, structures, works, and activities subject to authorization or declaration
                            (IOTA)
                            Decree No.2004-581/PRES/PM/MAHRH/MFB of 15/12/2004 on definition and procedures of
                            delimitation of the perimeters of protection of water intended for human consumption.
                            Decree No.2005-188/PRES/PM/MAHRH/MCE of 04 April 2005 laying down conditions of
                            enactment of the general rules and requirements applicable to installations, structures,
                            works, and activities subject to authorization or declaration (IOTA)
                            Decree No.2005-515/PRES/PM/MAHRH of 06 October 2005 on the procedures for
                            authorization and declaration of installations, structures, works, and activities (IOTA)
Law 0036-2011/AN of         Joint Order No. 2009-073/MECV/MAHRH of 27 August 2009 regulating agricultural clearing
05/04/2011 on forect Code   in Burkina Faso
in Burkina Faso             Order 2004-019/MECV of 07 July 2004 determining the list of forest species benefiting from
                            special protection measures
Law No. 012-2010/AN of      Promote and ensure the full and equal enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental
1st April 2010, on          freedoms for people with disabilities and guarantee respect for their intrinsic dignity.
Protection and Promotion
of Rights of Disabled
Persons


And also :


                                                        page 37
 Decree        No. 2015-1187 /PRES-TRANS/PM/ MERH/MATD/MME/1VIS/MARHASA/MRA/
  MICA/MHU/MIDT/MCT on the conditions and procedures for carrying out and validating the
  strategic environmental assessment, the study and the environmental and social impact
  statement. It is the text par excellence that frames the implementation of environmental
  assessments in Burkina (ESIA, NIES and CGES). It integrates the realization of the PARs in addition
  to ESIA and NIES, when necessary. This decree classifies activities into the following three
  categories: i) Category A: Activities subject to an ESIA with the completion of a public inquiry; (ii)
  Category B: Activities subject to a NIES; (iii) Category C: Activities that are submitted to neither
  NIES nor ESIA; iv) Environmental and Strategic Assessment (SEA) for policies, plans and programs
  or any other upstream initiative of policies, plans and programs that have a significant impact on
  the environment.

    o Thus, for each category, the projects are classified taking account of the sectors of activities
      defined by Law No. 010/98 / AN of 21 April 1998, on modes of intervention of the State and
      distribution of competences between the State and development actors.
      .Decree No. 2001-185/PRES/PM/MEE of 07 May 2001 in Burkina Faso, laying down
      standards for the discharge of pollutants into the air, water and soil, makes a number of
      provisions relating to releases that may be harmful to Burkina Faso's water and soil pollution.
      These provisions regulate and punish any offender in order to preserve the quality of the
      environment in Burkina Faso. In addition, this decree stipulates in its Articles 6, 10 and 11,
      respectively, the standards of fixed emissions discharges, the norms of discharge of waste
      water in surface water, the standards of discharge of sewage into the sewers. In its Articles 3
      and 15, it specifies standards in Burkina Faso where, by its activity, a unit is required to
      produce substances or substances in the air, in groundwater or in drinking water, with or
      without conveyances in the ground or the basement.

    o Decree         No.2001-1205/PRES-TRANS/PM/MERH/MEF/MARHASA/MS/MRA                        /MICA
      /MME/MIDT/MAD of 28 October 2015 laying down standards and conditions for the
      discharge of wastewater. This decree contains a number of provisions on releases that can
      cause pollution of air, water and soil in Burkina Faso. Article 2 of this decree sets standards
      for ambient air quality. Article 4 sets emission standards for motor vehicle emissions. The
      substances mentioned in Article 12 of the decree are prohibited from direct discharge into
      the receiving environment. Other decrees complete this legal arsenal:

    o Decree NBo.2015- 1203 /PRES-TRANS/PM/ MERH/MATD/MJDHPC on how to organize and
      conduct the environmental inspection

    o Decree No. 2008-125/PRES/PM/MECV of 7 March 2008 on establishment, roles and
      responsibilities, organization and operating of environmental units in the various ministerial
      departments, administrative regions and public and private enterprises




                                                page 38
Annex 3 : Expropriations and Compensations in Burkina Faso

    a) The Main Laws

In Burkina Faso, expropriation for public purposes is governed by the following laws:

    •   The Constitution of 2 June 1991, revised by Law No. 001-2002 / AN of 22 January 2002: being
        the supreme law, establishes the right to property and compensation in case of
        expropriation. It provides that: "the right of ownership is guaranteed. No one shall be
        deprived of their enjoyment except for reasons of public utility and under the condition of
        just compensation determined in accordance with the law ».

    •   Law No 034-2012 / AN of 02 July 2012 on the Agrarian and Land Reform in Burkina Faso and
        its implementing texts: lays down the general principles, the terms of the expropriation, the
        process of expropriation and compensation and complaint management mechanisms
        through Articles 300 to 312.

    •   Law No. 034-2009 / AN of 16 June 2009 on rural land tenure and its priority implementing
        texts: reaffirms the right of State ownership and expropriation to dispose of rural land for the
        purpose of public interest, and the guarantee of property and enjoyment rights regularly
        established on the land.

    •   Law No. 034-2002 / AN on orientation relating to pastoralism in Burkina Faso of 14
        November 2002 and implementing legislation: provides that pastoralists have the right of
        access to pastoral resources and may be deprived of their right only for reason of public
        utility.

    •   Law No. 002-2001 / AN on the water management directive of 06 February 2001 and
        implementing legislation: the right to classify land in the public domain of water is
        recognized. And the damage suffered as a result of the expropriation must be compensated.

    b) National Procedures for Expropriation and Compensation

National procedures for expropriation and compensation are defined by the RAF through articles 300
to 331. They are as follows:

• The State notes or declares as of public utility the completion of a project of general interest;

• The expropriating authority makes a declaration of intent to carry out a public utility project with
an indication of its object, purpose, direction, duration, benefits and cost. This declaration is
disseminated for one month through the official channels of communication and by any appropriate
means for the populations concerned by the project. In addition, the declaration mentions the
forthcoming opening of a public utility investigation; it must be posted at the town hall and in any
appropriate public place, in the form of a notice to the public, eight days before the beginning of the
inquiry and throughout its duration;

• one month after the declaration of intent, the inquiry of public utility is opened under the
conditions set by decree of the Council of Ministers or by order of the president of the council of
territorial collectivity after deliberation of said council;

• during the investigation period, the inhabitants of the locality concerned may consult the
expropriation file which will enable them, if any, to contest, either the principle of the operation, its



                                                 page 39
financial importance or else the place of realization. Observations may be made on the investigation
register or sent as a note to the president of the ad hoc inquiry committee;

• public utility is declared by decree taken in the Council of Ministers or by order of the president of
the council of the territorial collectivity after deliberation of this council. The declaration of public
utility sets the period during which the expropriation must be carried out. This period cannot be
more than three years;

• declaration of public utility can be the object of either amicable or contentious appeal;

• failing an amicable agreement, the expropriation is pronounced and the compensations are set by
the judge of the expropriation of the place of situation of the building;

• the expropriating party may, by payment or deposit of the provisional compensation set by
expropriation order, take possession of the immovable immediately after agreement of the
expropriation judge;

• under the resolutive condition of the payment of the final compensation within the period
provided for in Article 321 above, the amicable cession or expropriation judgment extinguishes, on
its date, all the real or personal rights relating to the immovable;

• At the end of the expropriation procedure, the taking of possession can only be made after
payment to the beneficiaries or deposit for their benefit, of a provision representing the possible
compensation of expropriation and corresponding to the estimate decided by the ad hoc committee;

• the amicable transfer of the property concerned is made by administrative act between the
beneficiaries and the department in charge of the State or local authorities domain. If an agreement
cannot be concluded, the expropriating party shall, within one month after taking possession,
continue the expropriation procedure by summoning the parties to appear before the expropriation
court. The expropriation judge shall, where appropriate, award a special compensation to the owners
of the rights struck by the expropriation that justify a prejudice related to the speed of the
proceedings.

It should be noted that this procedure remains theoretical. In practice, each experience of
expropriation and compensation is conducted taking into account the standard steps of this
procedure and adapting it to the context of intervention, since all the texts of applications and
structures planned to lead the process are not operational.

About valuation methods for affected property

Assessment methods for affected land and assets depend on their characteristics.

With respect to land, three types have been identified in accordance with the legislation in this policy
framework are: state-owned land; lands belonging to individuals; and lands held under customary
rights. State-owned land is transferred for free (possibly with the exception of processing and
registration fees). Property belonging to private persons should be acquired at their exchange value.
The guiding principle is that anyone occupying land to be acquired by the program receives in
exchange another land of equal size and quality.

About calculating the compensation rate for the land

Compensation includes compensation for: loss of land; the loss of infrastructure and buildings; fruit
trees and other trees; the work of the land; and the loss of the crop. The land compensation will


                                                page 40
cover the price of the labor market invested as well as the market price of the lost crop. The amount
of harvest is estimated by weighting the area lost and planted by the average yield per hectare for
the previous three seasons in the region. The unit cost used for land compensation must be
discounted to reflect the values at the time the compensation is paid. All in all, the evaluation
commission should find a calculation scale in relation to the economic and socio-cultural realities of
the zone of the activity financed.
About the compensation of buildings and infrastructures

The compensation covers the replacement of buildings and infrastructure and includes achievements
such as huts, houses, latrines, fences, henhouses, sheepfolds, granaries in banco, cemented or not,
pigsty. All lost infrastructure will be reconstructed on replacement lands acquired, indicated or
granted.




                                               page 41
Annex 4 : Organizational Chart of the Ministry of the Environment, Green Economy, and Climate
Change

(Source : http://www.environnement.gov.bf)




                                             page 42
Annex 5 : Examples of main potential hazards associated to the Program

Table A: Urban and Rural Water Supply Associated Impacts and Hazards

Activities                       Environmental Hazard                              Social Hazard
____________________             ____________________________                      ____________________________
In Urban Areas


Production capacity building     Loss of vegetation                                Risk of land and income source losses
Storage capacity building and    Loss of fauna and microfauna Soil pollution       Risk of physical or economic displacement of
water tower building             by accidental hydrocarbon spill                   populations
                                 Dust lift                                         Risk of conflict linked not only to the lack of
Capacity building, and           Noise                                             transparency in the recruitment of the local
completion of social                                                               workforce but also to the inequalities noted
                                 Soil pollution by rejected site waste at sites
connections and standpipes                                                         in the process of compensation of PAPs,
                                 Deep soil destruction;                            failing scales
                                 Risk of water contamination Indirect              Risk of conflicts related to non-ownership of
Completion of drillings in new   impacts on natural habitats or protected          the grievance mechanism by PAPs
centers                          areas (remnants of the city's greenbelt,
                                                                                   Traffic disruptions and collision risks
                                 either through encroachment or indirectly
                                                                                   between the population and construction
                                 by opening past non-existent access to
                                                                                   vehicles.
                                 natural habitats (e.g, pipe laying, access
                                 road construction).                               Disturbance of field and commercial
                                                                                   activities,
                                 Emissions of dust and exhaust fumes
                                                                                   Risk of degradaded remains buried in the
                                  Pollution of soils by discharge of materials
                                                                                   ground
                                 (scrap, plastics, etc.) and waste oils from
                                 vehicles and construction machinery
                                 Risks of soil erosion.
                                 Tree felling and vegetation destruction
                                 Destruction of wildlife and microfauna
                                 habitat –
                                 Cuts in roads, road shoulders, crossing
                                 structures, stone-walled embankments,
                                 gully outlets, gutters, medians, riffles, cycle
                                 tracks, old treated water gravity pipes,
                                 tracks, etc.
In Rural Areas


Construction and                 Occupational accident risks                       Economic and/or physical displacement of
rehabilitation of water supply   Noise                                             populations
systems in some rural areas                                                        Possible loss of fields and land,
                                 Dust and gas emissions
Construction of Drills                                                             Triggered latent conflicts,
                                 Destruction of plant species
equipped with manual pumps
                                 Destruction of fauna and microfauna               Increasing rivalries among villages, sectors,
                                                                                   neighborhoods,
                                                                                   Disturbances of field work during a given
                                                                                   period;
                                                                                   Change in water supply modes,
                                                                                   Behavioral change
                                                                                   Risks of sexual abuse and harassment of
                                                                                   women and transmission of viral diseases
                                                                                   (STIs, HIV/AIDS), because of the arrival of
                                                                                   foreign workers.




                                                           page 43
Table B: Urban and Rural Areas Sanitation Associated Risks

Activities                   Environmental Impacts and Risks            Social Risks


                                                                        Risks of occurrence of diseases related to the
                                                                        wild dumping of sewage sludge and poor
Construction of household                                               maintenance of structures; various nuisances
latrines and community       Risks of polluted water table;             (visual, olfactory …) ;
latrines in market places,   Risk of polluted surface water and soil;
health centers and schools                                              Non-observance of regulatory texts by
                             Risks of tree destruction
                                                                        management structures,
                                                                        Risk of proliferation of contagious and
                                                                        infectious diseases
                                                                        Risk of odor nuisance
                                                                        Risk of low gender sensitivity
                                                                        Risk of vandalism
                                                                        Risk of incivism




                                                       page 44
Annex 6 : Simplified Socio-environmental Screening Form

This screening form has been designed to assist in the initial selection of program sub-projects to be
carried out in the field. This fact sheet is completed by MEA / ONAE (environmental and social)
backup specialists, with the support of external technical assistance.



                                             Environmental and Social Selection Form

1 Name of the locality where the project will be carried out

2 Name of contact person

4 Name of Approving Authority

Date:                                                Signatures:




                                                              PART A

                                              Brief Description of Sub-projet

The proposed subproject (area, approximate area of total area to occupy, land status) and
consistency of work (Construction and operation, resources, materials, personnel, etc.)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------

                                                              Part B

Brief Descripti on of the Environmental Status and I dentificati on of Environmental
Impact or Risks

1. The Natural Environment

 (a) Describe the soil type, topography, vegetation of the subproject execution site and surrounding
vegetation.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------


                                                              page 45
(b) Estimate and indicate the vegetation that could be released-

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------
------

(c) Are there environmentally sensitive areas or species at risk of extinction?---------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2. Ecology of Rivers and Lakes

Is there a possibility that, owing to the implementation of the subproject, the ecology of rivers or
lakes will be negatively affected?

Yes______ No______

If yes, Comments :

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------
3. Protected Areas

Is the sub-project site located within or adjacent to any protected areas designated by the
Government (national park, national reserve, world heritage site, sacred site, etc.)?

Yes______ No______

If yes, Comments :

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------

If the execution and commissioning of the activity takes place outside a protected area (or in its
vicinity), is it likely to negatively affect the ecology of the protected area (e. g. interference?
migration routes for mammals or birds)?

Yes______ No______

If yes, Comments :

 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------
4. Geology and Soils




                                                              page 46
Are there areas of possible geological instability or soil (predisposition to erosion, landslides,
subsidence)?

Yes______ No______

If yes, Comments :

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------
5. Landscape/ Aesthetics

Is there a possibility that the works negatively affect the aesthetic aspect of the local landscape?
(cutting of trees, reduction of green spaces, etc.)

Yes______ No______

If yes, Comments :

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------

6. Historical, Archaeological or Cultural Heritage Site.

Based on available sources, consultations with local authorities, local knowledge and / or
observations, could the sub-project alter historical, archaeological or cultural heritage sites, or should
there be excavations nearby?

Yes______ No______

If yes, Comments :

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------

7. Air Pollution during Sub-project Execution or Implementation ?

Yes______ No______

If yes, Comments :

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------

8. Noise Pollution during Sub-project Execution or Implementation




                                                              page 47
Will the noise level during the implementation of the project concerned exceed the acceptable noise
limits? Yes______ No______

If yes, Comments :

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------

9. Solid or Liquid Waste

Will the activity concerned generate solid or liquid waste?

Yes______ No______

If yes, Comments :

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------

does the sub-project have a plan for their pickup and evacuation?

Yes______ No______

If yes, Comments



10. Will the sub-project entail risks for human health, safety during and/or after implementation?
Yes______ No______

If yes, Comments :

 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------

11. Will the sub-project generate changes in the distribution/displacement of persons and/or
animals in the area?

Yes______ No______

If yes, Comments :

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------



                                                              page 48
12. Does the sub-project require large quantities of building materials (e.g. gravel, stone, water,
firewood)?

Yes______ No______

If yes, Comments :

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------



13. Does the sub-project use polluting products, with resin and potentially toxic or dangerous
solvants (for asthmatics, for example), asbestos and lead?

Yes______ No______

If yes, Comments :

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------



                                                              Part C

Brief Description of the Social Environment and Identific ation of Social Impacts

1. Land Acquisition

Will the sub-project result in the denial or restriction of access to land or other economic resources?
Yes______ No______

If yes, Comments :

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------

Si Non, Observations-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------

2. Loss of Land: Will the proposed sub-project cause permanent or temporary loss of land?

Yes______ No______




                                                              page 49
If yes, Comments : -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



Si Non, Observations-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------

3. Loss of Infrastructure (housing, related structures, socio-community structures (football pitch,
wells, etc.): Will the sub-project cause permanent or temporary loss of infrastructure? Oui___
Yes______ No______

If yes, Comments : -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Si Non, Observations-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------

4. Loss of Income: Will the sub-project cause permanent or temporary loss of income (economic
activities, livelihoods, mode of production, …) ?

Yes______ No______

If yes, Comments : -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Si Non, Observations-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------

5. Loss of Crops or Fruit Trees : Will the sub-project cause the temporary or permanent loss of crops,
utilitarian trees (fruit trees, shade trees, ornamental trees, etc.) ? Oui___ Non_____

     •    If yes, Comments : --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
          ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
          ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

If No, Comments--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------




6. Public Consultation




                                                              page 50
Are stakeholder consultation and participation sought?

Yes______ No______

If yes, Comments : -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

If no, Comments ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------

                                                              Part D

                                                   Safeguard Instruments



For all « Yes » responses, the appropriate safeguarding instruments must be prepared.



                                                               Part E

                                                      Recommendations
     •    Environment

Required Environmental Instrument:


     o No safeguard instrument


     o Environmental impact statement

     •    Simplified environmental and social impact study


     •    Social

Required Social Instrument


     o    No social work to be done


     o    PAR



Sheet filled out by:
   • Name : ______________________________________________________________
   • Forename : ____________________________________________________________
   • Address : ___________________________________________________________


                                                              page 51
    •   Signature :



                               Done in ………………………on ……./….…../201…….



Compliance Certification from the Program Environmental Safeguard Specialist



                                        On ……../……../201…..



Compliance Certification from the Program Social Safeguard Specialist



                                        On ……../……../201…..



Compliance Certification ABE

                                        On ……../……../201……




Annex 7 : Environmental and Social Management Plan and Resettlement Action Plan

1. Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)

An Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) is a document that allows each sub-project
proponent with significant environmental and/or social effects to integrate environmental and social
dimensions into the design, planning, management and implementation process of activities.

An ESMP establishes procedures and measures relevant to the mitigation of their environmental and
social impacts on the basis of the procedures and mechanisms defined in the Technical Manual.

An ESMP includes, in particular, the following aspects:

•   Establishment of a complete sub-project sheet

•   Preparation of control/environmental and social review forms

•   Establishment of work supervision mechanisms

•   Documentation of public consultations conducted for ESMP

•   Mise en place d’un système simple et efficace de gestion des requêtes et plaintes



                                                page 52
•   Establishment and monitoring of the implementation and assessment of all planned mitigation
    and compensation measures

•   Definition of the environmental and social reporting system

•   Public disclosure of the ESMP for each of selected sub-projects

•   Etc.



2. Resettlement Action Plan

A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) is a document that allows any proponent of sub-project requiring
physical displacement of people, loss of property and assets, land acquisition, and/or loss of access
to natural resources or economic assets, to assess the social impacts associated with the temporary
or permanent resettlement of people and to propose a specific plan for compensation for losses and
support for the restoration of livelihoods, based on the procedures and mechanisms defined in the
Technical Manual, in particular with regard to the following:

•   Definition and implementation of procedures applicable to involuntary resettlement

•   Documentation of public consultations conducted for RAP

•   Establishment of a simple and effective request and complaint management system

•   Establishment of a system for monitoring possible land acquisition procedures

•   Establishment and monitoring of the implementation and assessment of all planned
    compensation and livelihood restoration measures.




                                               page 53
Annex 8 : Letter from the Minister in charge of the Environment relating to the Reclassification of
Water Supply Systems in Urban Areas




                                              page 54
Annex 9 : List of Main Documents Consulted



   World Bank: Aide-memoire of the Mission for preparing the Program supporting the sector of
   water, sanitation, and water resources management and Mission supporting the Implementation
   of the water sectoral Project in urban areas (PSEU) from 28 November to 21 December 2017

   MEA: National Wastewater and Excreta Sanitation Program 2016-2030, PN-AEUE, Program
   Document (DGAEUE ONEA Draft version)

   MEA: National Drinking Water Supply Program 2030: Strategic Environmental Assessment, Final
   Version (October 2015)

   MEA: National Wastewater and Excreta Sanitation Program 2016-2030, PN-AEUE: Strategic
   Environmental Assessment & Environmental and Social Management Framework (April 2016)

   MEA: National Drinking Water Supply Program by 2030, Final Version (October 2015)

   MEA: National Program for the Integrated Management of Water Resources by 2030

   MEA: Governance Program for the Water and Sanitation Sector

   MEA: Different implementation texts of the law of orientation relating to water

   Organizational Charts of institutions and Ministries (MEA, ONEA, MINEFID, MAAH, Min Health,
   LNSP, BUNEE)




                                              page 55
Annex 10 : Public Consultations

The first consultations with stakeholders and beneficiaries of the Program took place from 4 to 17
January 2018 in Ouagadougou and Bobo-Dioulasso with meetings by groups of actors. In total, about
thirty structures participated in the consultations.

These consultations made it possible to present the activities of the Program and to explain the
approach of the Evaluation of the Environmental and Social Management System of Burkina Faso. On
this occasion, preliminary information was collected on the processes for managing environmental
and social safeguards aspects in the different structures. Based on the interview guides, input on the
environmental and social impacts of the Program, mitigation and enhancement measures, as well as
existing grievance management mechanisms were solicited from each structure.

The comments and inputs received from the stakeholders consulted were used to analyze the
environmental and social impacts and risks related to the execution of PforR activities.

The second stage of consultation brought together the representatives of the two (2) implementing
entities of the Program (MEA and ONEA) on 22 January 2018 at the World Bank premises in
Ouagadougou. It allowed for a presentation of the preliminary results and to identify perspectives. It
was also an opportunity to gather information on the operating mode of the environmental unit of
ONEA (Directorate General) which supports the activities of the regional directorates of ONEA and
provides supervision. With respect to the new MEA environmental unit that had just been created on
12 January 2018, it was agreed to focus on strengthening it with human resources competent on
environmental and social safeguards so that it can work efficiently.

Discussions focused on the classification of certain Program activities such as AEP in urban centers
into category "A" (significant negative impacts) without additional details being provided. The main
recommendation resulting from this consultation was to approach the Ministry of the Environment
through the BUNEE in order to shed light on the inaccuracies found in national environmental
regulations, notably the category of AEP activities.

A third consultation took place on 05 February 2018 by videoconference (VC) at the World Bank to
share the results of consultations between BUNEE and ONEA on the classification of AEP systems in
urban centers. Based on the technical sheets provided by ONEA and describing the consistency of the
work for the AEP, clarifications were provided by the BUNEE on the possibility of classifying the AEP
systems in urban areas into category "B", thus eligible for PfroR. The materialization of these results
was made by taking a final decision at the level of the Minister in charge of the environment (see
Annex)

Following the consultations, a feedback meeting was held on 20 February 2018 by VC at the World
Bank. It brought together the implementing entities of the Program (ONEA and MEA). During the
exchanges, it was established that there was a need to refocus the proposed action plan on priority
actions that could be supported by the Program. ONEA also confirmed DR-ONEA Bobo as the current
administrative entity of the two (2) environmentalists assigned to it.

List of Institutions which participated in first round of consultations

Ministries                                        Structures consulted
Ministry of Water and Sanitation                  DGRE, SP-GIRE, DGA, DGEP, DGESS, ONEA
Ministry of Agriculture and Hydraulic             DGFOMR
Developments
Ministry of the Environment, Green Economy, and   BUNEE, DGPE, DREVCC, DGESS, DAJ, National Water Analysis Laboratory



                                                     page 56
Climate Change
Ministry of Economy, Finance, and Development       DGB, Working Group Compensation Baseline, DGCOOP, DGI
Ministry of Territorial Administration and          DGCT, AMBF, Burkina Regions Association, Townhalls of targeted
Decentralization                                    Regions
Ministry of Justice, Human Rights, and Civic        DAJAV
Promotion
Ministry of Woman, National Solidarity and Family   DGPF, DGPG, Anvironmental Unit
Ministry of Culture, Arts, and Tourism              DGPC
Ministry of Health (National Health Laboratory)     DGS
Ministry of Urban Development and Housing           General Directorate lf Urban development, Land Development and
                                                    Topography
Institutions of Bobo                                ONEA bobo, DREA Bobo, Bobo Townhall, DREVCC-HB
Associations/NGO                                    Ouagadougou City Emptiers Association




                                                       page 57
Annex 11 : Account of the National Public Consultation

Introduction

The national public consultation on the ESSA of the Water Supply and Sanitation Program was held at
the World Bank office in Ouagadougou Burkina Faso on March 27th, 2018, with the participation of 30
persons representing different state and non-state institutions, including ministerial departments,
national non-governmental organizations, civil society, and the private sector (see complete list of
participants below).

In their introductory remarks, Mr. Seydou Traoré (co-TTL of the Program) and Mr. Hamado
Ouedraogo briefly presented the Program, in general, and the ESSA, in particular. They highlighted
the importance of the national public consultation as it presented the opportunity to share the draft
ESSA with all the stakeholders and collect their remarks and suggestions before finalizing it.

Mr. Abdoulaye Gadiere, Sr. Environmental Specialist, presented the ESSA document, its main findings
and results, and key recommendations for a comprehensive Action Plan for environmental and social
safeguards. Mrs. Gertrude Coulibaly-Zombre, Sr. Social Development Specialist, stressed the fact that
the ESSA is based on preliminary in-depth assessments, whose results will be incorporated into the
Program Action Plan and the Program Operation Manual, and will inform the partnership agreement
to be signed by the Program and the BUNEE and the different safeguard instruments to be prepared
during implementation.

General comments and remarks

A number of specific remarks and suggestions were made about the ESSA, as presented below with
the responses provided by the World Bank safeguards specialists.

➢ The General Director of BUNEE highlighted the fact that the MEEVCC letter concerning the
  preparation of the NIES of the different sub-projects is not aimed at reclassifying sub-projects,
  but rather at providing an exceptional authorization on the basis of a range of the technical
  measures of the planned activities. One reason is that the scope of the activities are not in line
  with the issues of the decree n°2015-1187 concerning the conditions and procedures of the
  preparation and validation of the environmental strategic evaluation, of the environmental and
  social study and of the Environmental and Social Impact Statement (NIES).

        •   During implementation, BUNEE and ONEA will cooperate in order to identify the required
            safeguard instruments and related measures

➢ The representative of the Ministry of Justice pointed out at the risks of alternative
  interpretations of some legal texts.

        •   There will not be contradictory interpretations of the decree n°2015-1187 . The issue is
            that the decree gives inadequate descriptions of the nature of some specific activities
            (such as those related to Water Supply Infrastrcuture in urban areas). A revision of the
            decree seems necessary.

➢ Some health and sanitation-related legal texts should be presented in the main text and not only
  in the annexes (the law of orientation on the water, on protective perimeters, for example). The
  impact of latrines on groundwater should be stressed. Annex 2 should include legal texts related
  to public health and sanitation.



                                               page 58
        •   The Environmental and Social Impact Statements will take care of protective perimeters
            (the ESSA is not supposed to identify all the potential impacts).

        •   The risk of contaminating groundwater is low (the soil has a self-purifying potential).
            Besides, there are specific criteria for drilling boreholes. Adequate control measures will
            ensure water quality during operation.

Specific questions

➢ Safeguard instruments. Question concerning the differences between ESMFs and RAPs of
  previous ME projects and the ESSA/PforR.

    Answer: The ESSA, prepared by the World Bank, is about the general environmental and social
    framework for PforRs. Other safeguard instruments, prepared by the national counterpart, will
    address the environmental and social impacts of specific investment sub-projects.

➢ RAPs. Question about the opportunity of preparing RAPs when only a few persons are likely to
  be affected by sub-projects (in line with the national decree n°11-87/2015).

        Answer: The screening process of the different sub-projects will be part of a pragmatic,
        realistic and pro-active interpretation of the decree. However, it is commonly admitted that
        the decree should be revised.

➢ About the Budget. A question concerned the breakdown between grant and loan of the US$300
  million dollar budget.

        Answer: The operation will be financed by an IDA grant of US$50 million and US$250 credit
        from the IDA Scaling-up Facility.

➢ About the involvement of regional directorates of Health in the preparation and
  implementation of the PforR

Answer: At the preparation stage, the General Directorate of Health and the National Laboratory for
Public Health (LNSP) were consulted. The MEA will continue consultations with these institutions and
other actors during implementation (the technical Manual will be more specific in this regard). While
the General Directorate identifies health risks, the Regional directorates will define the criteria for
selecting sub-project sites. The LNSP will provides expertise in health risk assessment.

    ➢ About the role of the Mediateur du Faso (Ombudsman)

Answer. The Ombudsman will have an important role in the amicable settlement of some issues,
before the involvement of the justice.

    ➢ About additional elements of the Program Action Plan

Answer. The technical Manual will more directly address a range of specific issues and will identify
the different actors involved in implementing different activities

➢ The GD/BUNEE informed the audience that an accreditation process of firms and individual
  consultants for ESIAs / NIEs and RAPs is underway at the MEEVCC level.

        •   The World Bank asked to be associated with the definition of the accreditation criteria.




                                               page 59
At the end, participants suggested some inputs to specific paragraphs of the ESSA. This will be done
during the forthcoming revision of the document.

A special annex of the ESSA will present the minutes of the public Consultation.

Conclusion

The participants unanimously felt that the process of preparing the PforR is a very useful exercise and
a challenge for the national counterpart. Some gaps and weaknesses of the national systems were
identified and will be filled during implementation.

List of participants of the public Consultation




                                                  page 60
page 61
page 62
page 63
page 64
page 65
