Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                       Document of
                                                                      The World Bank

                                                               FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

                                                                                                         Report No: 125188-BJ

                                                  INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                          PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

                                                                           ON A

                                                                   PROPOSED CREDIT

                                                       IN THE AMOUNT OF EURO 138 MILLION
                                                           (US$170 MILLION EQUIVALENT)
                                                             FROM SCALE UP FACILITY

                                                                          AND A




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                   PROPOSED GRANT

                                                        IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 34.4 MILLION
                                                            (US$50 MILLION EQUIVALENT)


                                                                          TO THE

                                                                  REPUBLIC OF BENIN

                                                                         FOR THE

                                     RURAL WATER SUPPLY UNIVERSAL ACCESS PROGRAM FOR RESULTS




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                       April 24, 2018


                               Water Global Practice
                               Africa Region

                                 This document is being made publicly available prior to Board consideration. This does not
                                 imply a presumed outcome. This document may be updated following Board consideration and
                                 the updated document will be made publicly available in accordance with the Bank’s policy on
                                 Access to Information.
             CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
            Exchange rate as of March 31, 2018
                 US$1 = Euro 0.81126029
                 US$1 = SDR 0.68782414
                 US$1 = 532 XOF (West African CFA franc)

          ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

ACEP      Water Users’ Association
          Association des Consommateurs d’Eau Potable
ANAEPMR   Rural Water Supply National Agency
          Agence Nationale d’Approvisionnement en Eau Potable en Milieu Rural
ANLC      National Anti-Corruption Authority
          Autorité Nationale de la Lutte contre la Corruption
ARMP      Public Procurement Regulatory Authority
          Autorité Nationale de Régulation des Marchés Publics
ASTER     Treasury System Software
BAI       Presidency’s Office for Analysis and Investigation
          Bureau d’Analyses et d’Investigation
CAA       Autonomous Amortization Fund
          Caisse d’Amortissement Autonome
CBO       Community-based Organization
CENTIF    National Anti-Money Laundering Unit
          Cellule Nationale de Traitement des Information Financières
CFME      Training Center for Water Professionals
          Centre de Formation aux Métiers de l’Eau
CLTS      Community-Led Total Sanitation
CMAI      Internal Audit Committees
          Comités Ministériels d’Audit Interne
CMMR      Ministerial Risk Management Committees
          Comités Ministériels de Maitrise des Risques
CMP       Public Procurement Code
          Code des Marchés Publics
CPF       Country Partnership Framework
CPS       Country Partnership Strategy
CRD       Dispute Settlement Commission
          Commission de Règlement des Différends
CRD       Regional Development Committee
          Comité Régional de Développement
DA        Designated Account
DDCMP     Departmental Directorate of Procurement
          Direction Départementale de Contrôle des Marchés Publics
DGDU      Urban Development Directorate
          Direction Générale du Développement de l’Urbanisme
DG-Eau    General Directorate for Water
          Direction Générale de l’Eau
DGTCP     Treasury and Public Accounting Directorate
          Direction Générale du Trésor et de la Comptabilité Publique
DLI       Disbursement-Linked Indicator
DNCMP     National Public Procurement Directorate or National Central Directorate of
          Procurement
          Direction Nationale de Contrôle des Marchés Publics
DNSP      National Public Health Directorate
          Direction Nationale de la Santé Publique
EIA       Environmental Impact Assessment
ESM       Environmental and Social Management
ESMP      Environmental and Social Management Plan
ESSA      Environmental and Social Systems Assessment
FAD       Finance and Administrator Director
FCFA      West African CFA franc
FM        Financial Management
FPA       Framework Partnership Agreement
FY        Fiscal Year
GAC       Governance and Anti-Corruption
GDP       Gross Domestic Product
GHG       Greenhouse Gas
GiZ       German Corporation for International Cooperation
          Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit
GoB       Government of Benin
GRGES     Environmental and Social Management Guidelines
          Guide Référentiel pour la Gestion Environnementale et Sociale
GRM       Grievance Redress Mechanism
GRS       Grievance Redress Service
GWSP      Global Water Security and Sanitation Partnership
IFR       Interim Financial Report
IFSA      Integrated Fiduciary Systems Assessment
IGF       Inspectorate General of Finance
          Inspection Générale des Finances
IGM       Inspectorate General of the Ministry
          Inspection Générale du Ministère
IRR       Internal Rate of Return
INSAE     National Institute for Statistics and Economic Analysis
          Institut National de la Statistique et de l’Analyse Economique
INTOSAI   International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions
IVA       Independent Verification Agent
JICA      Japan International Cooperation Agency
JMP       Joint Monitoring Program
KfW       German Government-owned Development Bank
          Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau
LOLF      Organic Budget Law
M&E       Monitoring and Evaluation
MDG       Millennium Development Goal
MEM       Ministry of Water and Mines
          Ministère de l’Eau et des Mines
MICS      Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys
MoH       Ministry of Health
MoU       Memorandum of Understanding
NGO       Non-Governmental Organization
NPV       Net Present Value
NRW       Non-Revenue Water
OFOR        Rural Boreholes Agency
            Office des Forages Ruraux
PAG         Government Action Plan
            Programme d’Actions du Gouvernement
PAP         Program Action Plan
PAPHyR      Rural Sanitation Access and Hygiene Improvement Program
            Programme d’Amélioration de l’Accès à l’Assainissement et des Pratiques
            d’Hygiène en milieu Rural
PDDAEPMR    National Master Plan for the Development of the Rural Water Supply Sector
            Plan Directeur de Développement du sous-secteur de l’Approvisionnement en Eau
            Potable en Milieu Rural
PDO         Program Development Objective
PEFA        Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
PEMFAR      Public Expenditure Management and Financial Accountability Review
PEPRAU      Small Town Water Supply and Urban Septage Management Project
PFM         Public Financial Management
PforR       Program-for-Results
PGSSE       Drinking Water Safety Management Plan
            Plan de Gestion de la Sécurité Sanitaire de l'Eau
PIP         Program for Priority Investment
PPP         Public-Private Partnership
RAP         Resettlement Action Plan
SAI         Supreme Audit Institution
SCD         Systematic Country Diagnostic
SDG         Sustainable Development Goal
SDR         Special Drawing Rights
SEA         Strategic Environmental Assessment
SIGFIP      Financial Management Software
SIGMAP      Procurement Software
SONEB       Urban Water Utility of Benin
            Société Nationale des Eaux du Bénin
SUF         Scale-up Facility
SVGF        Village Committee for Land Management
            Structures Villageoises de Gestion Foncière
TA          Technical Assessment
TSSAI       Treasure Saving Service Account for Investment
UNICEF      United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund
WA          Withdrawal Application
WAEMU/UEMOA West Africa Economic and Monetary Union
WASH        Water, Sanitation and Hygiene
WHO         World Health Organization
WSS         Water Supply & Sanitation
XOF         West African CFA franc



              Regional Vice President:    Makhtar Diop
                     Country Director:    Pierre Frank Laporte
       Senior Global Practice Director:   Guang Zhe Chen
                    Practice Manager:     Steven Schonberger
                  Task Team Leaders:      Charles Delfieux, Sophie Trémolet
                            REPUBLIC OF BENIN
               RURAL WATER SUPPLY UNIVERSAL ACCESS PROGRAM

Table of Contents                                                     Page
I.   STRATEGIC CONTEXT                                                   1
A. Country Context                                                       1
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context                                    2
C. Relationship to the CPF and Rationale for Use of Instrument           5
II. PROGRAM DESCRIPTION                                                  6
A. Government program                                                    6
B. Program Development Objective and key results                         7
C. PforR Program Scope                                                   7
D. Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs) and Verification Protocols     16
E. Capacity Building and Institutional Strengthening                    17
III. PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION                                             17
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements                        17
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E)                              18
C. Disbursement Arrangements                                            18
IV. ASSESSMENT SUMMARY                                                  19
A. Technical                                                            19
B. Fiduciary                                                            22
C. Environmental and Social Effects                                     24
D. Risk Assessment                                                      26
E. Program Action Plan                                                  28
Annex 1: Detailed Program Description                                                 29
Annex 2: Results Framework Matrix                                                     39
Annex 3: Disbursement Linked Indicators, Disbursement Arrangements and Verification
Protocols                                                                             48
Annex 4: Summary Technical Assessment                                                 53
Annex 5: Fiduciary Systems Assessment                                                 68
Annex 6: Summary Environmental and Social Systems Assessment                          83
Annex 7: Systematic Operations Risk Rating (SORT)                                     87
Annex 8: Program Action Plan                                                          88
Annex 9: Implementation Support Plan                                                  91
Annex 9: Map                                                                          93
                                                        PAD DATA SHEET
                                                     REPUBLIC OF BENIN
                                         Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program
                                                     (Programme AQUA-VIE)

                                          PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
                                                          Africa Region
                                                       Water Global Practice


.




                                                            Basic Information
Date:                         May 15, 2018                     Sectors:     Water supply (100%)
Country Director:             Pierre Frank Laporte             Themes:      Rural services and infrastructure (80%); Public-Private
                                                                            Partnerships (20%)
Practice Manager              Steven Schonberger /

Senior Global Practice        Guang Zhe Chen
Director:
Program ID:                   P164186
Team Leaders:                 Charles Delfieux
                              Sophie Trémolet
Program Implementation Period                                  Start Date: May 15, 2018
                                                               End Date: June 30, 2024
Expected Financing Effectiveness Date:      October 31, 2018
Expected Financing Closing Date:            June 30, 2024
.




                                                      Program Financing Data
[ ] Loan        [X]        Grant            [ ]    Other
[X] Credit
For Loans/Credits/Others (US$M):
Total Program Cost:                240                           Total World Bank Financing:             220


Total Co-financing:                20                            Financing Gap:                            0


Financing Source                                                                           Amount (in million)
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                          US$20
IDA Grant                                                                                                   US$50
IDA Scale-Up Facility                                                                                     US$170
Total                                                                                                     US$240
.




Borrower: Republic of Benin
Responsible Agency:     Ministry of Finance
Contact:                Mr. Servais ADJOVI                                Title:     Directeur de Cabinet
Telephone No.:          +229 21 30 87 85                                  Email:    sadjovicaa@yahoo.fr

Implementing Agency : Agence Nationale d’Approvisionnement en Eau Potable en Milieu Rural (ANAEPMR, Rural Water Supply Agency)
Contact:                 Mr. Sylvain ADOKPO MIGAN                         Title:     Directeur Général
    Telephone No.:      +229 97 97 20 67                                  Email:    samigan@presidence.bj
.




Expected Disbursements (in US$ Million)
Fiscal Year          2019           2020         2021          2022         2023              2024
Annual               20.0           43.0         61.0          42.0         36.0               18.0
Cumulative           20.0           63.0         124.0         166.0        202.0             220.0
.




Program Development Objective(s)
To increase access to water supply services and to strengthen service delivery arrangements in selected rural areas.

                                                                 Compliance
Policy
Does the program depart from the CAS in content or in other significant respects?                                      Yes [ ]      No [ X]
.
Does the program require any waivers of Bank policies applicable to Program-                                           Yes [ ]      No [X]
for-Results operations?
Have these been approved by Bank management?                                                                           Yes [ ]      No [ ]
Is approval for any policy waiver sought from the Board?                                                               Yes [ ]      No [X]
Does the program meet the Regional criteria for readiness for implementation?                                          Yes [X]      No [ ]

Overall Risk Rating: Substantial
Conditions
Source of Fund               Name                                                                     Type
IDA SUF Credit and IDA       Subsidiary Agreement, Article V, 5.01                                    Effectiveness
Grant

Description of Condition:
The Subsidiary Agreement has been duly executed on behalf of the Recipient and the Program Implementing Entity under terms and conditions
satisfactory to the World Bank.

Legal Covenants
Name                                                       Recurrent                Due Date                            Frequency
Independent Verification Agent of the Program’s
results (Schedule 2, Section I, A, 2(a) of the Financing
                                                                                    January 31, 2019
Agreement for the credit and grant; and Section IV,
1(a) of the Program Agreement)
Description of Covenant:
The Recipient shall, through the Program Implementing Entity, not later than three (3) months after the effective date, engage an Independent
Verification Agent under terms of reference with qualifications and experience acceptable to the World Bank (“Verification Agent”), to prepare
and provide verification reports certifying the achievement of the DLRs, all in accordance with the procedures and arrangements acceptable to the
World Bank.

Name                                                     Recurrent                  Due Date                          Frequency
Program Operational Manual (Schedule 2, Section I, C,
1 of the Financing Agreement for the credit and grant,                              January 31, 2019
and Section I, B, 1 of the Program Agreement)

Description of Covenant:
The Recipient, through the Program Implementing Entity, shall no later than three (3) months of the effective date, update and thereafter maintain
a manual acceptable to the World Bank (“Program Operational Manual”), containing detailed arrangements and procedures for: (a) institutional
coordination and day-to-day execution of the program; (b) monitoring, evaluation, reporting and communication; (c) administration, financial
management and accounting; and (d) such other administrative, technical and organizational arrangements, and procedures as shall be required for
purposes of implementation of the Program.
.




                                                             Team Composition
                                                                  Bank Staff
Name                                                     Title                      Specialization                      Unit
                                                         Water Resources
Georges COMAIR                                                                      Water Resources Engineer            GWA07
                                                         Management Specialist
                                                         Senior Social
Gertrude COULIBALY ZOMBRÉ                                                           Social Management                   GSU01
                                                         Development Specialist
                                                         Senior Water Supply and
Charles DELFIEUX                                                                 Team Leader (ADM responsible)          GWA07
                                                         Sanitation Specialist
                                                         Financial Management
Angelo DONOU                                                                        Financial Management                GGO26
                                                         Specialist
                                                         Lead Water and
Matar FALL                                                                          Water and Sanitation Specialist     GWA07
                                                         Sanitation Specialist
Saba Nabeel GHESHAN                                      Associate Counsel          Lawyer                              LEGAM
                                                         Senior Procurement
Mathias GOGOHOUNGA                                                                  Procurement                         GGO07
                                                         Specialist
Jean Vincent KOUA                                        Temporary                  Team Support                        GWA07
                                                         Senior Financial
Jean Charles Amon KRA                                                               Financial Management                GGO26
                                                         Management Specialist
Pepita Hortense OLYMPIO                                  Program Assistant          Team Support                        AFMBJ
                                                         Senior Social
Abdoul-Wahab SEYNI                                                                  Social Management                   GSU01
                                                         Development Specialist
Issa THIAM                                               Finance Officer            Disbursement                        WFACS
Sophie TRÉMOLET                                          Senior Economist           Team Leader                         GWAGP
Non-Bank Staff

Name                                                     Title                                            City
Abdoul Ganyi BACHABI ALIDOU                              Environmental Specialist                         Cotonou, BENIN
Angelo BONFIGLIOLI                  Environmental Specialist   FRANCE
Aurore Ghislaine EGOUNLETY BIOKOU   Gender Specialist          Cotonou, BENIN
Dominique PREUX                     Training Specialist        Paris, FRANCE
Jérôme DJEGUI                       Training Specialist        Cotonou, BENIN
Ismael Sabas SONOU AGOSSOU          Social Specialist          Cotonou, BENIN
I.        STRATEGIC CONTEXT
     A. Country Context

1.      Despite achieving solid economic growth, poverty levels in Benin have been rising,
especially in rural areas. During the period 2000-2015, real gross domestic product (GDP) in
Benin grew on average by 4.3 percent annually and accelerated slightly during the last five-year
period (2011-2015) to 4.7 percent.1 During the same period, the population growth has been 3.2
percent per year, placing a significant strain on the country’s ability to maintain access to basic
social services. The poverty rate increased from 37.5 percent in 2006 to 40.1 percent in 2015.2
Important disparities between urban and rural poverty persist, with rates estimated at 35.8 percent
and 43.6 percent respectively.3 Per capita income was US$800 in 2016. The Human Development
Index was estimated at 0.48 in 2015, with Benin ranking 167th amongst 188 countries.4 Inequality
in the distribution of per capita income is moderately high, with a Gini index of 41 in 2015.

2.      Presidential elections in March 2016 marked a transition to new leadership. Patrice
Talon took up office as President of the Republic of Benin in April 2016, vowing to establish a
right-sized administration based on competence. In October 2016, the Council of Ministers
adopted the Government’s Action Program (Programme d’Action du Gouvernement – PAG),
2016–2021 worth FCFA 9,039 billion (US$15.3 billion or 170 percent of GDP) to develop the
potential for higher domestic value-added activities in the agriculture and tourism sectors,
identified as major potential sources of growth. The PAG includes 45 flagship projects in key
economic sectors (including three in the water sector), many of which are being funded through
public-private partnerships (PPP). Some of these flagship projects are led by agencies overseen
directly by the President’s office.5

3.      Providing universal access to water supply services is a priority for the Government of
Benin (GoB). According to the PAG, the GoB aims to provide universal access to water supply in
both urban and rural areas by 2021, for a total estimated cost of FCFA 456 billion (US$820
million).6 In the rural water sector, in particular, the GoB is advancing fast. In May 2017, the GoB
adopted the National Strategy for Rural Water Supply (Stratégie Nationale d’Approvisionnement
in Rural Areas, 2017-2030) to operationalize the PAG 2016-2021 and build on lessons from
implementation of the former national rural water strategy that applied to the 2005-2015 period.
A National Master Plan for the Development of the Rural Water Supply Sector (Plan Directeur de
Développement du sous-secteur de l’Approvisionnement en Eau Potable en Milieu Rural –
PDDAEPMR) was prepared to operationalize this strategy with support from the Water and
Sanitation Program and finalized in May 2017. The total cost for implementing the PDDAEPMR
is estimated at FCFA 314 billion (US$560 million). To implement this strategy, the GoB set up a
dedicated executing agency in charge of delivering on this objective, the Rural Water Supply
National Agency (Agence Nationale pour l’Approvisionnement en Eau Potable en Milieu Rural –


1
  Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD), July 21, 2017.
2
  Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD), July 21, 2017 & INSAE, EMICoV 2006-15 National Poverty and Inequality Rates 2006-2015.
3
  World Bank. 2016. Benin - Performance and Learning Review for CPS for the period FY13-17.
4
  Human Development Index
5
  Programme d’Actions du Gouvernement PAG (2016-2021)
6
  Programme d’Actions du Gouvernement : Actions 43 & 44 (PAG 2016-2021)

                                                                  1
ANAEPMR) in 2017. The ANAEPMR is in the process of establishing new rural water services
management models to be implemented in parallel with the execution of the investment program.

     B. Sectoral and Institutional Context

4.      Access to Water Supply and Sanitation (WSS) services. Benin has a population of 10.8
million inhabitants, of which 45 percent is urban and 55 percent is rural.7 While Benin met its
Millennium Development Goals (MDG) targets for access to improved water sources, with 81 and
71 percent access rates in urban and rural areas respectively, significant improvements will be
needed to achieve the higher service levels and targets reflected in the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDG).8 Access to improved water sources in rural areas is provided through rural piped
water supply systems, hand pumps or autonomous water points.9 According to the joint World
Health Organization (WHO)/United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund (UNICEF)
Joint Monitoring Program (JMP), only 30 percent of the rural population has access to piped water,
compared to 57 percent for the urban population.10 The GoB monitors service coverage in rural
areas based on an average number of people per water point and per household connection.11 As
of 2017, average service coverage in rural areas stood at 42 percent countrywide, with high
disparities across departments (departmental averages range between 32.6 to 61.6 percent) and
even greater disparities between municipalities (municipal averages range from 9 to 71 percent).

5.       Access to improved sanitation facilities is notably low with only 25 and 5 percent of the
urban and rural population having access to such facilities.12 The rate of open defecation is
estimated at 55 percent at the national level; it is particularly high in rural areas (76 percent) whilst
open defecation remains a common practice also in urban areas where 25 percent of the population
still defecates in the open. Sewerage networks are virtually non-existent, with less than 1 percent
of households connected to a sewerage network. Households with improved sanitation facilities
rely on simple dry latrines, ventilated pit latrines, flush toilets and septic tanks.

6.     Institutional framework for the WSS sector. The Ministry of Water and Mines (Ministère
de l’Eau et des Mines – MEM) is in charge of formulating policy for the water supply sector. Water
service arrangements differ between urban areas and rural areas.13 Benin’s National Water
Company (Société Nationale des Eaux du Bénin - SONEB) serves urban areas, which comprise of
the municipalities of Cotonou, Porto-Novo and Parakou and of the 74 towns heading the other
municipalities (as well as surrounding peri-urban areas). The GoB initiated a reform to split
SONEB into a publicly-owned asset-holding company, which will operate under a concession
contract with the GoB and a privately-owned operator which will operate under an affermage
contract. Rural areas include all other territories. According to the decentralization law,
municipalities are responsible for providing water supply services on their territory. They are
operating under the control and with support of the General Directorate for Water (Direction

7
  Nouvelle Stratégie Nationale d’Approvisionnement en Eau Potable en Milieu Rural (SNAEP_MR) 2017-2030-Annex D page 41.
8
  WHO/UNICEF JMP (2017).
9
   Approximately 620 piped rural water supply systems currently exist in Benin. They are generally made of boreholes pumping to an elevated
storage tank connected to a network distribution system supplying household connections and standpipes. There are approximately 12,200
handpumps. Plan Directeur de Développement du sous-secteur de l’Approvisionnement en Eau Potable en Milieu Rural – PDDAEPMR (2017)
10
   WHO/UNICEF JMP (2017.)
11
   The coverage rate is estimated by the GoB based on 250 people per water point and 24 people per household connection
12
   WHO/UNICEF JMP (2017).
13
   Benin has 77 municipalities (communes) spread across 12 departments. A main town is the seat of each municipality (chef lieu de commune).

                                                                     2
Générale de l’Eau - DG-Eau) within MEM, which has deconcentrated services throughout the
national territory providing technical support to municipalities and theoretically monitoring
service provision. The regulation arrangements for tariff and service standards in the WSS sector
are not operational.

7.      Service delivery arrangements in rural areas. Municipalities provide water services
themselves or delegate this responsibility to a different entity, including a private operator or a
community-based organization. Since 2007, municipalities have been encouraged to delegate
water supply service delivery to private operators through affermage contracts. In 2017,
approximatively 55 percent of the 620 existing rural piped water supply systems were operated by
a private operator. The affermage model has however not brought the full expected benefits in
terms of fostering professionalization and sustainability of service delivery, due mainly to the
following factors: (i) lack of capacity of the municipalities to design and supervise the
implementation of affermage contracts; (ii) small scale of the private operators, which limits the
extent to which they can attract professional staff and mobilize financing; and (iii) difficulties
encountered by municipalities to fulfill their financial obligations to rehabilitate and expand the
water supply system as part of the affermage agreement. To address identified shortcomings with
the affermage contracts and shift more investment responsibilities towards private operators, the
World Bank supported a pilot project (P132114) to let subsidized concessions for 10 water supply
systems to three local private operators. Under these contracts, private operators are expected to
invest in system rehabilitation and expansion and can access public funds to offer subsidized
household connections to their customers.14 These eight-year contracts were signed in 2014 and
are currently operating.15 The experience with implementation of these contracts has been
differing, as some of the operators suffered from a lack of predictability in the transfer of public
subsidies and invested less than was initially expected. There is however some evidence that
service quality has improved in their service areas.

8.      Ongoing reforms in the rural water supply sector. In 2017, the GoB created the
ANAEPMR with the objective to expand access to water supply services in rural areas more
rapidly and deliver universal access to rural water supply services by 2021. The ANAEPMR was
established as an asset-holding company for rural water supply services: it is in charge of
investments (to construct new infrastructure and rehabilitate existing ones), of contracting private
operators and of monitoring service delivery.16 The ANAEPMR is under the supervision of the
Presidency and its sectoral Ministry is the MEM. The creation of ANAEPMR has led to a need to
redefine institutional roles and responsibilities in the rural water sector, a process that is currently
ongoing.

9.       Service delivery arrangements for sanitation. Responsibilities for sanitation are split
between several institutions. The National Public Health Directorate (Direction Nationale de la
Santé Publique – DNSP) within the Ministry of Health (Ministère de la Santé - MoH) is in charge
of formulating sector policy for hygiene and sanitation, with a particular focus on on-site sanitation
facilities in rural and urban areas. Households are responsible for constructing on-site sanitation

14
   Funding for subsidies were provided by the Dutch Embassy (US$1 million). However, allegations of improper use of funds in 2015 related to
Dutch water programs in Benin put those payments on hold.
15
   World Bank (2015) Benin – Innovative public private partnerships for rural water services sustainability – a Case Study, by Sylvain Adokpo
Migan with Trémolet Consulting.
16
   Decree No 2017-039 of January 25, 2017.

                                                                     3
facilities and receive no financial assistance for doing so. In urban areas, the Urban Development
Directorate (Direction Générale du Développement de l’Urbanisme – DGDU) within the Ministry
of the Living Environment and Sustainable Development (Ministère du Cadre de Vie et du
Développement Durable) is in charge of formulating policy for the sanitary transport of wastewater
and fecal sludge. The collection and disposal of fecal sludge is performed by private sludge
emptying trucks, which are poorly regulated. An ongoing World Bank project, the PEPRAU
(Small Town Water Supply and Urban Septage Management Project - P156738) is financing
construction of a fecal sludge treatment plant in the east of the Grand-Nokoué region. The
PEPRAU will also finance institutional strengthening activities in the urban sanitation field, with
the objective of better structuring the sector, clarifying roles and responsibilities, incentivizing
households to build improved sanitation facilities and supporting the development of private sector
participation in the urban sanitation sector.

10.     Quality and efficiency of water supply services. In urban areas, the latest performance
indicators reported by SONEB for 2016 indicate relatively efficient management of water supply
services, with an Non Revenue Water (NRW) ratio at 23 percent, collection rate at 93 percent,
staff per 1,000 connections at 3.6 and operating cost coverage at 1.50.17 SONEB’s service coverage
stands at 76 percent (with 245,456 customers at the end of 2016) but cannot keep up with urban
growth. Average consumption (38 l/person/day) is low by urban standards. No regulatory
arrangements are in place to enable verification of performance. For rural areas, no consolidated
information on service performance is available at the national level. Information on assets and
performance for 150 rural piped water supply schemes is collected through a web-based platform
which allows private operators to prepare management reports for submission to municipalities
and the DG-Eau deconcentrated services. This database collects information on existing assets
(with geo-referencing) as well as operational data, including volumes of water produced and
distributed, frequency of service interruptions, the number of customers (active and inactive),
volumes of water billed and bill collections. For the small sample of systems included in the
database, the average water loss rate was 33 percent (ranging from 20 to 55 percent). The average
number of hours of service was five hours per day and 21 per cent of the systems had no
chlorination system (most other systems used chlorine injected directly in the water tank). The
DG-Eau and municipalities do not currently compile information or use it effectively for service
monitoring or benchmarking at national level. The DNSP is in charge of approving and monitoring
the compliance of the Drinking Water Safety Management Plan (Plan de Gestion de la Sécurité
Sanitaire de l'Eau – PGSSE) that service providers shall prepare and implement. However, it is
currently barely enforced.

11.     Affordability of water supply services. Tariffs for rural water services vary from one
locality to the next. Tariffs for water sold by private service providers are on average FCFA 500
(US$0.94) per m3, ranging between FCFA 425 and 550 per m3 for the systems that had provided
information. Water sold through standpipes includes the margin charged by standpipe operators
and is considerably more expensive at FCFA 800 (US$1.4) per m3. This is equivalent to a monthly
cost of FCFA 2,880 (US$5) per household, based on an average consumption of 20 l/person/day
and a household of six people.18 This represents 2 percent of the monthly monetary poverty
threshold of FCFA 140,800 (US$250) and is below the maximum percentage considered

17
     Water Utility Turnaround Framework, World Bank, 2017 and SONEB’s management report for 2016.
18
     PDDAEPMR (2017). Information based on a sample of 12 municipalities across the country.

                                                                    4
affordable but could affect the poorest households more (no information is available on water
service levels by income quintiles). Water in rural areas is also considerably more expensive than
in urban areas: it is four times higher than the social tariff applied by the urban water utility
(SONEB) to households which consume below 5 m3 per month, which is FCFA 198 per m3
(US$0.37).

12.     External support for WSS. The WSS sector is supported by several Development Partners,
including multilateral partners such as the World Bank, UNICEF, the European Investment Bank
and the European Union, the Islamic Development Bank, the African Development Bank, bilateral
partners including the Netherlands, Germany, Japan and China and numerous Non-Governmental
Organizations (NGOs). In December 2016, the World Bank approved the PEPRAU, its first
lending operation in the WSS sector since the closing of the Rural Water Supply and Sanitation
Project (P000121) in December 2000.

13.     Water resources management. Even though surface water sources are abundant in Benin,
groundwater resources traditionally constitute most of the drinking water sources. The main reason
for the limited use of surface water sources are the high initial capital costs (i.e. construction of
large infrastructure such as dams, canals, etc.) and potentially higher water treatment costs.
Currently, Benin lacks good knowledge and management of its water resources. The Directorate
of Water Resources Management within the MEM does not have the human, technical and
financial resources to carry out water resources monitoring activities in an efficient manner.

     C. Relationship to the CPF and Rationale for Use of Instrument

14.     Rationale for World Bank Engagement. The Program is well aligned with the new
Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY19-FY2319. The Program will directly contribute to
the CPF’s Objective 2 “Improving the quality of infrastructure”. It aims to deliver water services
to the poorer rural populations of Benin with multiple impacts on improved living conditions,
health, school attendance, productivity and income particularly for women and girls. It responds
to a demand of the GoB to support the implementation of one of its priorities, as defined at the
highest level by the President of Benin. The proposed Program constitutes a significant scale-up
for the World Bank engagement in the WSS sector, which started with the technical assistance
from the Water and Sanitation Program, followed by the PEPRAU under implementation. The
World Bank is well positioned to bring added value through its experience gained in the rural water
supply sector in Sub-Saharan Africa and globally.

15.     Maximizing Financing for Development. The proposed Program will help mobilize
investments from private operators (who will be expected to self-finance, through their
remuneration, part of the investments in renewal and rehabilitation, as part of their contractual
obligations under the affermage contracts20) and from water service users, through their investment
in the non-subsidized component of the household connection cost.21 Whilst the PEPRAU will
lead to the establishment of a guarantee fund for small-scale private operators, the Global Water

19
   Report No. 123031-BJ.
20
    It is not possible to estimate at this stage such a contribution of the private operators as it will depend on the affermage’s final contractual
obligations that will be defined during the Program implementation.
21
   FCFA 20,000 or US$38 per household connection

                                                                         5
Security and Sanitation Partnership (GWSP), a Trust Fund managed by the World Bank, will help
with assessing the financing needs of regional private operators and to identify whether similar
arrangements need to be established or tailored to their requirements to facilitate access to finance.

16.      Choice of Financing Instrument. The choice of the Program-for-Results (PforR)
instrument responds to the GoB’s request to (i) shift the focus towards results rather than
investment execution; (ii) progressively consolidate the execution of all rural water supply
activities under harmonized country systems; (iii) take advantage of the preparation of the Program
to identify opportunities to strengthen country systems; and (iv) create financial incentives to
address bottlenecks for the implementation of the Program. The PforR is thus considered an
appropriate instrument to support the proposed Program. The GoB has confirmed its strong
commitment towards this instrument.

II.          PROGRAM DESCRIPTION
        A. Government program

17.     Providing universal access to water supply services is the GoB’s priority. The GoB aims
at financing and executing an ambitious plan to provide universal access to water supply in both
urban and rural areas. 22 To achieve this objective, the GoB aims to allocate public sector financing
and leverage PPPs where possible. The GoB has demonstrated a high level of commitment to
achieving this goal, with adequate planning, upstream institutional reforms, allocation of public
funds and mobilization of both donor and private financing.

18.     GoB’s planned investments for universal rural water supply. The PDDAEPMR provides
an estimate of the investment needed to achieve universal coverage with improved rural water
services.23 According to the Plan, universal coverage will be achieved when all rural population
has access to water supply services within a 30 minute-round trip to fetch water. This will be
measured based on the number of standpipes and household connections in service, using the
assumptions that each public standpipe serves 250 people whereas each household connection
serves 24 people. The PPDAEPMR also envisages that, by 2021, half of the rural population will
have access to water supply at home. Universal coverage will be achieved through the construction
of new piped water systems, the rehabilitation or expansion of existing piped water systems as
well as through the construction or rehabilitation of hand pumps. The latter are mainly considered
to be a transitory solution towards piped water supply, as there is strong demand in rural areas for
piped water supply solutions and for household connections in particular. Investments needed for
providing universal access to water supply in rural areas were estimated at FCFA 314 billion
(US$560 millions) in the PDDAEPMR and would benefit approximatively 5.5 million
beneficiaries. The investment needs are split between the construction of new piped water systems,
rehabilitation or expansion of existing piped water systems (76 percent of the total of investment
estimates) and the construction or rehabilitation of hand pumps (24 percent). This expenditure
program is expected to be financed through GoB’s own resources and Development Partners
financing. Its implementation is to be executed by the ANAEPMR and started in early 2018. The


22
     Programme d’Actions du Gouvernement : Actions 42, 43, 44 (PAG 2016-2021).
23
     26,426 rural localities are included in 74 of Benin’s 77 municipalities.

                                                                    6
table below illustrates the contribution of the Program to the Government program as further
detailed in the following section.

19.    To ensure delivery of quality and sustainable services, the GoB also wants to implement
reforms to strengthen service delivery arrangements through the ANAEPMR in charge of
developing the sector’s assets and delegating service delivery to private operators recruited under
regional affermage contracts within an appropriate regulatory framework.

                         Table 1: Program contribution to the Government program

                                                                    Programme AQUA-VIE
               Government program
                                                                       (PforR Program)

                    Construction of new piped water
                                                         Will finance nearly 50 percent of the total
                    systems, rehabilitation or
                                                         investment needs, with a focus on localities
                    expansion of existing piped
 Increase access                                         with lower access to rural water supply
                    water systems in 74
 to water supply                                         services (Results Area 1)
                    municipalities
 service
                    Rehabilitation of hand pumps in
                                                                                   -
                    74 municipalities

                                                         Will finance key contribution
 Strengthen service delivery arrangements
                                                         (Results Area 2)



   B. Program Development Objective and key results

20.     The Program Development Objective (PDO) is to increase access to water supply services
and to strengthen service delivery arrangements in selected rural areas.

21.     Key Results Indicators. Achievement of the PDO will be measured through the following
indicators:
   x   People provided with access to improved water sources (including female) [Number]
   x   Piped rural water supply systems managed by regional operators [%]
   x   Publication by the ANAEPMR of bi-annual service monitoring reports [Number]


   C. PforR Program Scope

22.    The Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program (Programme AQUA-VIE) will
support a considerable investment program to increase access to rural water supply services as
well as ambitious reforms to strengthen service delivery arrangements. The proposed PforR is
embedded in GoB’s priorities to provide universal access to water supply services and to
professionalize service delivery. The Program is structured around two Result Areas.



                                                   7
23.   Firstly, the Program will support investments in piped rural water supply systems to rapidly
expand access to support the GoB achieve its ambitious targets for the sector.

24.    Secondly, the Program will strengthen service delivery arrangements through
comprehensive reforms of the rural water supply sector, based on the following principles: (i)
delegation of provision of rural water supply services to the ANAEPMR as the asset-holding
company for the development of rural water supply systems, and the establishment of
accountability mechanisms between the ANAEPMR, the GoB, municipalities and citizens; (ii)
delegation of service delivery to private operators through regional performance-based affermage
contracts with the aim to improve the quality and sustainability of the expanded water supply
systems; and (iii) development and approval of appropriate tariff policy and regulation
arrangements to contribute to sector financial sustainability.

25.     Rationale for the proposed reforms to strengthen service delivery arrangements. The
proposed reforms build on lessons learned from the decentralization process, from a decade of
experience with private sector participation in rural water supply services in the country, and from
similar reforms supported by the World Bank in the region. Existing institutional models for rural
water service delivery have not translated into the full expected benefits in terms of expanding
access, improving service and ensuring sustainability. This is particularly due to difficulties faced
by municipalities to design, bid and manage performance-based contracts and to fulfill their
financial obligations to invest in rehabilitation and expansion of water supply systems. In addition,
professionalization of services has remained limited, due to the fact that existing private operators
and other service providers operate at a small scale and have limited access to finance. The
principles of the reforms mentioned above have been designed to address these sector challenges.

               Box 1: Theory of Change – Delivering quality and sustainable rural water supply services


   Delivering quality and sustainable rural water supply services is at the heart of the reforms initiated by the
   GoB in the rural water sector. The underlying Theory of Change is shown on the figure below.




                                                          8
   This Theory of Change assumes that the strengthening of the service delivery arrangements supported by the
   Program will lead to improved quality and sustainability of the expanded access in rural areas.

   Service delivery arrangements will be strengthened as the ANAEPMR will have greater capacity to design,
   contract and monitor the performance of works contractors and private operators developing rural water supply
   assets as well as monitor service delivery. Also, performance-based affermage contracts will introduce strong
   incentives for the regional operators to deliver on expanding access and improving service quality and
   sustainability. Larger service areas will allow for attracting more professional operators, with greater ability to
   attract trained personnel and necessary finance, and a greater interest in delivering good quality and sustainable
   services to maintain their reputation. Signing a limited number of regional contracts will facilitate performance
   monitoring. Data collection will be performed through a reliable web-based platform and the ANAEPMR will
   produce regular reports on asset management and service performance. These reports will be publicly available
   and will allow municipalities and Government to ensure that services are adequately performed and be
   accountable to their citizens. Tariffs will be regulated by the Government to ensure financial viability of the
   regional operators as well as to contribute to the financing for the development of the rural water supply
   systems. Where tariff proceeds are not sufficient, the Government will commit to allocate sufficient funding,
   including through the Planning Contract signed with the ANAEPMR, to cover the costs of service expansion
   and rehabilitation as and when necessary.

   Achieving these expected outcomes will only be possible if adequate checks and balances are in place. These
   checks and balances will be established as shown below. The Planning Contract and service monitoring reports
   will make the ANAEPMR accountable for its responsibilities defined in the Framework Partnership
   Agreements (FPAs). The regional affermage contracts will be performance-based and will incentivize the
   operators to deliver improved services. Citizen engagement and grievance redress mechanisms will ensure
   citizens and users are consulted and can voice their needs and concerns during planning, design, construction
   and operation phases.




   The full design and implementation of the reforms supported by the Program will take time, and will be
   achieved during the Program implementation. These reforms will lay solid foundations for strengthening
   service delivery arrangements and therefore for the long-term improvement of quality and sustainable rural
   water supply services at the national level.


26.     PforR Program boundaries. The Program will finance a portion of the GoB’s planned
program of expenditures in universal rural water supply over the period 2018-2024. More
specifically, the Program will support the construction, rehabilitation and expansion of piped rural

                                                           9
water supply systems in selected localities with lower access to rural water supply services24 of
the municipalities having signed the FPA. Thus, the Program will correct existing disparities in
access as identified in the PDDAEPMR and in line with Government’s priorities. In addition, the
Program will strengthen institutional capacities of the ANAEPMR as the rural water sector’s asset
holding company and enable the implementation of professionalized service delivery models
through regional performance-based affermage contracts in the 74 municipalities where rural water
services are provided.25

27.    PforR Program financing. The Program has an estimated total cost of US$240 million,
The World Bank will provide the majority of the financing totaling US$220 million, which will
include a credit from the IDA Scale-up Facility (SUF) in the amount of US$170 million, and
US$50 million in the form of an IDA grant, whereas the GoB will provide US$20 million from its
own resources. The total budget represents 42 percent of the total estimated financial needs to
implement the PPDAEPMR.
                                                Table 2: Program financing (US$ million)


                                            Source                                           Amount

                            Borrower                                                           20

                            IDA                                                                50

                            IDA Scale-Up Facility                                             170

                            Total Program financing                                           240



28.    Description of the Program activities. The Program activities are structured in two Results
Areas. All Program activities will be executed by the ANAEPMR.

29.    Results Area 1: Increase access to water supply services. Under this Result Area, the
Program will support investments in piped rural water supply systems to rapidly expand access, at
a pace not previously experienced in the country. This will be supported through:

       x     1.1. Construction of new water supply systems, including (i) the construction of production,
             pumping, treatment and storage infrastructure, distribution networks, standpipes, and
             household connections; and (ii) development of associated studies and works supervision.
             It is estimated that the Program will finance the construction of 270 new water supply
             systems. The production, pumping, treatment and storage infrastructure, distribution
             networks and standpipes will be constructed by works contractors. Responsibility for the
             operation of the new water supply systems will be delegated to the regional operators at
             completion of the works. The regional operators will be in charge of maintaining the
             networks as well as constructing new household connections as part of their performance-
             based affermage contracts.

24
     Coverage rate in each department is provided in Annex 4.
25
     One department is exclusively urban and therefore excluded from the PforR boundaries.

                                                                       10
   x    1.2. Rehabilitation and expansion of existing water supply systems, including (i) the
        rehabilitation and/or expansion of production, pumping, treatment and storage
        infrastructure, distribution networks, standpipes and household connections; and (ii)
        development of associated studies and works supervision. It is estimated that the Program
        will finance the rehabilitation and/or expansion of 360 existing water supply systems. The
        responsibility for the operation of existing water supply systems in defined regional areas
        will be progressively transferred to the regional operators where there is no contract
        officially in place with a local private operator or at completion of those contracts. Once
        the responsibility of the operation has been delegated to the regional operators, they will
        be in charge of rehabilitating and/or expanding the production, pumping, treatment and
        storage infrastructure, distribution networks as part of their performance-based affermage
        contracts.

30.    Regional operators will also be in charge of constructing the new household connections
and standpipes. The Program will subsidize the construction of new household connections as
water service users will pay the operators only a portion of the cost of these connections.

31.    It is estimated that the Program will give access to piped water to approximatively
1,660,000 rural people through the construction of 3,300 new standpipes and 34,500 new
household connections.

32.     All construction and rehabilitation works will be carried out using standardized design
parameters and construction standards developed by the ANAEPMR in coordination with the
MEM. The development of the water supply infrastructure will pay adequate consideration to the
sustainable management of water resources, improved water treatment methods and optimization
of energy consumption. The Program will directly support the improvement of water resource
management through enhanced study and monitoring of groundwater levels and abstractions. This
will be achieved through:(i) systematic hydrogeological and geophysical studies and investigations
to be performed as part of the design and construction of piped water supply systems; and (ii) the
systematic installation of piezometers equipped with data transmission system.

33.   Results Area 2: Strengthen service delivery arrangements. Under this Result Area, the
Program will strengthen service delivery arrangements of the rural water supply sector through:

    x   2.1. Supporting the establishment of performance-based contracts with regional
        operators, including (i) development of the FPAs between the MEM and municipalities
        defining the conditions and modalities of partnership between the ANAEPMR and
        municipalities for the planning, financing, execution and delegation of service provision
        of rural water supply systems to the ANAEPMR and empowering the ANAEPMR to
        award public service delegation contracts to regional operators. Signature of the FPAs is
        a pre-requisite for the signing of the performance-based affermage contracts; (ii) technical
        assistance for the preparation of the bidding documents and bidding process for the
        recruitment of regional operators that will enter into a performance-based affermage
        contract with the ANAEPMR for the operation of the rural water systems. It is expected
        that there will be six regional performance-based affermage contracts; (iii) development
        of a Planning Contract between the Government and the ANAEPMR defining their multi-
        year commitments and obligations for the achievement of the development objectives of

                                                11
        the rural water supply sector; (iv) development of a tariff policy that will apply to the
        regional operators’ performance-based contracts taking into account the Operator’s
        Remuneration and affermage fees for the ANAEPMR and for the municipalities; the
        Operator Remuneration defined by the performance-based affermage contract will include
        incentives for reducing NRW and improving bill collection; (v) development of regulatory
        arrangements for tariff and water service standards by the MEM; and (vi) carrying out a
        communication campaign targeting the Program’s stakeholders to prepare and accompany
        the implementation of the above activities.
    x   2.2. Capacity building of the rural water supply professionals, including (i) enhancing the
        training facilities; and (ii) development of a specific curriculum to train local rural water
        supply professionals, including local affermage operators who will be co-opted by the new
        regional operators to expand their workforce so as to take-over the management of a
        rapidly growing number of water supply systems. Training activities will aim at promoting
        the participation of women in the provision of rural water supply services.

    x   2.3. Capacity-building of the ANAEPMR, ministries in charge of water and health, and
        municipalities, including (i) capacity-building of the ANAEPMR to fully discharge its
        functions of asset-holding company for rural water supply services, through the
        enhancement of its capacity in investment planning and implementation for rural water
        supply, including the development of adequate information systems; (ii) strengthening
        ANAEPMR monitoring capacities of service delivery, including for the regional operators
        and other providers of rural water services, as well as the publication of service monitoring
        reports; and (iii) capacity-building of the ministries in charge of water and health,
        including any of their directorates, and municipalities to enhance service delivery
        monitoring from the ANAEPMR and support investments in piped rural water systems.
        The Program will also finance the Program’s Independent Verification Agent (IVA) and
        financial audit, and operating costs of the ANAEPMR.

34.     The design of the Program will contribute to both climate change mitigation and
adaptation. According to the World Bank climate screening unit, climate change is expected to
impact rainfall patterns in Benin. Rainfall during January-March and April-June are expected to
decrease and to increase during the periods July-September and October-December. Sea levels are
projected to rise throughout the 21st century and to increase by 0.4 meter (low emissions scenario)
to 0.7 meter (high emissions scenario) by year 2100. As a consequence, climate change could
affect existing water systems - mainly those dependent on groundwater from bedrock formation -
which could fail to deliver water in the future due to a decline in groundwater tables by over
pumping, saline intrusion near the coastal areas and unsustainable use of the aquifers.

35.     The design of the Program will contribute to building resilience against climate-change
risks affecting its area of intervention. The following activities will contribute to climate change
mitigation and adaptation:
    x   Systematic hydrogeological and geophysical analysis, and installation of piezometers
        equipped with data transmission system as part as the construction, rehabilitation and
        expansion works under Results Areas 1.1 and 1.2 will directly improve monitoring of
        groundwater levels and abstractions. Thus, the Program will create a decision support


                                                 12
        system to study the future behavior or potential of the aquifers, to adapt groundwater use
        in response to different climate changing conditions.

    x   The installation of properly designed pumps as part of the construction, rehabilitation and
        expansion works under Results Areas 1.1 and 1.2 will improve the energy efficiency of
        the piped water supply systems and will contribute to climate change mitigation through
        a reduction of Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions per volume of water pumped. Likewise,
        the standardized design parameters and construction standards developed by the
        ANAEPMR and applied for all works will encourage a switch from diesel/fuel generator
        towards more efficient energy sources, including greater reliance on renewable energy
        sources and connections to the grid.

    x   A reduction in water losses will be a key objective of the regional operators’ performance-
        based contracts developed and implemented under Results Area 2.1. Those operators will
        be incentivized through their remuneration formula to reduce water losses. This will
        reduce the amount of water to be pumped, treated and conveyed to deliver the service.
        This in turn will contribute to climate change adaptation, by reducing groundwater
        abstractions, thus putting less stress on existing water sources. The reduction of leakages
        under Results Area 2.1 is also yielding energy efficiency gains, thus contributing to
        climate change mitigation.

36.     The Program will establish mechanisms to hold the ANAEPMR accountable, increase
transparency, access to information and awareness. The reforms for strengthening service
delivery arrangements will go hand in hand with strengthening accountability responsibilities
between the ANAEPMR, the GoB, municipalities and citizens through the (i) signing of the
Planning Contract defining the multi-year commitments and obligations of the GoB and of the
ANAEPMR for achieving the development objectives of the rural water supply sector; and (ii)
obligations to publish bi-annual service monitoring reports including the updated inventory of
assets and operating data for all piped rural water supply systems. Moreover, the monitoring
reports will be published by the ANAEPMR and delivered to all the municipalities having
delegated their responsibilities under the Program through the FPAs.

37.     Private sector interest in the proposed regional performance-based affermage contracts.
The private sector has been involved in rural water supply service delivery for over 10 years in
Benin. As of 2017, approximatively 55 percent of the rural piped water supply systems were
operated by local private operators. The new delegation model supported by the Program is based
on assigning responsibilities for piped water supply systems at a regional scale and will include
responsibilities both for construction and management of water systems. These larger contracts
will generate a greater turnover, which in turn will allow attracting more professional service
providers and generate economies of scope for key support functions (including management,
supervision and training). These performance-based contracts should be more attractive both for
existing local private operators (who can form consortia) and for international operators. This
proposed delegation model is being tested in Senegal, where the bidding of the regional
performance-based affermage contracts has attracted a lot of interest from national and
international private operators, including the Senegalese national urban water supply utility. World
Bank assistance in the preparation and implementation of the proposed delegation model could be

                                                13
an element of comfort and transparency enhancement for interested private operators, as noted in
similar reforms in West Africa supporting PPPs in the water supply sector, and could therefore
foster private sector interest in the proposed contracts.

38.     The Program will support the implementation of regulation arrangements for the sector
and the definition of appropriate user tariffs. Under the proposed reforms, the operators’
remuneration and service performance will be regulated through the terms of their performance-
based affermage contracts, under the supervision of the ANAEPMR. As part of the Program
design, reports on service monitoring will be compiled bi-annually and made available to
municipalities, citizens and other Program stakeholders to strengthen accountability. User tariffs
will be regulated by the MEM. Approval of the tariff policy applicable in the affermage contracts’
service area is a pre-requisite to the initiation of the performance-based affermage contracts. User
tariffs will be defined to cover the operators’ remuneration plus a contribution to the financing of
the sector’s investments within the limits of the willingness- and ability-to-pay of the users.

39.    Program of expenditures. The table below summarizes the estimated expenditures of the
Program. None of the activities financed by the PEPRAU will be considered as an expenditure
under the Program.
                                    Table 3: Program of expenditures


                                                                                      Amount
                                   Results Areas
                                                                                    (US$ million)
     Results Area 1:        1.1 Construction of new water supply systems                97.5
     Increase access to     1.2 Rehabilitation and expansion of existing water
                                                                                        97.5
     water supply service   supply systems
                            2.1 Supporting the establishment of performance-
                                                                                         0.5
     Results Area 2:        based contracts with regional operators
     Strengthen service     2.2 Capacity building of the rural water supply
                                                                                         5.5
     delivery               professionals
     arrangements           2.3 Capacity-building of the ANAEPMR, ministries in
                                                                                        25.0
                            charge of water and health, and municipalities
                                                                      Contingency      14.0
                                                        Total Program financing        240.0

40.     The Program complements other government-led investments to increase access to
improved sanitation and to water supply services in rural and urban areas and builds on past
World Bank engagements in the rural water sector. Support for sanitation and hygiene services
in rural areas is provided to the MoH by UNICEF, the Global Sanitation Fund program
(Programme d'Amélioration de l'Accès à l'Assainissement et des Pratiques d'Hygiène en milieu
Rural - PAPHyR), and by NGOs such as Helvetas and Protos. The MoH has allocated geographical
areas of responsibility to these different funding agencies. In their respective areas, these agencies
are conducting sanitation and hygiene promotion campaigns, which include Community-Led Total
Sanitation (CLTS) campaigns, as well as training on household water treatment and safe water
handling. In addition, the German Corporation for International Cooperation (GiZ) is funding the
preparation of a National Strategy for Promotion of Hygiene and Basic Sanitation (2018-2030),
building on the previous strategy which ran till 2015. Parallel funding provided by GWSP will

                                                   14
help explore how investments in sanitation and hygiene could be improved and how coordination
between water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) investments could be improved. This could entail
setting up and managing linked-up databases to better identify “hot spots” identified based on
access to WASH services and health statistics. In urban areas, the World Bank-funded PEPRAU
project is providing support for the development of a National Strategy for Hygiene Promotion in
Urban Areas and will increase access to sanitation in the Grand-Nokoué region, which is Benin’s
largest urban area. The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation are also active in the urban sanitation
sector. The World Bank is also supporting the reform of the urban water supply sector through the
PEPRAU to implement the Government’s decision to break-up SONEB into an asset-holding
company and an operating company, to be managed through a Public-Private Partnership (PPP)
contract. This strategic support builds on the experience and added value of the World Bank in
comparable reforms implemented in Sub-Saharan Africa and complements investments in
SONEB’s infrastructure supported by the German Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW), the
European Investment Bank, the European Union, Chinese cooperation, the African Development
Bank, the Islamic Development Bank and Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA).

41.     The Program will adopt citizen engagement mechanisms that enable participation of
citizens in key decisions and the treatment of water users’ complaints. Communities in the
Program’s selected rural areas will be part of the planning, design and supervision of the works in
the piped water supply systems according to the Program’s social intermediation methodology
involving the Water User Associations (Association des Consommateurs d’Eau Potable – ACEPs).
ACEPs are present in all the municipalities of Benin. They are in charge of representing users’
interests through a committee at municipal level and representing bodies at locality level. The
social intermediation methodology, which will be part of the contractual obligations of the
engineering consultant, works contractors and private operators, will entail participation of
municipalities, ACEPs and citizens throughout the consultation process during the planning,
design and supervision phases of the works. Female beneficiaries will be included in the
consultation process through women focus groups in order to address women’s specific concerns
and to encourage their participation, as stipulated in the Program’s social intermediation
methodology. The Program will also include a grievance redress mechanism embedded in the
contracts for the works contractors and private operators to ensure that consumers’ complaints
related to the execution of works supported by the Program or to service delivery are heard,
recorded and promptly dealt with.

42.    The Program also supports communications campaigns among municipalities, citizens
and other stakeholders. Major public communications campaigns will be implemented under the
Program at different stages of the full design and implementation of the reforms in order to engage
municipalities, citizens and other Program’s stakeholders, regarding the reform agenda, its service
improvement objectives, as well as implications for tariffs.

43.    The design of the Program will contribute to address the gender gaps in terms of access
to water services and employment opportunities for women. The Program will improve access to
water supply services: this will translate into multiple impacts including improved living
conditions, health, school attendance, productivity and income. In 90 percent of rural households,
women and girls are responsible for fetching water: they will therefore particularly benefit from
the impacts of the Program. In addition, the participation of women in the operation of rural water
supply services is currently nearly existent. An assessment of the gender and social inclusion

                                                15
dimensions of the Program was carried out during preparation with GWSP support. Women were
consulted in gender-disaggregated groups to ensure their specific needs will be reflected in the
design and implementation of the Program. The assessment explored gender gaps in two distinct
areas: (i) in terms of gender-based difference in access to rural water services and (ii) in terms of
women’s participation and levels of empowerment in institutions participating in the governance,
delivery and supervision of water services, including at central level in the MEM/DG-Eau,
MoH/DNSP and ANAEPMR; and at local level, within municipalities, private sector operators,
Community-based Organizations (CBOs) and ACEPs. This assessment examined existing barriers
that currently limit women’s access to water services and need to be specifically addressed, such
as access to information, inadequate complaint-redress mechanisms or limited access to financial
services.

44.     The Program will monitor that the minimum percentage of women who should be part of
the municipal committees of the ACEP is achieved or exceeded. Hence the Program will ensure
women’s involvement in the ACEPs and their participation in decision-making processes. In
addition, training provided under the Program will have a particular focus on empowering women
to be more involved in the delivery of water services, through an enhanced participation of women
in the specific curriculum to train local rural water supply professionals developed under the
Results Areas 2.2 of the Program. This will be achieved through the dissemination of information
about the training opportunities targeting specifically female workers.

45.      A more detailed description of the Program is provided in Annex 1.

      D. Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs) and Verification Protocols

46.     Disbursement-Linked Indicators. The ANAEPMR and the World Bank have agreed on
Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs) that will trigger the World Bank disbursements under the
Program. Four DLIs have been selected. The DLIs are embedded in the results chain of the
Program and were selected so as to provide a clear incentive for achieving results and to support
the achievement of key Program milestones. The DLIs and their associated amounts have been
selected to create financial incentives to achieve critical but measurable results during the
implementation of the Program under the two Results Areas. The signature of the FPAs under DLI
3 “FPAs signed between the Government’s MEM and selected municipalities” is expected to be
achieved prior to the signing of the credit as a prior result.

47.     Verification Protocols of the Program. An IVA will be contracted to verify Program
results under Terms of Reference acceptable to the World Bank. The National Institute for
Statistics and Economic Analysis (Institut National de la Statistique et de l’Analyse Economique
- INSAE) will be the Program IVA. The technical assessment found that this institute fulfils the
minimum criteria for an IVA, including in terms of autonomy and adequate capacity. The INSAE
will enter into a Cooperation Agreement with the ANAEPMR that will transfer an annual budget
allocation to the INSAE to perform its IVA functions. The verification of the achievement of DLI
1, 2 and 3 will be done on a biannual basis, while the verification of the achievement of DLI 4 will
be done upon achievement of the objectives. The World Bank will also review compliance with
the DLI targets during implementation support missions, and for disbursement purposes, the World
Bank will make the final decision on whether DLIs have been achieved, as per World Bank Policy
and Procedure (BP 9.00).

                                                 16
       E. Capacity Building and Institutional Strengthening

48.     The Program will contribute to building capacity and strengthen institutions at various
levels. Activities under the Results Area 2 will directly contribute to institutionally strengthen the
rural water supply sector and to build the capacity of the local private sector. First, the Program
will build capacity of the newly created ANAEPMR by improving planning, asset management,
and monitoring of the regional operators, so it can carry out its function of asset-holding company
for rural water supply. Secondly the Program will strengthen training facilities and develop a
specific curriculum to train local rural water supply professionals and in turn to build a trained
workforce to respond to the human resources needs generated by the professionalization of water
supply service management in rural areas. Municipalities, DG-Eau and DNSP’s deconcentrated
services will also be strengthened as part of the Program.

49.     In addition, through the selection of the INSAE, an autonomous state-owned institute
currently placed under the authority of the Ministry of Plan and Development, the Program will
yield significant development benefits, by building capacity within a public agency whilst the
Government is looking to move rapidly towards a more results-based approach for the
management of external aid flows.

III.        PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION
       A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

50.     Institutional Implementation Arrangements of the Program. The ANAEPMR will be in
charge of implementing the Program, including the execution of all Program activities, the
management of the environmental and social effects, monitoring & evaluation (M&E), handling
result-based disbursements requests and consolidation of the Program financial reports. To
perform its functions, the ANAEPMR will count on its internal structure and on a substantial
deployment of technical assistance. Technical assistance provided to the ANAEPMR will be
financed by different sources including the Program, Development Partners and by the PEPRAU.26
The GoB will also organize the delegation of the provision of water supply services in rural areas
from municipalities to the ANAEPMR through the signing of the FPAs. The ANAEPMR will
prepare and let contractual arrangements signed with regional private operators.

51.    Operational Manuals of the ANAEPMR. The procedures for the implementation of the
Program will follow the ANAEPMR’s own procedures to the largest possible extent, as defined in
its Operational Manuals. However, procedures and elements specific to the Program design such
as the disbursement arrangements, Result Framework, DLI matrices, verification protocol,
Program Action Plan (PAP) will be included as annexes to the ANAEPMR’s Operational Manuals.




26
     PEPRAU’s activities will not be considered as an expenditure under the Program.

                                                                17
   B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E)

52.     Monitoring and Evaluation arrangements. The ANAEPMR will be in charge of M&E for
all Result Areas of the Program. The ANAEPMR has a dedicated internal department for the M&E.
For each indicator of its Result Framework, the ANAEPMR has defined a realistic methodology
for data collection. The nature of the financial instrument used for the Program, under which
disbursements require the proper reporting of the results achieved, is also expected to enhance the
mechanism for M&E of the Program results. M&E of the Program will also greatly benefit from
the universal roll-out of a web-based and geo-referenced management tool and monitoring
platform to cover all the existing and new piped water supply systems supported by the Program.
The ANAEPMR will be responsible for submitting the results reports, after verification by the
IVA, in order to request disbursements.

53.     M&E of the Program impacts on service quality and sustainability. The
professionalization of the service delivery in rural areas through regional performance-based
affermage contracts aims at improving the quality and sustainability of the expanded access to
rural water supply services. Incentives to strengthen service quality and the financial performance
of service delivery will be embodied in the remuneration of the private operators. However, the
Program does not include indicators derived from the performance-based affermage as part of the
Program results framework due to the following reasons: (i) the identification of indicators for
service quality and sustainability, and the definition of targets will require developing a good
understanding of the current baseline and the potential for improvement which will only be
possible once technical due diligence supported by the Program activities have been carried out;
and (ii) service improvements will only materialize towards the end of Program implementation,
once private operators are in place and have had the time necessary to deliver improvements. Based
on such considerations, the main focus of the Program results framework is on putting in place
reforms that will lay the foundations for the improvement of service quality and sustainability,
rather than specific levels of performance improvement within the Program period.

   C. Disbursement Arrangements

54.     Summary of disbursement arrangements. A Designated Account (DA) in XOF will be
opened at the Central Bank (BCEAO) to receive the amounts of the initial advance up to 20 percent
of the PforR amount as well as the amounts corresponding to the DLIs achieved. The DA will be
managed by the Caisse Autonome d’Amortissement (Autonomous Amortization Fund - CAA) of
the Ministry of Finances in charge of the mobilization of donors’ funds and management of debt
in Benin. The CAA will transfer the entire amount of the DA into a Treasure Saving Service
Account for Investment (TSSAI) opened at the GoB’s Treasury and managed by the ANAEPMR.
The TSSAI will ensure that request for payment from the Program contractors and providers will
not suffer from cash rationing and shortage. The TSSAI will also receive transfers from the GoB
through its budget execution procedure that will contribute to the Program financing. In addition,
the ANAEPMR will open a transactions account in a commercial bank to receive the government
contribution to support the operating costs of the Agency. The Finance and Administrator Director
(FAD) of the ANAEPMR will be appointed by the Minister of Finance as Public Accountant
(Agent Comptable Public) assigned to the Program to manage the TSSAI and the transactions
account. The funds transferred to the TSSAI and the transactions account, will be spent following


                                                18
the ANAEPMR financial and accounting procedure manual. All payments will be signed by the
Managing Director and the FAD of ANAEPMR.

55.     A more detailed description of the disbursement arrangements is presented in the Annex 5
and in the Integrated Fiduciary Systems Assessment (IFSA).

IV.      ASSESSMENT SUMMARY

      A. Technical

56.    As part of the Program preparation, a TA of the Program was carried out. The TA
concluded that the Program is strategically relevant and technically sound. A number of
weaknesses have been identified which could be addressed through the adoption of key measures
included in the PAP. The Annex 4 provides a more detailed summary of the Program TA.

57.      Strategic relevance. The Program has a particularly high strategic relevance for the GoB.
It will contribute to fund a substantial portion of the GoB’s national program to deliver universal
access to water services in rural areas, which is a key development objective for the country. It
will support the establishment of institutional, contractual and financial arrangements that will
enable the GoB to achieve its strategic priorities to provide universal access to water services in
rural areas, strengthen sector governance and professionalize rural water services. The Program
will significantly contribute to delivering one of the 45 flagship projects identified in the PAG,
which aims to deliver universal access to water services by 2021. It will support the
implementation of the National Strategy for Rural Water Supply 2017-2030 adopted in May 2017
and the associated National Master Plan for the Development of the Rural Water Supply Sector
(PPDAEPMR). The Program will contribute to funding improved access to 1.6 million people, or
close to 30 percent of the overall national target to reach universal coverage by 2021. The
prioritization of the Program interventions will seek to redress substantial disparities in rural water
service coverage across the country. It will support the core intervention included in the
PPDAEPMR, which consists of extending existing and constructing new piped waters supply
systems in rural areas and to provide greater access through household connections, in line with
the Sustainable Development Goals.

58.    The Program’s focus on the rural sector will benefit a substantial portion of Benin’s
population (estimated at 70 percent of Benin’s population by 2021), which also tends to be the
poorest with limited economic development opportunities. Important disparities between urban
and rural poverty persist and have tended to increase, with poverty rates estimated at 35.8 percent
and 43.6 percent respectively.

59.     Technical soundness. The Program is technically sound. It will allow addressing a number
of identified weaknesses in the rural water sector in Benin, through an emphasis on greater service
standardization, increasing the scale of service delivery and strengthening of service quality
monitoring. This in turn will provide a basis for greater professionalization of service delivery and
generate economies of scope and some economies of scale, when piped water supply systems serve
multiple localities. The design of the proposed Program builds on on-going projects in the rural
water supply sector and on Benin’s experience in private sector participation for service delivery
                                                  19
and lessons learned from similar reforms in Sub-Saharan Africa. The TA formulated
recommendations to address issues related to ensuring availability and quality of water resources
used for drinking water supply.

60.      The Program approach to deliver access through a mix of standpipes and household
connections is in line with an ongoing shift in rural customers’ preferences towards household
connections, whilst recognizing the fact that standpipe supplies provide a good first step and will
be needed for some time, particularly in the poorest areas. The Program will provide an opportunity
to roll-out standard norms for the development and operation of piped rural water systems, which
in turn should generate economies of scale in procurement and efficiency gains. One area that will
need particular attention is that of water treatment, as existing approaches to water treatment are
unsatisfactory, both in terms of types of equipment and ongoing monitoring. Finally, a key area of
weakness in the Program’s technical design is linked to insufficient coordination between rural
water supply investments and investments in related interventions in hygiene promotion,
sanitation, nutrition so as to maximize health impacts. The TA recommended that coordination be
increased, at least through information sharing, so as to identify potential “hot spots” and take
account of these aspects when prioritizing rural water supply investments.

61.     Institutional arrangements. The Program’s institutional arrangements are sound and well-
aligned with GoB’s ongoing reforms of the rural water sector. However, these institutional
arrangements are untested in Benin, and could therefore generate substantial risks if the reform
process is not adequately managed. The implementing agency, ANAEPMR, benefits from high-
level support from the GoB and has the financial resources to mobilize the technical assistance
required to prepare the technical, financial, environmental and social studies underpinning the
design of the proposed Program. Having a main counterpart for Program implementation will
provide clarity of focus and leadership for implementation of the Program, as it is clearly aligned
with the core mandate of the Agency. Nevertheless, the ANAEPMR is an agency recently created
without execution records whilst mandated to implement a Program of an unprecedented
magnitude in Benin. As ANAEPMR is expected to be efficient (with a target number of staff
totaling 24), it will need to use technical assistance strategically and manage it well. It will be able
to benefit from considerable experience in the sub-region with the creation and operationalization
of similar asset-holding agencies, in which the World Bank was substantially involved and will be
able to facilitate experience transfers. The creation of the Agency effectively amounts to the
recentralization of many functions that had previously been decentralized to municipalities or that
had been attributed to the MEM, including for monitoring water services. The signing of the FPAs
between the GoB and municipalities will be supported at the highest political level, to ensure that
municipalities are fully in agreement with its institutional arrangements.

62.    A key factor of success for strengthening service delivery will be ensuring close
coordination with the deconcentrated services of both the MEM (DG-Eau) and the MoH (DNSP).
Both these Ministries have staff on the ground that have been in charge of monitoring various
aspects of water service quality. Service monitoring is weak at present, with limited information
on service quality available at central level, despite having an advanced web-based monitoring
platform in place. The TA recommended that the institutional arrangements be clarified and
formalized through a number of legal and contractual documents, including a multi-year Planning
Contract between the GoB and the ANAEPMR.


                                                  20
63.     In addition, the proposed regional performance-based contracts with private operators are
service delivery models involving private sector participation of a scale which has not yet been
implemented in Benin. Signing contracts at a regional scale has been identified as a necessary
condition for achieving targeted results in a relatively short period of time, for mobilizing
professional operators and for tackling identified weaknesses at the level of municipalities for
preparing, tendering and supervising private operator contracts. Technical assistance will be
provided to define adequate service areas and design the contracts. Professionalizing services will
also require developing adequate human resource capacities on the ground, which is an area that
was built into the design of the Program following an in-depth assessment.

64.     Program expenditure framework. The Program will be mostly financed by the World
Bank credit and grant. The DLIs have been designed in such a way so as to eliminate cashflow
constraints for the ANAEPMR. The results framework and associated DLIs have been designed
to maintain incentives for efficient delivery throughout the length of the Program. The overall cost
of the supported Program including the portion financed by the World Bank are included in the
multi-year expenditure programming documents as well as the program for priority investment
(PIP). Investments in piped rural water supply systems will mostly be funded with public funds,
as these are deemed to be basic social infrastructure. Underlying unit costs were assessed to be in
line with comparable regional benchmarks. The Program seeks to design operators’ performance-
based contracts in a way that mobilize some private sector investments, in the form of direct
investments in network rehabilitation and extensions as part of performance-based affermage
contract obligations.

65.     Economic analysis. The Program will benefit approximately 1.6 million people who will
receive improved services in a number of ways. They will have to spend less time fetching water
and will benefit from higher drinking water quality. They will be able to access greater water
volumes, in line with minimum standards for hygienic practices and will suffer from less service
interruptions due to technical breakdowns. Particular attention will be paid to ensuring that women
and girls can benefit from improved access, so that they can in turn benefit from greater economic
opportunities (including from being involved in water service delivery) and educational
opportunities. In addition, the Program will generate local jobs in the area of water supply delivery
and will reduce pressure on the use of local groundwater resources (through stronger monitoring
and management of these resources) and of energy sources (through an emphasis on connecting
piped rural water supply systems to the grid or relying on solar energy).

66.      An economic analysis was conducted to compare costs and benefits with and without the
Program. Costs and benefit streams were projected over 30 years and discounted at a social
discount rate of 8 percent. Benefit streams were estimated for four groups of beneficiaries to take
account of the different ways in which they will benefit from the Program. Costs included all
Program costs as well as operating and maintenance costs and households’ contributions to
connection costs. The construction of new piped rural water supply systems will benefit
approximately 827,000 people who had no prior access to improved water supplies and will either
get water through standpipes or household connections. This will result in greater time gains and
illness reduction. Rehabilitated systems will generate reductions in operating costs as well as time
gains, health benefits and an increase in consumer surplus for populations that switch from


                                                 21
standpipe supplies (charged at an average price of CFAF 800 per m3) to household connections
(for which water is charged at an average price of CFAF 500 per m3). The analysis yielded a
benefit-cost ratio of 5.44, which is in line with international estimates of similar investments in
areas with limited access to water supply. The net present value of costs and benefits is US$1.8
billion, which is equivalent to an annual net benefit per person of US$38. Overall, the Internal
Rate of Return (IRR) for the investment was estimated at 144 percent. A sensitivity analysis was
conducted on a number of parameters, including the social discount rate, the value of time and the
impact of the investments on diarrheal illness reduction, and operating costs. The Net Present
Value (NPV) remained highly positive under all these scenarios, which implies that the Program
will generate high positive returns for the economy.

67.     World Bank value-added support. The World Bank assistance to develop and support this
Program will facilitate the sharing of lessons learned from successful rural water projects globally,
while also building capacity for results-based planning and financing in the national Program. In
particular, World Bank support provides incentives for balanced, efficient investment in water
supply, as well as improved governance and financial processes.

       B. Fiduciary

68.     Integrated Fiduciary Systems Assessment (IFSA). The IFSA concluded that the
Program’s Integrated Fiduciary Systems have the capabilities to provide reasonable assurance that
the financing proceeds will be used for intended purposes with the objective of supporting the
achievement of the Program objectives.

69.      The IFSA covered mainly, the newly created ANAEPMR27, which is the Program
implementing agency. The ANAEPMR is under the supervision of the Presidency. All the Program
activities and payments will be executed by ANAEPMR. The Agency is implementing a World
Bank-financed project (P156738) since July 2017. The assessment focused on the quality of the
legislative and institutional framework for Public Financial Management (PFM), procurement and
Governance and Anti-Corruption (GAC) applicable to the Program, as well as the fiduciary
capacity of the ANAEPMR in terms of planning and budgeting, budget execution, internal controls
and external auditing. The design of the fiduciary arrangements of the Program considered also
two Circulars28 (ad hoc arrangements) applicable to government agencies. The Program will be
implemented using the procedures described in the administrative, Financial Management (FM)
and procurement manual of the ANAEPMR. The budget of the Program allocated to ANAEPMR
every year, will be made available to the Agency through the budgetary mechanism of "capital
transfer". The ANAEPMR will use its own procedures described in its manuals to execute the
budget, proceed payments to contractors and consultants, report on the execution of the budget
and to comply with the auditing requirements.

70.    Overall, the legislative and institutional framework for PFM in Benin is globally
considered acceptable. There is also an adequate legal, regulatory and institutional framework in

27
     Decree No 2017-039 of January 25, 2017.
28 Annex 2 of the Letter no 11-c/MEF/DC/SGM/DGB/DPSELF/SPSB of January 5, 2018 and no

950/MEF/DC/SGM/DGB/DPSELF of March 26, 2018.


                                                       22
place in Benin on fraud and anti-corruption. The framework is in line with or approximates
international standards. In addition, Benin has transposed the West Africa Economic and Monetary
Union (WAEMU) directives, regulations, and rules on public finances into national law and has
adopted in October 2017, a new procurement law29. The operationalization of the WAEMU
directives such as the budget program and the new procurement code is on-going with some delays
observed. A reform of the institutions of internal controls to conform with international best
practice and improve their performance is being implemented under the responsibility of Bureau
des Analyses et Investigations (Presidency’s Office for Analysis and Investigations - BAI).

71.     The assessment found a number of weaknesses and risks in the overall fiduciary systems
and GAC of the Program, warranting the design of action plans to mitigate them. The key
integrated fiduciary risks are the following:
        x   Rules and the institutional framework for internal controls are in place at the national level
            and deemed adequate but the overall performance of institutions of internal control faces
            significant challenges: some rules of ex ante control of expenditure are redundant or
            excessive. The internal audit process is largely focused on pre-payment audits. The
            internal control bodies do not have sufficient human and financial resources, and their
            capacities requires strengthening. The Chamber of accounts of the Supreme Court is
            poorly equipped (limited number of staff; human resources capacity challenges and
            limited financial resources) to handle its audit review (accounts) function as required by
            International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions (INTOSAI). All these
            weaknesses could create a fertile ground for fraud and corruption in budget execution,
            hence undermining the economy, efficiency, and effectiveness of spending of the Program.
       x    Current legislative and institutional arrangements for procurement at country and Program
            levels, make the implementation of Program activities difficult: the new procurement code
            promulgated by the Government on October 19, 2017 is not fully operationalized due to
            delays in the drafting and approval of the texts (decrees and arrétés) needed to support its
            implementation, as well as the development of standards bidding documents. Furthermore,
            the ANAEPMR does not have a procurement control unit as required by law and the person
            in charge of approving contracts is not yet appointed.
       x    Structural problems with cash flow management at the national level combined with long
            delays in procurement and redundancy in tasks performed by the actors in expenditure
            procedures, cause long delays in processing transactions. The 2014 Public Expenditure
            and Financial Accountability (PEFA) report30 revealed that “Predictability in the
            availability of funds for commitment of expenditures” is weak with a score of D+.
            Furthermore, the credibility of the budget in terms of aggregate expenditure out-turn
            compared to original approved budget is a concern in Benin. According to the 2014 PEFA
            report, over the past three years, the actual expenditure has recorded a difference
            corresponding to an amount equivalent to more than 15 percent of budgeted expenditure
            (29.4 percent in 2011, 21.8 percent in 2012 and 17.7 percent in 2013). Specifically, in the
            water sector, the budgets allocated to rural levels were executed at 10 percent in 2015; 8.3
            percent in 2016 and 39.8 percent in 2017.

29
     Law No 2017- 04 promulgated by the Government on October 19, 2017.
30
     https://pefa.org/sites/default/files/BI-Nov14-PFMPR-Public.pdf

                                                            23
    x   Weaknesses in compliance with the established legal and institutional framework for
        combating fraud and corruption at the national level and specifically in the water and
        sanitation sector, which could undermine the ability of the authorities to detect and address
        the occurrence of fraud and corruption risk in a timely and effective manner and impact
        the achievement of the Program objective. The 2017 Transparency International
        Corruption Perception Index ranked Benin 85th in the world, a deterioration from 80th in
        2014.

72.      Program Action Plan. The overall Program integrated fiduciary risk is rated high. The
above weaknesses and risks will be mitigated progressively through the implementation of the
PAP including (i) the adoption and promulgation of the decrees required for the implementation
of the new procurement code and standard bidding documents; (ii) the creation of a procurement
control unit and appointment of the person responsible for approving contracts at ANAEPMR; and
(iii) bi-annual joint technical, procurement and financial internal audit and inspection missions of
the Program to ensure efficient use of the Program funds. Hands on support as well as capacity
strengthening of the Agency and consideration of financing opportunities available to include the
institutions of controls mainly the Inspectorate General of the Ministry (Inspection Générale du
Ministère- IGM) of the MEM, are also planned during the entire implementation period of the
Program.

73.     Based on the expenditure program, no contracts in excess of the PforR policy exclusion
limits have been identified.

74.    A detailed report on Procurement and FM arrangements as well as governance and anti-
corruption is presented in Annex 5 of the PAD.

   C. Environmental and Social Effects

75.     Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA). An ESSA of the Program has
been conducted by the World Bank in close collaboration with counterparts to identify potential
environmental and social impacts under the Program. The draft ESSA was disclosed to the public
on April 22, 2018. In accordance with the requirements of World Bank’s policy, the ESSA assessed
the national systems with respect to institutional capacity and performance, policy and regulatory
bases, consultation mechanisms and Grievance Management to mitigate the impacts. The portfolio
of the Program’s activities to be undertaken was also analyzed to identify expected environmental
and social effects. The ESSA was based on a review of the legal, regulatory and institutional
framework related to environmental and social matters, broad consultation of the Program
stakeholders, and information collected during on-site visits. The assessment also drew on
experience from implementation of safeguard instruments under other previous World Bank
projects in Benin. The Annex 6 provides a more detailed summary of the Program ESSA.

76.     Environmental and social risks. In terms of environmental and social risk management,
the proposed Program is considered adequate for PforR financing. The Program will have limited
environmental and social impacts. The Program is not financing any investment posing a
potentially significant environmental and social risk and various negative, varied, irreversible and
unprecedented negative impacts (e.g., Category A type projects).


                                                 24
77.      Environmental and social impacts. The Program activities are expected to have an overall
positive effect that should be maintained over the long term, including: access to drinking water,
less hardship in fetching drinking water supply and time savings for women, reduced waterborne
diseases, improvement of living conditions, and job creation. Adverse social impacts are
anticipated to be moderate. Investments may include some forms, more or less temporary, of
involuntary resettlement of residential or business households, acquisition of private lands or
restrictions on access to local social and economic infrastructure. However, their negative social
impacts will be time-limited and spatially restricted (due to the relatively low land requirements
of the various investments planned under the program). Adverse environmental impacts, which
are expected to be typical construction impacts that are site-specific and generally limited to air or
water pollution, production and management of waste, use and disposal of hazardous materials,
etc., will be minimal and easily mitigated. Other non-construction works could have some adverse
environmental impacts or risks (on water uptake, water contamination, etc.), but adequate
measures (including modeling studies) will be taken during the preparation and implementation
phases.

78.     Environmental and social systems. The Beninese system for environmental management
systems is relatively comprehensive and is in many ways consistent with the core principles of
World Bank’s PforR policy. Benin’s legal framework and related action plans are conducive to
environmental protection. Environmental management tools are aimed to address environmental
aspects connected to development activities and investments. The ESSA analyzed the strengths,
gaps, risks and opportunities of these systems against the core principles and key planning
elements intended to ensure that PforR operations are designed and implemented in a manner that
maximizes potential environmental and social benefits, while avoiding, minimizing, or otherwise
mitigating significant adverse environmental or social impacts that are diverse or unprecedented.

79.     Gaps between national systems and World Bank requirements. The ESSA found some
gaps with Program requirements. For example, national and local institutions in charge of social
and environmental assessments do not have enough human resources and adequate financial means
to enforce the laws. Awareness of the problems of environmental management at the level of all
actors is low. Environmental and social management rules and procedures may not be
implemented properly and current environmental regulations may not be enforced in a timely
manner. Furthermore, although Benin's legal / regulatory system includes safety provisions on
construction sites and national policies and guidelines concerning the safety and health of the
public and workers, the national Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) system does not include
all aspects of public safety and workers. There is a general lack of awareness of public health and
safety issues, particularly with respect to exposure to hazardous materials. In terms of involuntary
reinstallation, although compensations of the affected persons are fixed on the basis of the
consistency and value of the goods and take into account the surplus value or the depreciation of
the planned execution of the non-expropriated part, customary land ownership must be confirmed
before being compensated, informal land titles are not recognized by national legislation and there
are no specific formal resettlement assistance measures for vulnerable people. Finally, strong and
timely public consultations and attention to grievance redress mechanisms that are easily
accessible to communities are some additional areas of improvement. The PAP has been designed
to address those weaknesses.


                                                 25
80.     Technical Manual. The ESSA described the process aimed at screening individual sub-
projects in order to identify the nature and the scope of their social and environmental impacts,
define the appropriate safeguard instruments, and monitor the implementation of adequate
corrective and mitigating measures. All these elements should be detailed in an Environmental and
Social Management Guidelines (Guide Référentiel pour la Gestion Environnementale et Sociale -
GRGES), aimed at supporting ANAEPMR to establish clear procedures to guide the assessment,
management, and monitoring of environmental and social impacts of sub-projects. Moreover, at
local level, ANAEPMR will set up a grievance management system, with the participation of
representatives of civil society organizations and the private sector and other stakeholders.

81.     Consultation on the ESSA. Consultation has been completed during the preparation of the
ESSA. This consultation highlighted: (a) the fact that land law regulations are new and support
will be needed in implementation; (b) the need to adapt communication materials to local
languages and beliefs and support implementation over a longer time period; and (c) the challenges
for sustainability of water supply schemes. These issues are being addressed through the design of
the Program.

82.     Grievance Redress: Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely
affected as a result of a Bank supported PforR operation, as defined by the applicable policy and
procedures, may submit complaints to the existing Program grievance redress mechanism or the
World Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are
promptly reviewed in order to address pertinent concerns. Affected communities and individuals
may submit their complaint to the WB’s independent Inspection Panel which determines whether
harm occurred, or could occur, as a result of WB non-compliance with its policies and procedures.
Complaints may be submitted at any time after concerns have been brought directly to the World
Bank's attention, and Bank Management has been given an opportunity to respond. For
information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank’s corporate Grievance Redress
Service (GRS), please visit http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For information on how to submit
complaints to the World Bank Inspection Panel, please visit www.inspectionpanel.org.

   D. Risk Assessment
83.      Risk Assessment. The risk assessment is informed by the results of the Technical, Fiduciary
and Environmental and Social systems assessments. In view of the substantial level of risk with
respect to institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability, as well as the high fiduciary
risk, the overall risk rating of the operation is high as detailed below:
               Risk                                                           Rating
               Political and Governance                                       Substantial
               Macroeconomic                                                  Moderate
               Sector Strategies and Policies                                 High
               Technical Design of Program                                    Moderate
               Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability   High
               Fiduciary                                                      High
               Environ mental and Social                                      Moderate
               Stakeholders                                                   Moderate
               Overall Risk                                                   High


                                                  26
Overall Risk Rating Explanation

84.     Main risks identified. The main risks rated substantial or high relate to political and
governance, sector strategies, the institutional capacity for implementation and to the fiduciary
risk. The Program is the first PforR in Benin, which may require adjustments at the level of the
executing agency staff used to implement more traditional investment projects.

85.     While the ANAEPMR benefits from direct support of the Presidency and from financial
resources to prepare the Program, the Program’s main executing agency was only established in
2017. It does not have a track record at this stage in program execution, as the Agency has so far
been focused on defining its strategy, hiring staff, establishing systems and mobilizing financing.
Substantial technical assistance is planned to support the Agency, but strong supervision and
management of technical assistance to support Program implementation will be essential to
success. In addition, capacity in deconcentrated services of the MEM and MoH, on which the
ANAEPMR will need to rely for service monitoring, is currently weak and will need to be
strengthened, once their residual roles and responsibilities have been more clearly defined.

86.     In terms of sector policy, the implementation model relies on the assumption that
municipalities, which have so far been responsible for providing WSS services in their municipal
area, will embrace the new and more centralized operating model for the sector. However, such a
change in modus operandi in the sector generates a political risk and potential confusion in terms
of the definition of residual responsibilities for municipalities and deconcentrated services of the
MEM and MoH. The FPAs to be signed between the GoB and the municipalities will address this
risk by defining clearly the conditions and modalities of partnership between the ANAEPMR and
municipalities for the planning, financing, execution and delegation of service provision of rural
water supply systems. The proposed regional performance-based contracts correspond to a private
sector participation model that has not yet been implemented in Benin, but will build on a decade
of experience of smaller affermage contracts and the existence of a pool of small-scale private
sector operators.

87.     Excessive emphasis on rapid infrastructure development may generate commonly
encountered challenges with supply-driven programs, including a lack of community engagement
resulting in inadequate siting or sizing of the investments and limited emphasis on promoting
behavior change at the level of water service users, which could limit potential impact. This will
be addressed through solid citizen engagement and grievance redress mechanisms embedded into
the Program design.

88.     In terms of the fiduciary risk, although there are adequate legal, regulatory and institutional
frameworks in place in Benin on fraud and anti-corruption, this has not translated significantly into
corruption reduction in the country. Control bodies do not have sufficient human and financial
resources, and their capacities remain limited. In terms of procurement, the new procurement code
is not yet fully operationalized. Besides, the ANAEPMR does not have a procurement control unit
as required by law and the person in charge of approving contracts is not appointed yet. Structural
problems with cash flow management can cause long delays in processing transactions. The
internal audit function within the ANAEPMR has not yet been created and proposed modalities
for transferring Program funds to the ANAEPMR prevent the intervention of a financial controller


                                                  27
for verifying the Agency’s expenditure commitments, execution, control and payments. A detailed
PAP has been designed to address these risks.


   E. Program Action Plan

89.     Definition and implementation of the PAP. The technical, fiduciary, environmental and
social assessments have identified areas to improve the performance and efficiency of the Program
and in turn increase the likelihood of achieving the Program results. The GoB has agreed to
implement an integrated set of critical actions, through the PAP presented in detail in Annex 8,
including implementation responsibility, timing and measurement of the actions. Those actions
will contribute to build the capacity of the Program’s institutions and/or strengthen the Program
systems. The implementation of the PAP along the agreed dates and completion measures will be
systematically supervised by the World Bank during the execution of the Program. The GoB will
finance each action of the PAP through the Program and/or GoB’s own resources.




                                               28
                                             Annex 1: Detailed Program Description


Program Development Objective (PDO)

1.     The PDO is to increase access to water supply services and to strengthen service
delivery arrangements in selected rural areas.

Government’s program of expenditures

2.     Providing universal access to water supply services is the GoB’s priority. The GoB
aims at financing and executing an ambitious plan to provide universal access to water supply
in both urban and rural areas by 2021.31 To achieve this objective, the GoB aims to allocate
public sector financing and leverage PPPs where possible. The GoB has demonstrated a high
level of commitment to achieving this goal, with adequate planning, upstream institutional
reforms, allocation of public funds and mobilization of both donor and private financing.

3.     GoB’s planned investments for universal rural water supply. The National Master
Plan for the Development of the Rural Water Supply Sector (Plan Directeur de Développement
du sous-secteur de l’Approvisionnement en Eau Potable en Milieu Rural – PDDAEPMR
estimates investment needed to achieve universal coverage with improved rural water
services.32 According to the Plan, universal coverage will be achieved when all rural population
has access to water supply services within a 30 minute-round trip to fetch water. This will be
measured based on the number of standpipes and household connections in service, using the
assumptions that each public standpipe serves 250 people whereas each household connection
serves 24 people. The PPDAEPMR also envisages that, by 2021, half of the rural population
will have access to water supply at home. Universal coverage will be achieved through the
construction of new piped water systems, the rehabilitation or expansion of existing piped
water systems, as well as through the construction or rehabilitation of hand pumps. The latter
are mainly considered to be a transitory solution towards piped water supply, as there is strong
demand in rural areas for piped water supply solutions and for household connections in
particular. Investments needed for providing universal access to water supply in rural areas
were estimated at FCFA 314 billion (US$560 millions) in the PDDAEPMR and would benefit
approximatively 5,500,000 beneficiaries. The investment needs are split between the
construction of new piped water systems, rehabilitation or expansion of existing piped water
systems (76 percent) and the construction or rehabilitation of hand pumps (24 percent).

4.     To ensure delivery of quality and sustainable services, the GoB also wants to implement
reforms to strengthen service delivery arrangements through the ANAEPMR in charge of
developing the sector’s assets and delegating service delivery to private operators recruited
under regional affermage contracts within an appropriate regulatory framework.




31
     Programme d’Actions du Gouvernement : Actions 42, 43, 44 (PAG 2016-2021).
32
     There are 26,426 rural localities in Benin which are included in 74 of its 77 municipalities.

                                                                           29
5.      The expenditure program is expected to be financed through GoB’s own resources and
Development Partners financing. Its implementation is to be executed by the ANAEPMR and
started in early 2018.
              Table A1.1: Planned investments to achieve in each of the departments (FCFA millions)

                       District              Investment needs               Percentage
                  Alibori                         40,511                       13%
                  Atacora                         29,365                        9%
                  Borgou                          42,950                       14%
                  Donga                           20,687                        7%
                  Collines                        18,050                        6%
                  Zou                             24,104                        8%
                  Plateau                         19,877                        6%
                  Couffo                          34,238                       11%
                  Mono                            21,304                        7%
                  Oueme                           21,050                        7%
                  Atlantique                      42,574                       14%
                               Total             314,711                      100%

Program Scope

6.      The Program (Programme AQUA-VIE) will support a considerable investment program
to increase access to rural water supply services and ambitious reforms to strengthen service
delivery arrangements. The proposed PforR is embedded in GoB’s priorities to provide universal
access to water supply services and to professionalize service delivery. The Program is built on
two Result Areas.

7.      Firstly, the Program will support investments in piped rural water supply systems to rapidly
expand access at a level not previously experienced in Benin with the aim to achieve its ambitious
targets for the sector.

8.     Secondly, the Program will strengthen service delivery arrangements through
comprehensive reforms of the rural water supply sector based on the following principles: (i)
delegation of provision of rural water supply services to the ANAEPMR as the asset-holding
company for the development of rural water supply systems, and the establishment of
accountability mechanisms between the ANAEPMR, the GoB, municipalities and citizens; (ii)
delegation of service delivery to private operators through performance-based regional affermage
contracts with the aim to improve the quality and sustainability of the expanded water supply
access; and (iii) development and approval of an appropriate tariff policy and regulation
arrangements to contribute to the financial sustainability of the sector.

9.      Rationale for the proposed reforms to strengthen service delivery arrangements. The
proposed reform builds on lessons learned from the decentralization process, from a decade of
experience with private sector participation in rural water supply services in the country, as well
as on lessons learned from similar reforms supported by the World Bank in the region. Existing

                                                       30
institutional models, under which municipalities are responsible for providing of water supply
services in rural areas through small-scale affermage contracts, direct municipal management or
community-based organizations, have not translated into the full expected benefits in terms of
expanding access, improving service and ensuring sustainability of services. This is particularly
due to difficulties faced by municipalities to fulfill their financial obligations to invest in
rehabilitation and expansion of water supply systems. In addition, the fact that existing private
operators and other service providers operate at a small scale, combined with a general lack of
technical capacity at municipal level for designing, bidding and managing incentivizing
performance-based contracts have prevented the professionalization of water supply service
delivery and opportunities to mobilize financing. Principles of the reforms supported by the
Program have been defined to address those challenges through the recentralization of the
development of rural water supply asset, strengthened service delivery monitoring and regulation,
and implementation of regional performance-based affermage contracts which will include
incentives to improve service quality and sustainability.

10.     The Program will lay the foundations and the incentives for improving quality and
sustainability of rural water supply services over the medium to long-term. The GoB has defined
reform principles, which the Program will support. The full design and implementation of the
reforms are part of the Development Objective of the Program and will be achieved as part of the
execution of the operation. These reforms, designed to address the rural water supply sector’s
challenges, will lay the institutional foundations for the long-term improvement of the quality and
sustainability of the rural water supply services expanded under the Program. The Program will
also build incentives for service delivery and service monitoring. This will be achieved through
the performance-based remuneration embedded into the regional affermage contracts that will
create direct incentives for service delivery improvement and through PforR disbursements being
linked to enhanced service monitoring by the ANAEPMR.
11.     PforR Program boundaries. The Program will finance a portion of the GoB’s planned
program of expenditures in universal rural water supply over the period 2018-2024. More
specifically, the Program will support the construction, rehabilitation and expansion of piped
rural water supply systems in selected localities with lower access to rural water supply
services33 of the municipalities having signed the FPAs. Thus, the Program will correct existing
disparities in access as identified in the PDDAEPMR and in line with Government’s priorities.
In addition, the Program will strengthen institutional capacities of the ANAEPMR as the rural
water sector’s asset holding company and enable the implementation of professionalized
service delivery models through regional performance-based affermage contracts in the 74
municipalities where rural water services are provided.34

12.    PforR Program financing. The Program has an estimated total financing of US$240
million, including US$220 from the World Bank and US$20 million from the Government’s
own resources.




33
     Coverage rate in each department is provided in Annex 4.
34
     One department is exclusively urban and therefore excluded from the PforR boundaries.

                                                                       31
                              Table A1.2: Program financing (US$ million)


                             Source                              Amount

                  Borrower                                           20

                  IDA                                                50

                  IDA Scale-Up Facility                             170

                  Total Program financing                           240



13.    The Program activities are organized in two Results Areas. The Program is not
including any high-value contracts.

   x   Results Area 1: Increase access to water supply services

   x   Results Area 2: Strengthen service delivery arrangements

Description of Results Area 1: Increase access to water supply services

14.     Construction, rehabilitation, expansion of piped water supply systems. The Program
will finance (i) the construction, rehabilitation and/or expansion of production, pumping,
treatment and storage infrastructure, distribution networks, standpipes, household connections ;
and (ii) development of associated studies and works supervision. The new or existing piped
water supply systems supported by the Program will be supplied by surface water catchments,
boreholes or through bulk supplies from SONEB.

15.     Standardized design parameters and construction standards. All construction,
rehabilitation and expansion works will be carried out using standardized design parameters
and construction standards developed by the ANAEPMR. The development of the water supply
infrastructure will pay adequate consideration to the sustainable management of water sources,
water treatment improvement and energy consumption optimization.

16.    Responsibilities for planning, designing, supervising, constructing and operating the
new and existing piped water supply systems. The ANAEPMR has contracted a Technical
Assistant. It will support the ANAEPMR for the execution of the Program through the
following responsibilities: (i) definition of standardized design parameters and construction
standards; and (ii) grouping the new and existing piped rural water supply systems for defining
works packages and preparing the corresponding preliminary designs. In addition, the
ANAEPMR will contract an Engineering Consultant in charge of carrying out the detailed
design and supervising the works package on behalf of the ANAEPMR in coordination with
municipalities and ACEPs. In the case of new piped water supply systems, the construction of
production, pumping, treatment and storage infrastructure, distribution networks and
standpipes will be executed by works contractors. The operation of those newly constructed
systems will be transferred to the regional private operators. In the case of existing piped water
supply systems, their operation will be delegated to the regional private operators where there

                                                  32
 is currently no contract officially in place with a local private operator or at completion of
 those contracts. Once the operation of the existing systems has been transferred to the regional
 operators, they will execute the rehabilitation and/or expansion works of the production,
 pumping, treatment and storage infrastructure, distribution networks, standpipes as part of their
 affermage contracts that will include the list of quantities of the works to be undertaken in
 addition to their operational obligations. All household connections and related network
 extensions in the new and existing piped systems will be executed by the regional private
 operators. The Program will subsidize the construction of the new household connections as
 the water service users will pay the operators a portion only of the actual cost of the household
 connections. The rest of the cost of the household connections will be borne by the Program
 as they will correspond to an item of the list of quantities of the works to be executed by the
 regional operators.

 17.    The table hereafter presents a summary of the responsibilities for the planning, design,
 supervision, construction and operation of the new and existing rural piped water supply
 systems.
   Table A1.3: Institutional responsibilities for planning, designing, supervising, constructing and operating the new and
                                              existing piped water supply systems


                                       Grouping of
                      Definition
                                       water supply
                    standardized
                                        systems for          Detailed
                        design
                                          defining            Design /
                     parameters                                                  Construction               Operation
                                           works           supervision of
                         and
                                       packages and            works
                    construction
                                        preliminary
                      standards
                                          designs
                                                                                    Works
                                                                                  contractors
                                                                                 (except new
Construction of                                                                                          Regional private
                                                                                  household
new piped                                                                                               operators once the
                                                                               connections that
water supply                                                                                              construction is
                                                                               will be executed
systems                                                                                                     completed
                                                                                by the regional
                      Technical           Technical         Engineering             private
                      Assistant           Assistant         Consultant            operators)
                                                                                                         Regional private
Rehabilitation                                                                                        operators where there
and/or of                                                                                            is no contract officially
                                                                               Regional private
existing piped                                                                                         in place with a local
                                                                                  operators
water supply                                                                                          private operator or at
systems                                                                                                completion of those
                                                                                                             contracts

 18.     Water resources management. The Program will directly support the improvement of
 decision support for water resources management through enhanced study and monitoring of
 the groundwater levels and abstractions. This will be achieved through systematic
 hydrogeological and geophysical studies and investigations, detailing the impacts of the
 drilling operation on the water resource, the aquatic environment, the flow, the depth and the
 quality of the water, to be performed as part of the design and construction of the piped water

                                                             33
supply systems and through the systematic installation of piezometers equipped with data
transmission system.

19.     Expected results and beneficiaries. It is expected that the Program will finance the
construction of 270 new water supply systems and the rehabilitation and/or expansion of 360
existing water supply systems. This will include the construction of approximatively 34,500
household connections and 3,300 standpipes providing access to a total of 1,660,000 on the
basis of a household connection providing access to 24 people and a standpipe providing access
to 250 people.

Description of Results Area 2: Strengthen service delivery arrangements

20.     Supporting performance-based contracts with regional operators. The Program will
support the recruitment of regional operators that will enter into an affermage performance-
based contract with the ANAEPMR and with the municipalities where they will operate new
or existing piped rural water systems. The operation of the new piped rural water supply
systems will be delegated to the regional operators while the operation of the existing piped
rural water supply systems will be delegated where there is no contract officially in place with
a local private operator or at completion of those contracts. The ANAEPMR has contracted
Task Force of PPP specialists to define the boundaries of the affermage contracts, draft the
bidding documents of and support the bidding process of those regional performance-based
contracts. It is expected that there will be six regional affermage contracts.

21.    Under the performance-based affermage contracts the regional operators will be
responsible for:

   x   Operating the production, treatment, distribution infrastructure of the rural water supply
       systems whose service delivery has been delegated to them. Remuneration of the
       regional operators is defined in the affermage contracts and will be performance-based
       to create incentives for efficiency improvement. For example, it could be equal to the
       Operator Remuneration per m3 offered by the winning bidder multiplied by (i) the
       actual volume produced; (ii) contractual targets in terms of (1-Non Revenue Water);
       and (iii) contractual targets in terms of collection rate.

   x   Executing rehabilitation and/or expansion works of the existing piped water supply
       systems as well as for executing all new household connections. The list of quantities
       and market-based unit prices of the corresponding works will be defined by the
       Technical Assistant contracted by the ANAEPMR as part of the preparation of the
       preliminary designs.

22.     The regional performance-based affermage contracts will be signed by the ANAEPMR.
Prior to the signing of those contracts, FPAs between the Government and the municipalities
will be signed. The FPAs will set the terms and conditions of the partnership between the
Government and the municipalities for the planning, funding, implementation and sustainable
delivery of water supply services in rural areas. Most specifically through this Framework
Agreement, the municipalities will empower the ANAEPMR to prepare and award public
service delegation contracts to regional operators.

                                               34
23.     In addition, the Program will support the preparation of a Planning Contract between
the Government and the ANAEPMR defining their multi-year commitments and obligations
for the achievement of the development objectives of the rural water supply sector.

24.    The Program will also support the development of a tariff policy that will apply to the
regional operators’ performance-based contracts taking into account the affermage’s Operator
Remuneration and affermage fees for the ANAEPMR and for the municipalities. This will be
accompanied by the definition and implementation of arrangements for the regulatory
functions to be performed by the DG-Eau.

25.    Finally, the Program will undertake a communications campaign among the Program
stakeholders to prepare and accompany the activities paving the way to strengthen service
delivery arrangements.

26.     Capacity building of the rural water supply professionals. The Program will finance
the enhancement of training facilities. The Program will also support the development of a
specific curriculum to train local rural water supply professionals aiming at promoting the
participation of women in the delivery of rural water supply services. Targeted professionals
will include local affermage operators who will be co-opted by the new regional operators to
expand its workforce in order to take-over the management of a rapidly growing number of
water supply systems.

27.    Capacity-building of the ANAEPMR and sector institutional strengthening. The
Program will finance the capacity-building of the ANAEPMR to fully discharge its functions
of asset-holding company for rural water supply. This will include the enhancement of its
investment planning and implementation capacities for rural water supply, including the
development of adequate information systems; and the strengthening of its monitoring
capacities of the affermage regional operators and of other providers of rural water services,
as well as the publication of service monitoring reports. This will also include the capacity-
building of the ministries in charge of water and health, including any of their directorates and
municipalities to enhance service delivery monitoring from the ANAEPMR and support
investments in piped rural water systems. The Program will also finance the Program’s
Independent Verification Agent (IVA) and financial audit, and operating costs of the
ANAEPMR.

Program costs

28.     The Table below summarizes the estimated expenditures of the Program. It is based on
the following costing parameters:

   x   Average cost to provide access: FCFA 65,000

   x   Average cost of a new subsidized household connection: FCFA 120,000 including
       FCFA 100,000 financed by the Program and FCFA 20,000 financed by the beneficiaries

   x   Average cost of a new standpipe: FCFA 600,000

   x   Average investment/new piped rural water system: FCFA 200,000,000
                                               35
      x   Average investment/rehabilitated and/or extended piped rural water system: FCFA
          150,000,000

29.       The costing of the Program also includes 5 percent contingency.
                                    Table A1.4: Program of expenditures


                                                                                       Amount
                                    Results Areas
                                                                                     (US$ million)
      Results Area 1:        1.1 Construction of new water supply systems                97.5
      Increase access to     1.2 Rehabilitation and expansion of existing water
                                                                                         97.5
      water supply service   supply systems
                             2.1 Supporting the establishment of performance-
                                                                                          0.5
      Results Area 2:        based contracts with regional operators
      Strengthen service     2.2 Capacity building of the rural water supply
                                                                                          5.5
      delivery               professionals
      arrangements           2.3 Capacity building of the ANAEPMR, ministries in
                                                                                         25.0
                             charge of water and health, and municipalities
                                                                       Contingency      14.0
                                                         Total Program financing        240.0


Coordination with other Development Partners

30.     The Program complements other government-led investments to increase access to
improved sanitation and to water supply services in rural and urban areas and builds on
past World Bank engagements in the rural water sector. Support for sanitation and hygiene
services in rural areas is provided to the MoH by UNICEF, the Global Sanitation Fund
PAPHyR program, the OmiDelta project funded by the Dutch Embassy as well as by NGOs
such as Helvetas and Protos. The MoH has in practice allocated geographical areas of
responsibility to these different funding agencies. In their respective areas, these agen cies are
conducting sanitation and hygiene promotion campaigns, which include CLTS campaigns, as
well as training on household water treatment and safe water handling. Parallel funding
provided by GWSP will help exploring how coordination between rural water sector
investments and investments in sanitation and hygiene could be improved. This could entail
setting up and managing linked-up databases to better identify “hot spots” identified based on
access to WASH services and health statistics. In urban areas, the World Bank-funded
PEPRAU project is providing support for the development of a National Strategy for Hygiene
Promotion in Urban Areas and will increase access to sanitation in the Grand-Nokoué region,
which is Benin’s largest urban area. The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation are also active in
the urban sanitation sector. The World Bank is also supporting the reform of the urban water
supply sector through the PEPRAU to implement the Government’s decision to break -up
SONEB into an asset-holding company and an operating company, to be managed through a
PPP contract. This strategic support builds on the experience and added value of the World
Bank in comparable reforms implemented in Sub-Saharan Africa and complement investments
in SONEB’s infrastructure supported by KfW, the European Investment Bank, the European


                                                    36
Union, Chinese cooperation, the African Development Bank, the Islamic Development Bank
and JICA.

Institutional Implementation Arrangements

31.    The ANAEPMR will be in charge of implementing the Program. In that respect, the
ANAEPMR will execute the Program activities, will be responsible for its environmental and
social management, M&E, requesting result-based disbursements and consolidating the
Program financial reports. The GoB will also organize the delegation of responsibilities for the
provision of water supply services in rural areas through regional affermage contracts from
municipalities to the ANAEPMR through the signing of the FPAs. The ANAEPMR will
prepare and let contractual arrangements with regional private operators.

32.    The institutional responsibilities in the rural water supply sector in which the Program
will be implemented are summarized in the table below.




                                              37
                    Table A1.5: Institutional responsibilities for the rural water supply sector

                          Functions                                       Institution in charge
Sector policy definition                                                MEM / DG-Eau
Regulation
- Definition and application of tariff policy applicable at             MEM / DG-Eau
  national level
- Definition and application of technical norms applicable at           MEM / DG-Eau, in
  national level                                                        coordination with ANAEPMR
Investment planning
- At local level                                                        Municipalities in collaboration
                                                                        with MEM / DG-Eau and
                                                                        ACEPs
- At national level                                                     ANAEPMR
Investment execution
Programming                                                             ANAEPMR
Preparation of technical, environmental, social studies and             ANAEPMR in collaboration
bidding documents                                                       with municipalities / ACEPs
Social intermediation                                                   Engineering consultant, works
                                                                        contractors in collaboration
                                                                        with municipalities / ACEPs
Works supervision                                                       ANAEPMR in collaboration
                                                                        with municipalities / ACEPs
Contracting regional operators
Drafting regional operators’ contracts                                  ANAEPMR
Signing of regional operators’ contracts                                ANAEPMR
Contracting works contractors                                           ANAEPMR
Infrastructure construction
Construction of new rural water supply systems                          Works contractors
Rehabilitation and expansion of existing water supply                   Regional operators
systems
Service delivery                                                        Regional operators
Service monitoring at national level                                    ANAEPMR, in coordination
                                                                        with MEM / DG-Eau
Monitoring of operationalization of the PGSSE                           MoH / DNSP
Grievance redress mechanism                                             Regional operators for
                                                                        complaints linked to service
                                                                        delivery
                                                                        Works contractors for works-
                                                                        related complaints
Water resources management                                              MEM / DG-Eau
Independent results verification (IVA)                                  INSAE




                                                   38
                                                        Annex 2: Results Framework Matrix

                                                              Table A2.1: Results Framework


 Results Areas
                                                                                                               Unit of      Baseline   End Target
 Supported by             PDO Indicators                   Intermediate Results Indicators             DLI #
                                                                                                               Measure       (2018)      (2024)
    PforR

                   People provided with access to
                                                                                                         -      Number         0       1,660,000
                   improved water sources

                                  including female                                                       -      Number         0        830,000
Results Area 1:
Increase access                                      New household connections built under the
                                                                                                         1      Number         0         34,500
to water supply                                      Program
services                                             New standpipes built under the Program              2      Number         0         3,300
                                                     New piped rural water supply systems built
                                                                                                         -      Number         0          270
                                                     under the Program functioning
                                                     Existing piped rural water supply systems in
                                                     rural areas rehabilitated or expanded under the     -      Number         0          360
                                                     Program functioning
                   Piped rural water supply
                   systems managed by regional                                                           -     Percentage     0%          80%
                   operators
                   Publication by the ANAEPMR
Results Area 2:    of bi-annual service monitoring                                                     3(b)     Number         0           11
Strengthen         reports
service delivery                                     FPAs between the Government’s MEM and
arrangements                                         municipalities for service provision and          3(a)     Number         0       At least 50
                                                     monitoring signed
                                                     Planning Contract between the Government /
                                                                                                         -      Yes/No        No          Yes
                                                     ANAEPMR signed
                                                     Tariff policy for rural water supply services
                                                                                                         -      Yes/No        No          Yes
                                                     approved

                                                                            39
Results Areas
                                                                                           Unit of      Baseline   End Target
Supported by    PDO Indicators         Intermediate Results Indicators             DLI #
                                                                                           Measure       (2018)      (2024)
   PforR
                                 Performance-based contracts between the
                                 ANAEPMR and regional operators signed and           4      Number         0           6
                                 with service orders issued
                                 Piped rural water supply systems included into
                                 information system to control and monitor
                                                                                     -     Percentage     0%         100%
                                 rural water supply assets and regional
                                 operators
                                 Piped rural water supply systems providing
                                                                                     -     Percentage     0%          90%
                                 improved water quality
                                 People benefiting from training activities on
                                                                                     -      Number         0          660
                                 rural water supply under the Program
                                                                including female     -     Percentage     0%          15%
                                 Women being members of the committees of
                                                                                     -     Percentage    10%          25%
                                 ACEPs
                                 Grievances registered related to delivery of
                                                                                     -     Percentage     0%          80%
                                 Program benefits that are addressed




                                                        40
                                                                         Table A2.2: Indicators description

                                                                                                                                                       DLIs
                                                                                                                         Responsibility
                                                                                                  Methodology for                         Responsibility    Scalability of
   Indicators                  Description              Frequency          Data Source                                     for Data
                                                                                                  Data Collection                           for Data        Disbursement
                                                                                                                          Collection
                                                                                                                                           Verification       (Yes/No)
Results Area 1: Increase access to water supply service
                    Sum of (i) number of
                    new household
                    connections built under
                    the Program * number of
                    people served per
                    household connection in
                    rural areas as set by
People provided     ANAEPMR, i.e. 3                                                              Indicator calculated
with access to      households of 8 persons                              Intermediate            based on
                                                Bi-annual                                                                 ANAEPMR               -                 -
improved water      or 24 persons and (ii)                               indicators              intermediate
sources             number of new                                                                indicators
                    standpipes built under
                    the Program * number of
                    people served per
                    standpipe in rural areas
                    as set by ANAEPMR,
                    i.e. 250 people
                    (including female).
                                                                                                 (i) Compilation and
                                                                                                 submission of
                        New household                                    Reports from            implementation
New household           connections under the                            regional                reports by regional
connections built       Program connected to a         Bi-annual         operators               operators                ANAEPMR             AVI                Yes
under the Program       functioning35 piped rural                        validated by            (ii) Certification of
                        water supply system                              ANAEPMR                 the reports by the
                                                                                                 Engineering
                                                                                                 Consultant

        35
             A rural water supply system is considered functioning if not out-of-service.

                                                                                            41
                                                                                                                                                        DLIs
                                                                                                                          Responsibility
                                                                                                   Methodology for                         Responsibility    Scalability of
    Indicators                  Description              Frequency          Data Source                                     for Data
                                                                                                   Data Collection                           for Data        Disbursement
                                                                                                                           Collection
                                                                                                                                            Verification       (Yes/No)
                                                                                                  (iii) Validation of
                                                                                                  the reports by
                                                                                                  ANAEPMR
                                                                                                  (i) Compilation and
                                                                                                  submission of
                                                                                                  implementation
                                                                                                  reports by regional
                         New standpipes under                             Reports from
                                                                                                  operators
New standpipes           the Program connected                            regional
                                                                                                  (ii) Certification of
built under the          to a functioning piped         Bi-annual         operators                                        ANAEPMR             AVI                Yes
                                                                                                  the reports by the
Program                  rural water supply                               validated by
                                                                                                  Engineering
                         system                                           ANAEPMR
                                                                                                  Consultant
                                                                                                  (iii) Validation of
                                                                                                  the reports by
                                                                                                  ANAEPMR
                                                                                                  Counting of
                                                                          Minutes of works
                                                                                                  minutes of works
New piped rural                                                           commissioning
                         New piped rural water                                                    commissioning
water supply                                                              acceptance and
                         supply systems built                                                     acceptance and
systems built                                           Bi-annual         the geo-                                         ANAEPMR               -                 -
                         under the Program                                                        monitoring reports
under the Program                                                         referenced
                         functioning                                                              of the geo-
functioning                                                               information
                                                                                                  referenced
                                                                          system
                                                                                                  information system
Existing piped                                                            Minutes of works
                                                                                                  Counting of
rural water supply       Existing piped rural                             commissioning
                                                                                                  minutes of works
systems in rural         water supply systems in                          acceptance and
                                                                                                  commissioning
areas rehabilitated      rural areas rehabilitated      Bi-annual         the geo-                                         ANAEPMR               -                 -
                                                                                                  acceptance and
or expanded under        or expanded under the                            referenced
                                                                                                  monitoring reports
the Program              Program functioning36                            information
                                                                                                  of the geo-
functioning                                                               system

         36
              A rural water supply system is considered functioning if not out-of-service.

                                                                                             42
                                                                                                                                              DLIs
                                                                                                                Responsibility
                                                                                          Methodology for                        Responsibility    Scalability of
   Indicators              Description            Frequency        Data Source                                    for Data
                                                                                          Data Collection                          for Data        Disbursement
                                                                                                                 Collection
                                                                                                                                  Verification       (Yes/No)
                                                                                         referenced
                                                                                         information system
Results Area 2: Strengthen service delivery arrangements
                                                                                         Number of piped
                                                                                         rural water supply
                                                                                         systems in rural
                                                                                         areas whose
                     Percentage of total
Piped rural water                                                                        management is
                     number of rural piped                       Activity reports
supply systems                                                                           delegated to
                     water supply systems in     Bi-annual       of regional                                     ANAEPMR               -                 -
managed by                                                                               regional operators,
                     the country managed by                      operators
regional operators                                                                       divided by the total
                     regional operators
                                                                                         number of piped
                                                                                         rural water supply
                                                                                         systems in the
                                                                                         country
                     (a) FPAs defining the
                     conditions and
                     modalities of partnership
                     between the ANAEPMR
                     and municipalities for
Framework            the planning, financing,
Partnership          execution and delegation
                                                                 (a) FPAs signed         (a) FPAs signed
between the          of service provision of
                                                 (a) Once        (b) Service             (b) Compilation of
Government’s         rural water supply                                                                          ANAEPMR             IVA                Yes
                                                 (b) Bi-annual   monitoring              service monitoring
MEM and              systems, signed by at
                                                                 reports published       reports
municipalities       least 50 municipalities;
established          (b) Publication by the
                     ANAEPMR of bi-annual
                     service monitoring
                     reports including the
                     updated inventory of
                     assets and key

                                                                                    43
                                                                                                                                              DLIs
                                                                                                                Responsibility
                                                                                          Methodology for                        Responsibility    Scalability of
   Indicators              Description           Frequency         Data Source                                    for Data
                                                                                          Data Collection                          for Data        Disbursement
                                                                                                                 Collection
                                                                                                                                  Verification       (Yes/No)
                     performance indicators
                     for all piped rural water
                     supply systems of the
                     municipalities having
                     signed the FPA. The
                     reports will cover the
                     semesters from July-
                     December 2018 through
                     July-December 2023.
                     Contract defining multi-
                     year commitments and
Planning Contract    obligations of the          Developed       Planning
between the          Government and of the       once and        Contract between
                                                                                         Planning Contract
Government /         ANAEPMR for the             renewed         the Government /                                ANAEPMR               -                 -
                                                                                         signed
ANAEPMR              achievement of the          every 3 years   ANAEPMR
signed               development objectives                      signed
                     of the rural water supply
                     sector
                     Approval by regulatory
                     text of the appropriate
                                                 Developed
Tariff policy for    tariff policy(s) covering
                                                 once and        Tariff policy(s)        Tariff policy
rural water supply   at least the Operator                                                                       ANAEMPR               -                 -
                                                 renewed as      actually applied        applied
services approved    Remuneration applicable
                                                 needed
                     in the perimeters of the
                     regional operators
                     Number of contracts
Performance-
                     setting the terms and
based contracts
                     conditions for the
between the                                      Once per        Service order
                     delegation of the                                                   Service order issued    ANAEPMR             IVA                Yes
ANAEPMR and                                      contract        issued
                     production and
regional operators
                     distribution of water
signed and with
                     supply in regional rural

                                                                                    44
                                                                                                                                         DLIs
                                                                                                           Responsibility
                                                                                      Methodology for                       Responsibility    Scalability of
    Indicators              Description            Frequency     Data Source                                 for Data
                                                                                      Data Collection                         for Data        Disbursement
                                                                                                            Collection
                                                                                                                             Verification       (Yes/No)
service orders        perimeters, with service
issued                order issued by
                      ANAEPMR, and
                      applying the approved
                      tariff policy(s)
                      Percentage of piped rural
                      water supply systems
Piped rural water     included into a geo-
supply systems        referenced information
included into the     system providing the
information           ANAEPMR with:                                                  Monitoring reports
                                                               Geo-referenced
system to control     (i) The updated                                                of the geo-
                                                   Bi-annual   information                                  ANAEPMR               -                 -
and monitor rural     inventory of assets in the                                     referenced
                                                               system
water supply          perimeters of the                                              information system
assets and services   regional operators.
managed by            (ii) The key performance
regional operators    indicators as set in the
                      contracts of regional
                      operators.
                      Percentage of piped
                      water supply systems
                                                               (i) Geo-
                      whose management has                                           (i) Monitoring
                                                               referenced
                      been transferred to a                                          reports of the geo-
                                                               information
Piped rural water     regional operator since at                                     referenced
                                                               system.
supply systems        least one year and                                             information system.
                                                               (ii) Reports from
providing             meeting the following        Bi-annual                         (ii) Reports from      ANAEPMR               -                 -
                                                               the MoH / DNSP
improved water        conditions:                                                    the MoH / DNSP
                                                               of the monitoring
quality               (i) The piped water                                            are transmitted to
                                                               of
                      supply systems are                                             the ANAEMPR and
                                                               operationalization
                      functioning. (ii) The                                          consolidated.
                                                               of the PGSSE.
                      piped water supply
                      systems have a PGSSE

                                                                                45
                                                                                                                                                                                             DLIs
                                                                                                                                                   Responsibility
                                                                                                                   Methodology for                                              Responsibility    Scalability of
    Indicators                    Description                    Frequency               Data Source                                                 for Data
                                                                                                                   Data Collection                                                for Data        Disbursement
                                                                                                                                                    Collection
                                                                                                                                                                                 Verification       (Yes/No)
                         approved by the
                         MoH\DNSP and the
                         regional operators
                         comply with its
                         requirements.37
                         Number of water supply
                         professionals benefiting
                         from training activities
People benefiting        under the Program. Rural                                                                 Consolidation of
                                                                                      Activity reports
from training            water supply                                                                             activity reports
                                                                                      from the training
activities on rural      professionals are defined              Bi-annual                                         from the training                  ANAEMPR                              -                           -
                                                                                      center supported
water supply             as professionals involved                                                                center supported by
                                                                                      by the Program
under the Program        in the management of                                                                     the Program
                         rural water supply
                         systems (including
                         female).
                         Percentage of women                                          Minutes of the              Consolidation of
Women being
                         being members of the                                         General                     the minutes of the
members of the
                         municipal ACEPs                        Bi-annual             Assemblies                  General Assemblies                 ANAEMPR                              -                           -
committees of
                         established for water                                        constituting the            constituting the
ACEPs
                         supply services                                              ACEPs                       ACEPs

                         Percentage of grievances                                     Grievance redress           Monitoring of
Grievances
                         from Program’s                                               reports issued by           grievance redress
registered related                                              Bi-annual                                                                            ANAEPMR                              -                           -
                         beneficiaries registered                                     the works                   reports issued by
to delivery of
                         and addressed by works                                       contractors and             the works


         37
            The PGSSE is a document to be prepared by the regional operators as part of its contractual obligations and that includes all preventive and corrective measures needed to reduce the risks of water
         quality deterioration between the catchment area and the point of distribution of water to the consumer. The PGSSE shall also identify preventative measures to reduce the number of unplanned supply
         interruptions, as these are a frequent cause of water contamination in Benin. Producers and distributors of water are also expected to conduct regular sanitary inspections of water supply systems and to
         control regularly the quality of drinking water supplied to populations.



                                                                                                            46
                                                                                                                                    DLIs
                                                                                                      Responsibility
                                                                                  Methodology for                      Responsibility    Scalability of
   Indicators              Description          Frequency     Data Source                               for Data
                                                                                  Data Collection                        for Data        Disbursement
                                                                                                       Collection
                                                                                                                        Verification       (Yes/No)
Program benefits     contractors and regional               regional             contractors and
that are addressed   operators in accordance                operators            regional operators
                     with their contractual
                     obligations




                                                                            47
                  Annex 3: Disbursement Linked Indicators, Disbursement Arrangements and Verification Protocols

                                              Table A3.1: Disbursement-Linked Indicator Matrix

                     Total
                                  As % of
                   Financing
                                   Total    DLI
                  Allocated to                                               Indicative timetable for DLI achievement
                                 Financing Baseline
                    DLI (in
                                  Amount
                    million)
                                                        Year 1           Year 2         Year 3         Year 4           Year 5   Year 6
DLI 1
The number of
new household       EUR 65
                                   36%        0           0              3,450          8,620          10,350           8,620    3,460
connections        (US$80)
built under the
Program
DLI 2
The number of
                   EUR 32.5
new standpipes                     18%        0           0               310            830           1,000             830      330
                   (US$40)
built under the
Program
DLI 3
Framework
Partnership
between the
Government’s
MEM and            EUR 40.5
                                   23%        No
selected           (US$50)
municipalities
established
under terms
acceptable to
the World Bank



                                                                    48
DLI 3(a)
FPAs signed
                                          FPAs signed
between the
                  EUR 12.2                by at least 50
Government’s                  7%     No
                  (US$15)                 municipalities
MEM and
selected
municipalities
DLI 3(b)                                   2 bi-annual     2 bi-annual   2 bi-annual   2 bi-annual   2 bi-annual   1 bi-annual
Service                                      service         service       service       service       service       service
                  EUR 28.3
monitoring                    16%    No    monitoring      monitoring    monitoring    monitoring    monitoring    monitoring
                  (US$35)
reports                                      reports         reports       reports       reports       reports       reports
published                                   published       published     published     published     published     published
DLI 4
Performance-
based contracts
between the
ANAEPMR
and selected      EUR 40.5
                              23%    0          0               3            3            N/A           N/A           N/A
regional          (US$50)
operators
signed and a
service order
for each
contract issued
                  EUR 178.5
Total Amount:                 100%   -          -               -            -             -             -             -
                  (US$220)




                                                           49
                                                        Table A3.2. DLI verification protocol table

                                                                                         Protocol to evaluate achievement of the DLI and data/result
                                                                   Scalability of
                              Definition / Description of                                                        verification
#          DLI                                                    Disbursements
                                     achievement                                                       Verification
                                                                     (Yes/No)          Data source                                 Procedure
                                                                                                          entity
                                                                                                                      The IVA verifies the number of new
                                                                                                                      household connections in operation
    The number of new     New household connections under
                                                                                                                      connected to piped rural water
    household             the Program connected to a                                   Intermediate
1                                                                       Yes                                IVA        supply systems that have been built,
    connections built     functioning piped rural water                                 indicators
                                                                                                                      rehabilitated or expanded under the
    under the Program     supply system
                                                                                                                      Program and whose execution has
                                                                                                                      been validated by ANAEP.
                                                                                                                      The IVA verifies the number of new
                                                                                                                      standpipes in operation connected to
    The number of new     New standpipes under the Program                                                            piped rural water supply systems
                                                                                       Intermediate
2   standpipes built      connected to a functioning piped              Yes                                IVA        that have been built, rehabilitated or
                                                                                        indicators
    under the Program     rural water supply system                                                                   expanded under the Program and
                                                                                                                      whose execution has been validated
                                                                                                                      by ANAEP.
                          (a) FPAs defining the conditions
                          and modalities of partnership
                          between the ANAEPMR and
    Framework             Government’s MEM and selected
    Partnership between   municipalities, signed by at least 50                          (a) FPAs                      The IVA verifies that the
    the Government’s      municipalities;                                                 signed                       Framework Agreements have been
    MEM and selected                                                                    (b) Service                    signed by all stakeholders and that
3                                                                       Yes                                 IVA
    municipalities        (b) Publication by the ANAEPMR                                monitoring                     the bi-annual service monitoring
    established under     of bi-annual service monitoring                                 reports                      reports have been published by the
    terms acceptable to   reports presenting the updated                                 published                     ANAEPMR.
    the World Bank        inventory of assets and key
                          performance indicators for all piped
                          rural water supply systems of the
                          municipalities having signed the


                                                                              50
                                                                                 Protocol to evaluate achievement of the DLI and data/result
                                                               Scalability of
                              Definition / Description of                                                verification
#           DLI                                               Disbursements
                                     achievement                                               Verification
                                                                 (Yes/No)       Data source                               Procedure
                                                                                                  entity
                           FPA. The reports will cover the
                           semesters from July-December
                           2018 through July-December 2023.
    Performance-based      Number of contracts setting the
    contracts between      terms and conditions for the
    the ANAEPMR and        delegation of the production and
                                                                                                              The IVA verifies that the service
    selected regional      distribution of water supply in                      Service order
4                                                                  Yes                             IVA        orders relating to the Contracts have
    operators signed and   regional rural perimeters, with                         issued
                                                                                                              been issued.
    with service order     service order issued by ANAEPMR
    for each contract      and applying the approved tariff
    issued                 policy(s)




                                                                         51
                                                         Table A3.3 World Bank disbursement table

                                                                                   Minimum DLI          Maximum DLI
                                 World Bank
                                                 Of which                            value to be        value expected
                                  financing                   Deadline for                                                 Determination of Financing
                                                 Financing                       achieved to trigger    to be achieved
#              DLI               allocated to                     DLI                                                    Amount to be disbursed against
                                                available for                     disbursements of     for World Bank
                                   the DLI                    Achievement                                                achieved and verified DLI value
                                                Prior results                       World Bank          disbursements
                                 (in million)
                                                                                     Financing             purposes
                                                                                                                         Amount assigned to DLI / End-
                                                                                                                         of-Program target for DLI
                                                                                                                         = EUR 65,000,000/34,500
    The number of new                                            Closing date
                                   EUR 65                                                                                = EUR 1,884 per new household
1   household connections                            -              of the               0                 34,500
                                  (US$80)                                                                                connection
    built under the Program                                       Financing
                                                                                                                         (=US$80,000,000/34,500
                                                                                                                         = US$2,319 per new household
                                                                                                                         connection)
                                                                                                                         Amount assigned to DLI / End-
                                                                                                                         of-Program target for DLI
    The number of new                                            Closing date
                                  EUR 32.5                                                                               = EUR 32,500,000/3,300
2   standpipes built under the                       -              of the               0                  3,300
                                  (US$40)                                                                                = EUR 9,848 per new standpipe
    Program                                                       Financing
                                                                                                                         (=US$40,000,000/3,300
                                                                                                                         = US$12,121 per new standpipe)
                                                                                                                         (a) EUR
    (a) FPAs signed between                                                                                              12,200,000/US$15,000,000 at
    the Government’s MEM                                                                                11 bi-annual     signature of the FPAs by at least
                                                                 Closing date
    and selected                  EUR 40.5       EUR 12.2                                                 service        50 municipalities
3                                                                   of the               0
    municipalities; and (b)       (US$50)        (US$15)                                                 monitoring      (b) EUR 2,572,727/
                                                                  Financing
    service monitoring reports                                                                            reports        US$3,181,818 at publication of
    published                                                                                                            each bi-annual service monitoring
                                                                                                                         report
    Performance-based
    contracts between the
                                                                 Closing date                                            EUR 6,750,000/ US$8,333,333
    ANAEPMR and selected          EUR 40.5
4                                                    -              of the               0                   6           per Contract with service order
    regional operators signed     (US$50)
                                                                  Financing                                              issued
    and with service order for
    each contract issued

                                                                           52
                           Annex 4: Summary Technical Assessment

Scope and Purpose of the Technical Assessment (TA)

1.      The technical assessment for the Program (Programme AQUA-VIE) provides reasonable
assurance that the GoB program has a strong strategic rationale, including the justification for
public financing, is technically sound, has an appropriate expenditure framework and has suitable
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) capacity. A stand-alone TA report was produced and provides
further detail on the assessment findings.

Strategic Relevance

2.      The Program is strategically relevant. It will contribute to funding a substantial portion of
the national program to deliver universal access to water services in rural areas, which is a key
development objective for the GoB.

3.      The Program is perfectly aligned with the GoB’s strategic priorities, overall, and with the
rural water sub-sector, in particular. Following the election of Patrice Talon to the Presidency in
April 2016, the Government conducted a comprehensive audit of the country and produced a
Government Action Plan (Programme d’Action du Gouvernement, PAG, 2016-2021) under the
“Revealing Benin” (Bénin Révélé) banner. The Government program identified 45 flagship
projects to be undertaken during the 2016-2021 period to spur growth and improve the
population’s living conditions. Three of these flagship projects (42, 43, 44) focus on the water
sector, including project 43, which is to provide universal access to water in rural and semi-urban
areas, serving an estimated 2.5 million people by 2021 at a total estimated cost of US$375 million.

4.      The Program will support the implementation of the National Strategy for Rural Water
Supply 2017-2030 (Stratégie Nationale d’Approvisionnement en Eau Potable en Milieu Rural,
2017-2030) which was adopted in May 2017. The National Master Plan for the Development of
the Rural Water Supply Sector (Plan Directeur de Développement du sous-secteur de
l’Approvisionnement en Eau Potable en Milieu Rural – PDDAEPMR) was prepared and finalized
in May 2017 to operationalize this strategy. The total cost for implementing the PDDAEPMR was
estimated at FCFA 314 billion (US$560 million), out of which approximately 92 percent will be
used to serve people who currently do not receive improved services, whilst the remainder will be
invested in rehabilitating existing infrastructure to bring it in line with existing norms.

5.      The overall objective of the National Strategy is to ensure that Benin’s rural population has
access to quality drinking water in an equitable and sustainable manner, and at an affordable cost.
Three main principles underline this Strategy: (i) to provide universal access to basic water
services to the entire rural population of Benin by 2021; (ii) to professionalize management of
rural water supply services; and (iii) to support and strengthen the municipalities so that they can
effectively deliver on their role to build water supply infrastructure and ensure the delivery of
water supply services in their perimeter.

6.     The Program will seek to target its interventions to redress substantial disparities in rural
water service coverage. The PDDAEPMR estimated that rural water service coverage stands at 42

                                                 53
percent nationwide, with significant variations from one municipality to another. The coverage
rate was estimated based on an average number of people per water point (250) and per household
connection (24); it is different from the access rate estimated through surveys and used in JMP
reporting. If non-functionality of water points that can be rehabilitated is taken into account, the
coverage rate drops to 38 percent. The lowest coverage rates (just above 30 percent) are found in
Alibori Department in the far North, as well as in Atlantique, Mono and Ouémé Departments, in
the South. Municipalities with the lowest coverage rates include Aguégués in Ouémé (9 percent),
Abomey in Zou (15 percent) and Comè and Grand-Popo in Mono (18.3 and 19.3 percent
respectively). By contrast, some municipalities have relatively high coverage rates, such as
Athiémè in Mono (64.6 percent), Sinendé in Borgou (70.6 percent) and Savé in Collines (71.1
percent. Table 3 in the TA shows current coverage rates by department.

7.      The PDDAEPMR estimated that to achieve universal coverage in rural areas by 2021,
water supply improvements will be needed in areas where 8.84 million rural dwellers will be
residing by 2021 (70 percent of Benin’s population by 2021). A significant share of service
improvements of service improvements will be achieved by extending existing and constructing
new piped water supply systems. These interventions will benefit 67.6 percent of the rural and 50
percent of the total population. Table 4 of the TA provides additional detail on planned investments
in rural water supply by 2021.

8.      The Program is well aligned with the World Bank’s new Country Partnership Framework
(CPF) for FY19-FY23. It will directly contribute to the CPF’s Objective 2, “Improving the quality
of infrastructure”. A Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) was prepared in 2017 in preparation
of the CPF, which identified constraints to inclusive and sustainable growth and defined strategic
priorities. Amongst the most binding constraints to inclusive growth identified in the SCD were
inadequate access to infrastructure services, gender imbalances and a lack of female
empowerment, as well as sustainability issues with respect to natural resource management. The
Program’s focus on the rural sector will benefit a substantial portion of Benin’s population, which
also tends to be the poorest with limited economic development opportunities.

9.       The Program is well aligned with a number of these key strategic priorities, including the
emphasis on “building human capital, particularly among the poorest and among women and girls,
so that they can increasingly benefit from and contribute to a growing and transforming economy”.
The Program will deliver basic water infrastructure to alleviate women and girls’ burden of
fetching water. It will improve health outcomes for the poorest segments of society. It will create
both temporary jobs (related to construction works) and permanent jobs (related to the provision
and supervision of water services) at the local level and will seek to specifically empower women.

10.      The choice of the PforR instrument meets a clear request from the GoB to move away from
a project-based approach, with financing linked to inputs, towards a programmatic financing
approach, with financing based on results. The Program will enable the GoB to strengthen its
institutional set-up to receive future financing based on results, enabling it to reach universal access
and keep in line with its priorities. Attracting additional financing from other funders who have
expressed interest in moving towards a results-based approach to financing (such as the Islamic
Development Bank, the African Development Bank or the Dutch cooperation) will become easier
once the robustness and effectiveness of this funding mechanism has been demonstrated.

                                                  54
Technical Soundness
11.     The Program is technically sound. It will address many weaknesses identified in Benin’s
rural water sector through an emphasis on greater service standardization and increasing the scale
of service delivery. This in turn will provide a basis for greater professionalization of service
delivery and will generate economies of scope, and some economies of scale, since piped water
supply systems will serve multiple localities. The guiding principle for use of Program funds is
that investments funded by the Program will aim to redress geographical imbalances in terms of
access to the service and will be used to provide services to the poorest segments of the population.
The TA led to the identification of a few technical weaknesses, however, which are summarized
in the paragraphs below. These areas will need to be addressed during implementation so as to
increase chances of Program success.

12.     Management of water sources. Drinking water supply will mostly come from groundwater
sources, which is in line with current practices in Benin. This is deemed to be cost-effective and
sustainable, provided key measures are adopted to ensure availability and adequate quality of
groundwater sources. Such measures will include improving the monitoring of groundwater
resources and defining and enforcing a regulatory framework for their sustainable usage. The
regulatory framework for ensuring the quality of groundwater sources is in place, although in
practice, its enforcement is limited by human resources and financial constraints. The Program
will give the opportunity to ensure stronger enforcement of the existing framework, provided there
is good coordination at the level of the different actors and adequate resources. For example,
municipalities are currently in charge of defining protection perimeters around water sources,
which then need to be approved by the MEM and the MoH. It will be essential to ensure that
municipalities can continue to do so and are adequately resourced to ensure that such protected
perimeters are effectively enforced.

13.     One issue identified during the TA is that knowledge regarding available water resources
and their management is currently very limited in Benin. The Directorate of Water Resources
Management within DG-Eau does not have the human, technical and financial resources to carry
out water resources monitoring activities in an efficient manner. The Program will foster
sustainable management of groundwater resources through a number of activities that will need to
be carried out, including requiring hydrogeological reports by the consultants in charge of
designing the water schemes, hydrogeological and geophysical investigations to be carried out by
the contractors and piezometric monitoring and modernization of the data transmission of
piezometric levels in coordination with the other institutions and financing partners. These
proposed interventions will be necessary and realistic in terms of promoting more sustainable
management of water resources. In the long run, to ensure drinking water security, it will be
necessary to invest in improving knowledge of groundwater resources and to conduct feasibility
studies for the mobilization of surface water resources in areas where groundwater sources are not
reliable or might be impacted by climate change, as detailed in the TA.

14.     Service levels. The Program will focus on the construction of piped water supply systems
and will not include the construction or rehabilitation of autonomous water points or handpumps.
Even though these systems exist in Benin and provide a large share of the rural population with
water, they are not currently the GoB’s priority. The Government’s strategy is to keep investments

                                                 55
in handpumps down to a minimum, as those solutions are mainly a transition towards piped water
supply on premises. Program design placed emphasis on household connections, as this is in line
with aspirations expressed by the rural population and is also in line with the National Strategy
objective for 2030. Although the benefits of providing household connections are clear and there
appears to be substantial demand for such connections, there is still limited evidence that such
demand will effectively materialize. Few rural water systems have more than 100 household
connections at present, whereas the number of household connections in the other systems varies
between 2 and 75. For this reason, the Program will invest both in household water connections
and standpipe connections, as the latter allow increasing access faster with a limited demand risk.

15.     Approach to prioritizing investments. A total of 5.4 million people will need to receive
improvements in services to achieve the target of providing universal access by 2021. The Program
will contribute to funding improved access to close to 1.6 million people, which is equivalent to
30 percent of the overall national target to reach universal coverage by 2021. The guiding principle
for use of Program funds is that investments funded by the Program will aim to redress
geographical imbalances in terms of access to the service and will be used to provide services to
the poorest segments of the population. Up to this point, prioritization of investments has mostly
been done based on technical factors, combined with political factors. With respect to the provision
of connection subsidies, existing practices in the context of the pilot subsidized concession
contracts have not used specific targeting criteria. Going forward, the ANAEPMR will need to
define a well-articulated approach to prioritizing investments and allocating connection subsidies.
The ANAEPMR will invest Program funds in departments and communes with the lowest
coverage rates to redress existing inequities in access. Such investments will be carried out
throughout the country, and will be programmed on an ongoing basis, based on many
considerations, including the need to spread investments throughout the national territory. At
present, there is no structured way for Government institutions (either at national or local
government level) to share and jointly track sanitation indicators (open defecation prevalence,
improved sanitation coverage rate), health indicators (diarrheal diseases, prevalence of stunting)
or socio-economic indicators, including poverty rates. This type of information would be very
helpful for the ANAEPMR to identify potential “hot spots” in terms of disease incidence, poverty
and access to basic services and provide a basis for prioritizing investments. So far, no
comprehensive analysis to explain differences in water coverage rates has been undertaken, nor
has any evaluation of the local impacts of inadequate access been carried out. When entering the
construction phase and preparing detailed engineering designs, additional information on local
context will need to be obtained so as to apply clear prioritization criteria and maximize impact.
When defining an approach to prioritization, including to define which schemes should be
prioritized and who should benefit from subsidized connections, the need to redress access
imbalances will need to be balanced against costs and efficiency in implementation.

16.     Ensuring water safety. Existing legislation in Benin assigns responsibilities to ensure that
water quality is guaranteed from the point of abstraction to the point of water delivery to
consumers. Implementation of this legislation has been patchy, however, as noted in the National
Strategy. Piped water supply systems constructed or rehabilitated under the Program are at risk of
being contaminated if water quality is not monitored correctly. The Program offers an opportunity
to ensure stronger enforcement of existing legislation to improve water safety records and reduce
the incidence of water-related diseases, provided key measures are adopted as detailed below. The


                                                56
Program will provide support to the Agency for the development of water safety monitoring
systems as part of its service supervision responsibilities, in coordination with deconcentrated
services of the MEM and the MoH. The objective of these activities will be to ensure that activities
required by the legislation are systematically undertaken, including amongst others: (i) systematic
testing of the quality of raw water resources at design stage to identify potential risks and remedial
measures; (ii) ongoing monitoring of raw water quality; (iii) ongoing monitoring of water quality
at the point of supply. In addition, it is strongly advised that the private operators be given
responsibilities in the areas of water-related hygiene promotion towards customers: this could
include education on hand-washing and water storage practices.

17.     Under the Program, the installation of a chlorination system will need to be included in the
detailed designs and bidding documents for new piped water supply systems. The water treatment
units constructed will consist of chlorine metering pumps which will be placed right after the main
intake. These metering pumps can deliver the required amount of chlorine by injecting it directly
into the upstream water main before reaching the reservoir. However, there is no evidence at
present that there is a well-developed network for spare part distribution and repair of such pumps;
these would need to be in place to ensure that this type of equipment is installed systematically on
new piped water supply systems, or fitted retroactively on existing ones as part of rehabilitation
works. In case the water quality in the aquifer becomes degraded, techniques such as aeration,
sedimentation and sand filtration followed by chlorine disinfection should also be considered.
Ongoing water quality monitoring and treatment by water supply system operators will be essential
to ensure that services meet necessary water quality conditions. According to the PGSSE, water
producers and distributors should test water quality twice a year for physico-chemical tests and
every quarter for bacteriological tests. Existing requirements will be reflected in private operators’
contracts and their application will be monitored by the ANAEPMR through the deconcentrated
services of the DNSP in the MoH.

18.     Standardizing design parameters and construction standards. The Program provides a
unique opportunity to standardize and roll-out technical norms and standards throughout the
country. The ongoing World Bank-funded PEPRAU project is currently funding technical
assistance to ANAEPMR for the definition or harmonization of technical norms which will need
to be incorporated into the contracts for design engineers, works contractors and private operators,
under the PEPRAU, the Program and any other investments funded and implemented by the
ANAEPMR. At present, there are no standard norms that are commonly applied for a number of
key areas. For example, different service providers may use different types of water meters, which
increases overall running costs (as it limits opportunities for bulk purchases) and also increases the
risk of failure of such equipment (as they are likely to be more difficult to repair in the event of a
breakdown). Standardizing technical norms will be particularly beneficial for areas such as
borehole drilling, water storage, water distribution networks and water meters.

19.    Rationalizing energy use. The Program will offer an opportunity to rationalize the use of
energy for water production, so as to reduce overall operating costs, reduce the risk of service
outage and contribute to mitigating climate change through the use of renewable energy. The
Program will encourage the choice of an energy source for pumping that reduces operating and
maintenance costs and climate impacts. The PDDAEPMR specifies that a connection to the grid
should be established when available, that thermal energy (i.e. an autonomous generator) should

                                                 57
be used for localities between 2,000 and 3,000 inhabitants and that solar energy should be relied
upon for smaller localities. The technical feasibility and cost-effectiveness of connecting to the
national grid or to install solar energy solutions will need to be explored in detail during the
feasibility studies for specific sites according to hydrogeological and hydraulic constraints.

20.     Coordination with sanitation and hygiene promotion. Given a fragmented institutional
context for sanitation and hygiene, water investments run the risk of being implemented in
isolation from other interventions or investments that could strengthen overall impacts on health
and well-being, such as interventions in rural sanitation and nutrition. Even though the core
mandate of the ANAEPMR is focused on interventions in the rural water supply sector, the
technical assessment found that, in order to enhance the health impacts of the Program, the
ANAEPMR should ensure that piped water supply system operators fully comply with the
requirements of the PGSSE in terms of water point protection and hygiene promotion. To do so,
the Agency should coordinate its interventions more closely with those undertaken by other actors
involved in sanitation and hygiene promotion, including the MoH. The MoH and its funders are in
turn responsible to better identify “hot spots” identified based on access to WASH services and
health statistics. At present, there is no to very limited sharing of information on these aspects,
either at local or at national level. Information provided by the Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys
(MICS) 2014 shows that there are linkages between areas with limited access to water supply and
areas with high rates of open defecation. When entering the construction phase and preparing
detailed engineering designs, additional information on local context will need to be obtained so
as to apply clear prioritization criteria and maximize impact. Private operators will need to deliver
services in line with municipal hygiene plans for the localities and their contracts should include
specific responsibilities for water-related hygiene education, such as education about water storage
and hand-washing practices.

Institutional Arrangements

21.      The Program’s institutional arrangements are sound and well-aligned with GoB’s ongoing
reforms of the rural water sector. However, these institutional arrangements are new and untested
in Benin, and could therefore generate substantial risks if the reform process is not adequately
managed. The provision of water services has so far been placed under the exclusive responsibility
of municipalities, which have been receiving some limited assistance from central Ministries and
their deconcentrated services to plan and supervise the delivery of such services. The creation of
the ANAEPMR and the letting of regional contracts will lead to a recentralization of some of these
functions with the objectives of consolidation and the introduction of stronger checks and balances.
Institutional reforms are still ongoing and will be implemented with support of the Program. The
overall direction for these reforms has been defined in the Agency’s Roadmap (“Feuille de
Route”), which was approved by the President of Benin in November 2017. These orientations
will need to be translated into policy documents, as well legal and contractual arrangements in
order to clarify the roles of institutional actors in the sector following the reforms. They will also
need to be clearly communicated to sector actors so as to minimize the risk of confusion.

22.    The Program’s main implementer is the Rural Water Agency (Agence Nationale pour
l’Alimentation en Eau Potable en Milieu Rural - ANAEPMR). Having a main counterpart for
Program implementation will provide clarity of focus and leadership for implementation of the

                                                 58
Program, which is clearly aligned with the core mandate of the Agency. The Agency holds
standard roles assigned to other asset-holding agencies in countries in the sub-region, both for
urban and rural water services. These agencies were formed in many instances with support from
the World Bank; they have accumulated considerable experience that the Agency will be able to
draw from, including through exchange programs. Similar reform experiences in the region, such
as the creation of the Rural Boreholes Agency (Office des Forages Ruraux-OFOR) in Senegal
show that reforms take time and have also highlighted key areas that need to be taken into
consideration, such as the need for simultaneous tariff reform. Another lesson from regional
experiences is that an asset-holding agency can perform better if its roles, specific objectives and
available resources to achieve those objectives are clearly laid out in formal contractual
arrangements signed between the line Ministry and the Agency. As part of the Program, a multi-
year Planning Contract (Contrat Plan) will be signed by GoB and ANAEPMR to clarify mutual
roles and responsibilities: the initial adoption and renewal of such a contract has been included in
the Program’s results framework. This contract will define the institutional actors’ respective
commitments, their objectives over a three to five year rolling period, multi-year allocation of
financial resources and will specify time-bound responsibilities, including for the setting up of
service monitoring systems for example.

23.      The Agency was recently created, and has no proven track-record in terms of delivering an
investment program of such a scale or supervising delivery of quality water services across the
national territory. Its creation has significantly impacted the roles and responsibilities of other
institutional actors, particularly that of the MEM, of the MoH and of municipalities. The definition
and formalization of these new roles is still pending the realization of an organizational assessment
for the DG-Eau within the MEM (which is being financed by PEPRAU) and the adoption of the
FPAs between the central Government and municipalities. Up to this point, there has been no
official text to clarify roles and responsibilities and reflect recent reforms, given that the reforms
are still ongoing and responsibilities are being assigned.

24.      For long-term sector sustainability, it will be important to clarify responsibilities for setting
and adjusting tariffs or defining and applying norms and standards. With respect to tariff
regulation, it is anticipated that the MEM will continue to be in charge of setting and enforcing
tariffs. This will require clarifying tariff setting principles, structures and applicable taxation
(particularly as this proved to be a key hurdle for the contracting of private sector operators in
Senegal). For this reason, the approval of a tariff structure for rural water supply services has been
introduced as a results indicator in the Program results framework. In the longer run, a sector law
could be drawn up to clarify roles and responsibilities of institutional actors and provide
institutional stability.

25.     To deliver on its responsibilities, the Agency will need to rely extensively on external
technical assistance. This technical assistance will help clarify the applicable contractual
arrangements, which have been defined at a general level but for which specific details need to be
worked out. The Technical Assistant funded by PEPRAU will play a critical role to advise the
Agency with key decisions for the design of the Program, particularly with respect to the definition
of the regional operators’ service areas, reconciling multiple factors linked to geography, socio-
economic conditions, technical and political factors. Similarly, the Task Force of experts in PPPs
will play a critical role for the design of the contracts as well as supporting the Agency with the

                                                   59
actual transactions. It will be essential to mobilize high quality dedicated consultants of the task
Force for that purpose, and to manage them well.

26.     The Program will also support institutional support and capacity-building activities, that
will benefit the ANAEPMR so that it can enhance its investment planning capacities for rural water
supply, its information system and its supervision capacities. Additional technical assistance may
be provided to the deconcentrated services of the MEM and the MoH. The detail of these capacity
building activities still needs to be drawn up and will most likely evolve throughout the Program,
to adjust to capacity building needs. It is advised that the Agency and sector stakeholders draw up
a joint capacity building plan, once their respective roles and responsibilities have been clarified.
Supervision of service quality, which has so far been the responsibility of the DG-Eau and of the
MoH (with respect to water quality aspects), has historically been weak due to a lack of financial
and human resources. This is an area that will need particular focus when designing the program
of technical assistance to strengthen ANAEPMR and other sector actors with residual
responsibilities in this area, and with which ANAEPMR will need to coordinate its own activities.

27.     To facilitate transfer of responsibilities from the municipalities to the ANAEPMR for the
implementation of the national investment program, the GoB, represented by the Minister of
Water, will sign FPAs (Convention Cadre) with municipalities. Signing these FPAs is critical for
the implementation of the entire Program. Its signing will also be treated as a prior result. The FPA
will establish the terms and conditions for the partnership between the central government and
municipalities, particularly with respect to the programming, financing, implementation and
sustainable management of drinking water supply systems in rural areas. Under this FPA,
ANAEPMR will be empowered to prepare and award public service delegation contracts to
regional operators and to monitor the infrastructure and related service delivery. The FPA is a
high-level document, which means that further precision will need to be included in subsequent
legal provisions or contractual arrangements to ensure that the allocation of roles and
responsibilities between central level institutions and municipalities is clear and that the
ANAEPMR is accountable to the municipalities for this transfer of responsibilities relative to the
implementation of the national investment program. The ANAEPMR will need to publish regular
public reports on asset management and service monitoring. Municipalities will be able to rely
upon these reports in their interaction with their citizens for handling water-service related queries.

28.     Based on the FPAs, the ANAEPMR will be entitled to sign affermage contracts with
private operators. The design of these contracts will be the subject of an in-depth study during the
first month of the Program’s implementation. A technical study, undertaken by the Technical
Assistant to ANAEPMR, will help determine the appropriate perimeter of the operators, will assess
baseline conditions and will provide inputs for the definition of contractual arrangements,
particularly with respect to contract length, risk allocation, performance indicators and
remuneration formula. A Task Force will work on the design of these contracts, including legal
and financial aspects.

29.    It is expected that the affermage contracts will cover a number of drinking water systems
in several municipalities. Technical studies will confirm the number of regional operators to
provide water supply services in rural areas across the national territory. There will be six
contracts, which means that the rural population living in the perimeter of a given private operator

                                                  60
contract will be approximatively 1 million people. Such a scale is deemed appropriate to attract
private operators of a certain size, including international operators. The contracts will have an
appropriate duration in line with the responsibilities of the regional operators, particularly with
respect to financing. Under these contracts, private operators will:
x Carry out the construction of rehabilitation and expansion works financed by the Program.
    These will be carried out based on bills of quantities included in their contracts;
x Operate new or existing systems supported by the Program, as well as existing systems whose
    affermage or affermage agreements with the municipalities on their operating perimeter may
    expire or be terminated during the life of the regional operator’s contracts and that they could
    be asked to take over;
x Be remunerated based on their bid price (which will set the private operator’s remuneration)
    adjusted to take account of a number of performance criteria. The private operators will assume
    at least part of the commercial risks as their remuneration formula will, amongst other
    indicators, reflect their performance with respect to collection.

30.     The GoB decided to adopt a regional private sector participation model based on lessons
from more than ten years of private sector participation in the rural water sector, to address
persistent shortcomings with existing models and accelerate implementation towards universal
coverage. Letting performance-based contracts on a regional scale is seen as a key way to
overcome issues of lack of capacity for contract design, tendering, contract management and
service quality monitoring at the level of municipalities. Even though municipalities have
responsibilities for water service provision, they have limited resources and are frequently unable
to provide funding for rehabilitation and extensions (which would be needed in the case of an
affermage) or to provide adequate contract supervision. The emphasis on regional contracts was
inspired by regional experiences, such as in Senegal. This assessment found that letting regional
contracts is appropriate in the context of Benin, provided the following factors are met: (i)
municipalities effectively transfer their responsibilities for contracting and supervising private
operator contracts, and are clear about their residual responsibilities, particularly in terms of local
level planning, monitoring of water quality or resolution of customer complaints; (ii) contracts
are designed in a way that is attractive for professional private operators; (iii) monitoring of service
quality can be effectively carried out jointly by the ANAEPMR, deconcentrated services of the
DG-Eau and of DNSP as well as municipalities (for local level monitoring); and (iv) mechanisms
are in place for ensuring citizen engagement and adequate treatment of customers’ grievances at
the local level. Given that the operators will be responsible for constructing infrastructure, carrying
out pre-specified works based on bills of quantities and for managing the services, it may be
necessary to have different firms associate, including water service operators associating with
construction companies in order to bid for these contracts. As part of their contractual obligations,
the engineering consultant, works contractors and private operators will have to apply a social
intermediation methodology. This social intermediation methodology will entail participation of
municipalities, ACEPs and citizens throughout the consultation process during the planning,
design and supervision phases of the works.

31.    The affermage contracts will need to include strong incentives for performance
improvements. They will be prepared based on existing contractual models that have delivered
performance improvements in similar contexts. The performance-based affermage contracts used
in both urban and rural Senegal provide good examples, for example. Those contracts define a

                                                  61
number of performance parameters. Private operators face two types of incentives to improve their
performance with respect to these indicators. Critical performance indicators (related to non-
revenue water and bill collections) are embedded in the private operator’s remuneration formula,
which means that they would directly benefit (or be penalized) in accordance with their ability to
shift performance in line with those indicators. In addition, the contracts will reflect service level
norms and other service performance indicators (with associated targets), which have associated
penalties for non-compliance. A comprehensive set of result indicators will be defined, which will
capture both elements of performance of the installations, as well as customer service indicators.

32.     Human resources for professional water sector service delivery will need to be
strengthened and this will be achieved through specific activities funded by the Program, with a
particular focus on empowering women to engage in water service delivery and supervision. After
having considered the alternative of a new dedicated training center for rural water supply
specialists, it was decided that the Program should focus on strengthening the existing training
centre for urban water supply professionals (Centre de Formation des Métiers de l’Eau - CFME).
CFME is presently oversized and has large enough premises and some of the necessary
pedagogical equipment to enable a scale-up. The reform of the urban water supply sector is an
opportunity to turn the CFME into a national training operator for the entire water sector - urban
and rural, as long as it can become autonomous and its efficiency be improved.

33.      Mechanisms have been included in the design of the Program to ensure that citizens are
given a voice to express their preferences and can voice complaints and have these redressed.
Municipalities will need to hold regular meetings to ensure transparency on management and
obtain customer feedback – ANAEPMR will need to identify how it will be involved in those
processes. Specific mechanisms will need to be established to take account of women’s point of
view. All these activities will require strong institutional coordination and strengthening of
institutional actors at all levels, including locally.

34.     To achieve its objectives and contribute to addressing gender gaps in the country, the
Program will need to alleviate constraints for women and girls for accessing services and boost
their opportunities to be productively engaged in the water sector. The issue of ensuring greater
voice and agency will also need to be considered in detail, to ensure women’s adequate
participation in the sector. An assessment of the gender and social inclusion dimensions of the
Program was carried out during preparation with GWSP support. The assessment explored gender
gaps in two distinct areas: (i) in terms of gender-based difference in access to rural water services
and water-related hygienic practices (including hand-washing at critical times, food preparation,
bathing and washing and menstrual hygiene management) and (ii) in terms of women’s
participation and levels of empowerment in institutions participating in the governance, delivery
and supervision of water services and water-related hygienic practices in rural areas, including at
central level in the MEM/ DG-Eau, MoH / DNSP and ANAEPMR; and at local level, including
for local governance and service provision, within municipalities, private sector operators, CBOs
and ACEPs. This assessment examined the existing barriers such as access to information,
inadequate complaint-redress mechanisms or limited access to financial services, that currently
limit women’s access to water services and need to be specifically addressed. In addition, the
analysis examined whether women’s participation in the delivery of rural water services could be


                                                 62
supported through the Program, as it is currently very limited and since improving economic
opportunities for women is a priority of the draft CPF for Benin.

35.     To achieve its objectives and contribute to addressing gender gaps in the country, the
Program will seek to alleviate constraints for women and girls for accessing services and boost
their opportunities to be productively engaged in the water sector. The Program will improve
access to water supply services: this will translate into multiple impacts including improved living
conditions, health, school attendance, productivity and income. It is anticipated that women and
girls will particularly benefit from those impacts given the disproportionate role they play in
fetching water for households at present. In addition, the Program has defined a number of
measures to increase voice of women in consumer committees (ACEPs) and support them to
access training for water sector technical professions.

Program Expenditure Framework

36.     The Government has in place budget and expenditure management systems and practices
that support the Program in reaching its expected results. The Program Expenditure, as shown in
Table 8 of the TA, will mostly be financed by the World Bank loan (US$220 million, equivalent
to 92 percent) with the GoB contributing directly eight percent (US$20 million), which will cover
budget allocations to the Agency for its running costs and some investments in piped rural water
supply systems.

37.     The unit costs for drawing up the Program Expenditure framework were estimated based
on a review of unit cost estimates included in the PDDAEPMR and a comparison with regional
benchmarks. The average capital cost per person served through a mix of technical options
(new/rehabilitated/expanded water supply system) was estimated at FCFA 65,000 (US$122).
These costs appear reasonable when compared to data obtained from similar water supply projects
for example in Senegal (Saloum islands and Kaolack). Despite variations in unit costs, the same
payment per person served was included in the Program design to provide incentives to extend
coverage and identify the most appropriate ways of doing so during Program implementation,
based on local-level demand and financial viability. It is expected that the private regional
operators will have a strong built-in incentive to provide household connections given that they
result in higher water sales and therefore higher revenues for the operator. As household
connections allow for the consumption of more water and reduce the burden of fetching water,
they also deliver greater economic benefits for the population.

38.     As the Program will mostly rely on public investments, it will be essential to build in
incentives for delivering the Program in the most efficient way possible. The unit costs reflected
in the works program will need to be closely examined to reflect efficient market costs. Given that
the localities where the Program will invest have not yet been defined, there are no detailed studies
on which to rely for estimating such costs. There is always a risk that, for a Program of this scale
undertaken with external financing, contractors may seek to apply a mark-up on costs. A full
review of these designs will be needed to refine the estimates of unit costs provided in the TA in
Table 9. These could vary depending on the difficulty of the material being drilled (depth/type of
aquifer), as well as unexpected construction delays.



                                                 63
Results Framework, Monitoring and Evaluation

39.     The Program’s results framework was drawn up based on the definition of a clear results
chain, ranging from activities and inputs to intermediate outcomes and outcomes (see Table 10 of
the TA). The definition of this results chain was led by the ANAEPMR, which demonstrated a
clear understanding of the underlying Theory of Change for the Program.

40.      The design of the Program is focused, hence there are a limited number of results indicators
providing for clear incentives during implementation. Results indicators have been included with
respect to gender aspects and citizen engagement. Following discussions with the Government, it
was deemed premature to include indicators that relate to service quality as part of the Program
results framework. However, private operators will have clear service quality improvement targets
as part of their contracts. In the affermage contract model under consideration, remuneration will
be directly tied to the ability of service providers to improve service quality with respect to key
parameters.

41.      Four DLIs were identified along the different steps of the results chain. The DLIs were
selected to provide clear incentives for achieving results and to support key milestones towards
their achievement. The rationale for the selection of the DLIs is sound and well understood by all
parties:

x   The two first DLIs, “The number of new household connections built under the Program” and
    “The number of new standpipes built under the Program” are outputs. They are scalable, which
    means that disbursements will take place throughout the life of the Program as soon as water
    supply schemes are commissioned and effectively deliver water to end-users. Such DLIs will
    provide strong incentives for the Agency and for the regional operators to deliver results on
    the ground.
x   The third DLI, “Framework Partnership between the Government’s MEM and selected
    municipalities established” is at the output level. This DLI consists of two sequential sub-
    indicators. The first one, the signature of the FPAs, is a key milestone that will condition the
    implementation of the entire Program and will demonstrate high-level political support for the
    Program. The second one, the bi-annual publication of service monitoring reports, will reflect
    the new role of the ANAEPMR for water supply service monitoring in rural areas, and will
    make it accountable for its responsibilities for service provision.
x   The fourth DLI, “Performance-based contracts between the ANAEPMR and regional operators
    signed and with service orders issued” is also at the output level. There will be six regional
    contracts signed to cover all rural areas in the country. The preparation of these contracts, their
    marketing to potential operators and their effective signing will represent a significant amount
    of work for the Agency.

42.       The implementation of the Program’s M&E framework will require strong M&E tools,
first, to gather information on a real-time basis and, second, to verify the information. The Agency
will perform routine monitoring and evaluation (M&E) activities based on information provided
by the private operators, as well as the deconcentrated services of the MEM and MoH (for water
quality). Monitoring and evaluation capacities within the Agency are solid. However, since the
Agency has no proven track-record of effective monitoring, the M&E department will need to be

                                                  64
reinforced with additional staff and will need to develop effective mechanisms of working with
the deconcentrated services of DG-Eau, the MoH and municipalities.

43.     Routine monitoring activities will greatly benefit from the universal roll-out of a web-based
management tool and monitoring platform, m-water, which offers multiple functionalities. This
management tool was developed and extended as part of a WSP-funded activity and has
demonstrated its operational value particularly for local private operators working under
“subsidized concession” contracts. This monitoring platform requires that the water systems be
geo-referenced. It allows service operators to produce the activity reports that existing operators
are expected to submit to municipalities every month. Despite the significant advantages of the
existing web platform, the TA has identified weaknesses in the management of the information
produced by the existing web-platform, including in terms of providing staff in charge of service
monitoring with access to information and enabling them to adequately process this data. The
Agency and the MEM will need to be trained and granted access rights to effectively manage real-
time information on the current operating status of rural water systems in a form that is suitable
for service monitoring purposes at a fairly aggregate level. DLI 3 of the Program creates an
incentive to address this challenge.

44.     The INSAE will be the IVA for the Program. The bulk of the verification activities will
relate to DLIs 1 and 2. The other two DLIs are more straightforward to verify, as they are based
on ensuring that legal documents have been signed and that monitoring reports have been
published. With respect to DLI 4, it will be important to verify not only that the contracts with
private operators have been signed, but also that the operators have effectively started service
provision, with all required pre-conditions put into place. The TA found that the INSAE fulfills
the minimum criteria for an IVA, including in terms of autonomy and adequate capacity. The
INSAE was deemed to be sufficiently independent to verify results in an unbiased and nonpartisan
manner.

Economic Analysis

45.     The rationale for providing public financing for the Program is strong. The Program aims
at extending access to rural water services. In rural areas, ability to pay is low, whilst costs of
extending services are substantial, and potential economic returns may also be substantial. Here,
the use of public financing is considered appropriate for supplying what is a basic public good.
Improving access to rural water supply services will translate into multiple impacts, including
improved living conditions, health, school attendance, productivity and income. It is anticipated
that women and girls will particularly benefit from these impacts given the predominant role they
play in fetching water for households.

46.     The Program will benefit a targeted 1.6 million people who will receive improved services
across several parameters. The population will spend less time fetching water, as the Program aims
to provide at least 50 percent of the target population with access through a household connection
(time fetching water goes down to zero) and 50 percent through a standpipe (time fetching water
will be reduced to below 30 minutes round trip).




                                                 65
47.      The Program will generate local jobs, including for construction of the systems and for
operating and maintaining piped water services. Thanks to investment in training and development
of a professionalized workforce for rural water supply services, including for women who will be
encouraged to join the workforce, a greater proportion of these jobs will be qualified jobs which
will attract higher salaries. The program will also reduce pressure on the use of local groundwater
resources (through stronger monitoring and management of these resources) and of energy sources
(through an emphasis on connecting piped rural water supply systems to the grid or relying on
solar energy).

48.     The construction of new rural water supply systems will benefit approximately 827,000
people who had no prior access to improved water supplies and will either get water through
standpipes or household connections. This will result in greater time gains and illness reduction.
Rehabilitated systems will generate reductions in operating costs as well as time gains, health
benefits and an increase in consumer surplus for populations that switch from standpipe supplies
(charged at an average price of CFAF 800 per m3) to household connections, for which water is
charged at an average price of CFAF 500 per m3.

49.     Gaining access to water within the home will allow for usage of greater water volumes. At
present, it is estimated that families who fetch water from standpipes or non-improved water points
use approximately 5 to 7 liters per day per capita, which is below the recommended standard for
hygienic practices per capita per day (20 liters per capita per day). Depending on the tariff applied
by private operators, higher consumption may not necessarily result in greater total water costs for
consumers. At present, water users who buy water (at a standpipe for example), pay approximately
FCFA 20 (US$0.04) for a bucket of 25 liters, which is equivalent to FCFA 800 (US$1.5) per m 3,
although this price varies considerably between departments. This price includes the mark-up
applied by the standpipe operator. It is four times higher than the social tariff applied by the urban
water utility (SONEB) to households which consume below 5 m3 per month, which is FCFA 198
per m3 (US$0.37) for higher consumption volumes (27 liters per capita per day for a household
with six people).

50.    An economic analysis was conducted to compare costs and benefits with and without the
Program. Costs and benefit streams were projected over 30 years and discounted at a social
discount rate of 8 percent. Benefit streams were estimated for four groups of beneficiaries to take
account of the different ways in which they will benefit from the Program. Costs included all
Program costs (including costs of reforms, construction and rehabilitation costs) as well as
operating and maintenance costs and households’ contributions to connection costs.

51.     The analysis yielded a benefit-cost ratio of 5.44, which is in line with international
estimates of similar investments in areas with limited access to water supply. The net present value
of costs and benefits is US$1.8 billion, which is equivalent to an annual net benefit per person of
US$38. Overall, the IRR for the investment was estimated at 144 percent. A sensitivity analysis
was conducted on a number of parameters, including the social discount rate, the value of time and
the impact of the investments on diarrheal illness reduction, and operating costs. The results are
particularly sensitive to estimates of incidence of diarrheal episodes in the affected region, the
impact of the project on waterborne disease reduction and the value of time. The NPV remained


                                                 66
highly positive under all these scenarios, which implies that the Program will generate high
positive returns for the economy.

52.    The rationale for World Bank support is strong. The proposed operation is closely aligned
with the Bank’s twin goals of ending extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity, as well as
the overarching theme of sustainability. The GoB is committed to delivering universal access by
2021 (by which they really mean coverage, i.e. providing all people with access to an improved
water source within 30 minutes of their dwelling).

53.     The World Bank assistance to develop and support this Program will facilitate the sharing
of lessons learned from successful rural water projects globally, while also building capacity for
results-based planning and financing in the national Program. In particular, World Bank support
provides incentives for balanced, efficient investment in water supply, as well as improved
governance and financial processes.

54.    An assessment of technical risks and identification of associated risk mitigation measures
has been included in Annex 7.




                                               67
                            Annex 5: Fiduciary Systems Assessment

This Annex 5 corresponds to the complete Program’s Integrated Fiduciary Systems Assessment.

Scope of the IFSA
   A. Introduction
1.      As part of the Program preparation, the IFSA of the Program was carried out, consistent
with World Bank Policy and World Bank Directive: “Program-for-Results Financing” and in
accordance with the World Bank Guidance Notes for ‘Program-for-Results Financing’. The
objective of the assessment was to examine whether Program systems provide reasonable
assurance that the financing proceeds will be used for their intended purposes, with due attention
to the principles of value for money, economy, integrity, fit-for-purpose, efficiency, effectiveness,
transparency, fairness, and accountability. The FM systems were assessed to gauge the extent to
which the planning, budgeting, accounting, controls, funds flow, financial reporting, and auditing
systems and practices provide a reasonable assurance on the appropriate use of Program funds and
safeguarding of its assets. Equally, the Program procurement systems have been assessed to
establish the extent to which the planning, the bidding, evaluation, contract award and contract
administration arrangements and practices provide reasonable assurance in support of achievement
of the Program results through its procurement processes and procedures. In addition, the
assessment covered the aspects of capacity of the fiduciary systems and considered how Program
governance systems manage the risks of fraud and corruption and how such risks will be mitigated.

2.      The IFSA was conducted through a methodical review of systems and practices at the
national and district levels, involving the review of analytical work mainly: (i) PEFA 2014
Assessment; (ii) Public Expenditure Management and Financial Accountability Review
(PEMFAR 2014); and (iii) Assessment of Procurement Systems conducted in 2015 by the World
Bank and the African Development Bank. The team also reviewed the lessons learned in the
implementation of World Bank operations in the water and sanitation sector. The WSS in Benin
is supported by several Development Partners, including the World Bank through its “Small Town
Water Supply and Urban Septate Management Project (PEPRAU)” (P156738). The PEPRAU,
approved in December 2016, was the first lending operation of the World Bank since the closing
in December 2000, of the Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project (P000121). The PEPRAU
aims at increasing access to water supply and sanitation in selected rural and urban areas and
strengthen service delivery capacity of WSS.

3.     The conclusion of the IFSA is that the Program systems meet the requirements of the World
Bank Policy and World Bank Directive: “Program-for-Results Financing” and are adequate for
achievement of the Program objectives. The IFSA has identified certain risks and measures to
mitigate such risks. The risks mitigation measures will be managed through implementation of the
PAP. The overall Program integrated fiduciary risk (FM, procurement, and governance) is rated
high because of weaknesses in legislative and institutional framework in procurement, internal
controls and auditing, procurement, and governance systems and practices in the country. The
capacity of the Agency (e.g. newly created agency) as well as its governance arrangements also
remain a challenge. The key mitigation measures arising from the identified risks, that are largely
contained in the DLIs/PAP include the following: (i) the adoption and promulgation of the decrees

                                                 68
required for the implementation of the new procurement code and standard bidding documents;
(ii) the creation of a procurement control unit and appointment of the person responsible for
approving contracts at ANAEPMR; (iii) opening of a DA managed by the CAA and a “Treasure
Saving Service Account for Investment” managed by ANAEPMR to prevent cash constraints; and
(iv) bi-annual joint technical, procurement and financial internal audit of the Program to ensure
efficient use of the Program funds. Hands on support and capacity strengthening of the Agency
and of the MEM’s Inspectorate General of the Ministry (IGM) are also planned during the entire
implementation period of the Program.

    B. Program Design (Institutional arrangements) and Expenditure Framework

4.      The IFSA covered the newly created ANAEPMR38, the implementing agency of the
Program supported by the World Bank. The GoB created ANAEPMR in January 2017 to
consolidate the execution of all rural water supply activities, to expand more rapidly access to
water supply services in rural areas and establish service delivery models for a quality and
sustainable operation in coordination with the municipalities. The ANAEPMR is under the
supervision of the Presidency.

5.      All the Program activities will be executed by ANAEPMR using its fiduciary procedures
described in the manuals of the Agency. The ANAEPMR is staffed with one experienced recruited
procurement specialist. The FAD is supported by the FM team of ANAEPMR currently composed
of one accountant. The selection of the remaining staff is on-going and is expected to be completed
by Program effectiveness. The ANAEPMR is organized in conformity with the country
procurement legislation with a Procurement Commission and chaired by the nominated Person in
charge of Procurement. The documents (Bidding Documents, Request for Proposals, Bid
Evaluation Reports) conjointly elaborated by the procurement commission and the ANAEPMR
should be submitted for decisions to the procurement control unit of the ANAEPMR or to the
National Procurement Control Directorate (Direction Nationale de Controle des Marchés Publics)
under the Ministry of Finance depending of the competency of the procurement control threshold.
In absence of the establishment of the procurement control unit of the ANAEPMR, all documents
are submitted to the National Directorate for Public Procurement Control (Direction Nationale de
Contrôle des Marchés Publics – DNCMP) for decision.

6.     The Program will finance a portion of the GoB’s program expenditures for universal rural
water supply estimated at US$560 million. More specifically, the Program will support over the
period 2018-2024 the development of rural water supply systems and professionalized service
delivery models in selected municipalities with lower access to rural water supply services. The
Program focuses on the development of piped water schemes. The Program will also finance the
capacity building activities of the newly created national agency in the water sector– ANAEPMR.




38 Decree No 2017-039 of January 25, 2017.



                                                69
                      Table A5.1: Summary of the Program Expenditure Framework
     Funds Source                       Amount (in US$ million)                        Total
                       FY19     FY20     FY21         FY22    FY23    FY24    FY25
     Government                 4.00     4.00         4.00    4.00    4.00              20.00
     IDA including     20.00    43.00    61.00        42.00   36.00   18.00   0.00     220.00
     IDA Scale - Up
     Facility
     Total             20.00    47.00    65.00        46.00   40.00   22.00   0.00     240.00


Review of Public Financial Management Cycle including Procurement
   A. Legislative and institutional PFM framework
A1. Procurement:
7.      The last assessment conducted by the World Bank and the African Development Bank of
the procurement system was completed in 2015. This assessment revealed some weaknesses
relating to lack of transparency, lack of efficiency and low capacities. On the basis of
recommendations made and within the framework of the transposition of WAEMU Directives, the
GoB adopted a new procurement code no 2017 – 04 on October 19, 2017. The elaboration of
application decrees of this new law is ongoing and is expected to be adopted by end of FY18. The
review of the draft decrees revealed that the procurement thresholds and the procurement control
threshold have not been increased sufficiently as recommended in the PEMFAR report.

8.     It is also noted that the decree covering the request for quotation is separated from the
decree on the request for price information. It is recommended to increase the procurement
thresholds and the procurement control threshold and to not separate the two decrees of the request
for quotation and the request for price information. In the new adopted procurement law, the open
tender procedure is the procurement method used as a matter of principle. This method is
mandatory for contracts above a certain threshold. The new thresholds will be updated through the
decree of application of the new procurement law.

9.      The information and price request procedure and the direct contract option are other
methods accepted by the code, under certain conditions. The procurement law stipulates that the
total amount of contracts concluded through direct contract will not exceed 10 percent of the total
amount of the contracts concluded in the year. There is no statistic to prove that this direct
contracting percentage was respected. It is recommended to conduct the procurement process
through SIGMAP (e-GP) to have statistics available in terms of amounts of contracts approved
and amount per procurement methods.
A2. Financial Management:
10.    The enabling legislative and institutional framework for FM is contained in the (i)
Constitution – Law No 90-032 dated on December 11, 1990 (Article 99 related to Finances Laws
including Settlement Laws); (ii) Organic PFM law no 2013-14 dated on September 27, 2013 which

                                                 70
were aligned with the WAEMU directives; (iii) WAEMU directives; and (iv) some through
decrees and ordonnances, subsidiary legislations, regulations and operational and financial
directives which dictate the day-to-day basis for the management and oversight of public finances.

11.    In general, the legislative and institutional framework for PFM is in place and globally
considered acceptable. This framework is in line with or approximates international standards. In
addition, Benin has transposed the WAEMU directives, regulations, and rules on public finances
into national law. However, this is still in process, with some delays, notably in the budget,
accounting, internal control and external auditing. Furthermore, compliance with this legislative
framework as well as rules and regulations remains a key challenge for the government.

12.     For the Program, in addition to the legislative and institutional PFM framework, the design
of the FM arrangements considered the ad hoc arrangements described in the following two
Circulars: (i) Annex 2 of the Letter no 11-c/MEF/DC/SGM/DGB/DPSELF/SPSB of January 5,
2018 and (ii) no 950/MEF/DC/SGM/DGB/DPSELF of March 26, 2018. The two Circulars clarify
mainly how to mobilize, manage and control the resources under the responsibility of Government
agencies. Under these Circulars, ANAEPMR can execute the budget allocated to the Agency
outside the country public expenditure chain and using its own accounting and FM procedures
detailed in its manual of procedures.

   B. Planning and Budgeting
B1. Adequacy of budgets.
13.     The Organic Budget Law (LOLF) no 2013-14 dated on September 27, 2013 has introduced
the Performance based budget which uses statements of missions, goals and objectives to explain
how the money is being spent. The new multi-year expenditure programming documents
(Documents de Programmation Pluriannuelle de la Dépense) are prepared according to the new
WAEMU directives on PFM.

14.     The overall cost of the supported Program including the portion financed by the World
Bank are included in the multi-year expenditure programming documents as well as the PIP. The
annual budgets are prepared based on the PIP. Importantly, the Government has recently adopted
a policy of only including projects from the PAG in the PIP, as well as projects which are mature
and ready for implementation (e.g. feasibility studies and technical evaluation already conducted
to project readiness). Planning and budgeting related to this Program will follow the national
procedures. Based on budget instructions/circular, the team of ANAEPMR will prepare the budget
of the Program considering the limits of allocations set by the Government. The budget of
ANAEPMR will be integrated in the budget of the MEM. Thereafter, this budget will be
consolidated in the overall budget of the country. The national budget is approved by the
Parliament.

15.     The 2018 Finances Law includes a budget line in the budget of the MEM allocated to the
Government Program in the sector. However, for the PforR operation, the budget line will be
created once the Financing Agreement of the supported Program is signed. A due process between



                                                71
the Ministry of Finances and the ANAEPMR via the Presidency is in place for negotiating the
annual budget. This program is part of the five (5) priority Programs of PAG.

16.     The total amount allocated to the Program during the fiscal year 2018 should be reflected
in the revised 2018 Finances Law.
B2. Procurement planning.
17.    Article 23 of Procurement Law No 2017 - 04 of October 2017 on the organization of the
procurement process and the functioning of the procurement units provides that the Contracting
Authorities have the responsibility to prepare, annually, the consolidated procurement plan (PPM)
based on their activities program and in line with their allocated credit. The procurement plan
approved by the relevant procurement control is submitted to the National Central Directorate of
Procurement (DNCMP) for publication.

18.     The inconsistency between budget and planning was noted. There is a disconnect between
procurement planning and budget availability. Procurement planning for the fiscal year is done
before the budget is allocated with overambitious results at this stage. The procurement plan is
later adjusted based on the available budget and the priorities set by the agency. Execution of the
procurement plan complies with the applicable rules and procedures for each procurement method
applied as per the PPM. It is recommended to define in the new decree of the rule and modality of
elaboration of the procurement plan that a draft PPM should be submitted together with the budget.
Once the budget is approved, the draft Procurement Plan can be finalized and sent to the competent
authority, for approval and publication.

   C. Budget Execution
C1. Budget execution modalities for Government agencies
19.    At the national level, the execution and management of contracts financed by the Treasury
are significantly handicapped by long delays in payments. Late payments adversely affect the
entire chain of public procurement financed through the Treasury. Moreover, this reduces
competition. This undermines also the cost of contracts as well as the authority of the public
administration in the management and administration of contracts.

20.     Furthermore, proposed commitments for expenditure executed as per regular procedures
are subject to approval by the financial controller before authorization for payment by the
Treasury. Following approval by the financial control authorities and before the issuance of the
payment order, Treasury rechecks the control procedures already carried out by financial control.
The Treasury also provides approval for expenses. This duplication of tasks causes delays between
the liquidation and authorization of expenses.

21.     To ensure that the Program activities will be implemented within the timeframe agreed
during the preparation of the Program, the Government has decided to allow the newly created
ANAEPMR to use its own fiduciary procedures including planning and budgeting, accounting,
internal control and audit, financial reporting, disbursement and external audit as described in the
Agency administrative and FM procedures manual.


                                                72
22.     Specifically, the budget allocated to the Program every year, will be made available to
ANEAPMR through the budgetary mechanism of "capital transfer". The budget allocation, once
mandated and disbursed, allows to have endowment for the financing of capital spending. The
capital transfer transaction follows the country public expenditure chain with some flexibilities to
avoid any delays. However, it involves the key actors of the public expenditure chain mainly the
Delegated Authorizing Officer (Ordonnateur Délégué), the Financial Controller's Delegate
(Délégué du Controleur Financier) and the Public Accountant (Treasury). Hence, Program funds
provided by the World Bank will be entirely reflected in the central government budget under the
budget line for the Program of the MEM and will then be channeled to ANAEPMR through the
Treasury to finance planned activities.

23.     The budget execution performance in the sector is deemed low. As per the information
provided by the Directorate of the Planning and Programming (Direction de la Programmation et
de la Planification of the MEM), the budgets (both national and donors) allocated to rural levels
in the water sector were executed at 10 percent in 2015; 8.3 percent in 2016 and 39.8 percent in
2017.
C2. Funds flow arrangements for Program implementation.
Disbursement from IDA to the Designated Account (DA)

24.     A DA in XOF will be opened at the Central Bank (BCEAO) to receive the amounts of the
initial advance up to 20 percent of IDA supported Program costs as well as the amounts
corresponding to the DLIs achieved. Upon achieving DLI-related results, a Withdrawal
Application (WA) will be submitted to the World Bank, using the World Bank’s standard
disbursement forms through the e-disbursement functionality in the World Bank’s Client
Connection system. The WA prepared by the team of ANEAPMR will be accompanied by certified
and cleared evidence from the task team that the related results were achieved. The DA will be
managed by the CAA in charge of the mobilization of donors’ funds and management of debt in
Benin.

“Treasure Saving Service Account for Investment” (Compte du Service d’Epargne du Trésor pour
investissement de l’ANAEPMR).

25.     A Treasure Saving Service Account will be opened and managed by the ANAEPMR. It
will also ensure that request for payment addressed to ANAEPMR will not suffer of cash rationing
and shortage.

26.    Upon receipt of IDA funds into the DA, the CAA will transfer within a maximum of ten
(10) business days, the entire amount to the Treasure Saving Service Account for investment
(TSSAI) managed by ANAEPMR. The amounts to be received from IDA represents the “initial”
advance up to 20 percent of the Program costs as well as the amounts of DLIs achieved.
27.    The Government, through its budget execution procedure applicable to Agencies as
described in the 2018 Finances Law39 and related Circulars, will transfer its contribution to the

39 2018 Finances Law – Page 62 and 63 – Parag 34.1 and 34.2.




                                                               73
TSSAI to support some investment related to the Program. This contribution could pre-finance the
expenditure. The Government would claim disbursements40 from the World Bank as the DLIs are
achieved. The process will follow the standard public expenditure chain which requires the
intervention of the financial controller, public accountant and budget manager. The Government
will transfer its annual contribution to the TSSAI based on the approved annual plan and budget
as well as the payment estimates (“plan de consommation”). Additional supporting documents
agreed between the Agency and the Ministry of Finance (DGTCP) as required by the country PFM
acts will be provided as well.

Contribution of the Government to the operating costs of ANAEPMR: Transaction Account

28.    The ANAEPMR will open a Transaction account managed by the Public accountant
(Finance Director) and the Managing Director of the Agency in a commercial bank to receive the
government contribution to support the operating costs of the Agency.

29.     The DGTCP, through its budget execution procedure applicable to Agencies and described
in the 2018 Finances Law41, will transfer to the Transaction account, its contribution to support
the operating costs of ANAEPMR. The process will follow the standard public expenditure chain
which requires the intervention of the financial controller, public accountant and budget manager.
The Government will transfer its annual contribution to the Transaction Account twice a year. It
will be based on the approved annual plan and budget as well as the payment estimates for the next
months to be paid from the TSSAI.

Payments of service providers, contractors of the Program and operating costs of ANAEPMR.

30.     According to Paragraph 34.1 and 34.2 of 2018 Finances Law, and related Circulars as
described above, the TSSAI of ANAEPMR and the Transaction account opened in a commercial
bank should be managed by the Public Accountant (Agent Comptable public) assigned to the
Agency. However, the current Finance Director of ANAEPMR will be appointed by the Minister
of finance as the Public Accountant assigned to the Program to manage the funds allocated to the
Agency.

31.     The funds transferred to the “Treasure Saving Service Account for Investment” and the
Transaction Account managed by the ANAEPMR, will be spent following the Agency financial
and accounting procedure manual. The Managing Director of ANAEPMR as well as the Public
Accountant assigned to the Program (Finance Director) will sign all payments to beneficiaries,
service providers and contractors. ANAEPMR will proceed payments to Implementing Agencies
or contractors in regard to the specified activities in the Program. Payments will be made in
accordance with the payment modalities, as specified in the respective contracts/conventions. In
addition to these supporting documents, the ANAEPMR will consider the findings of the internal
audit and IGM/IGF/ANRMP while approving the payments. The ANAEPMR will reserve the right
to verify the expenditures ex-post, and refunds might be requested for non-respect of

40 If there is any advance with the World Bank, either it could be adjusted or rolled over till the end of the Program for final

adjustment.
41 2018 Finances Law – Page 62 and 63 – Parag 34.1 and 34.2.



                                                                 74
contractual/convention clauses. Misappropriated activities could result in the cancellation or
suspension of financing for beneficiaries, service providers or constructors found guilty.

                                 Figure A5.1: Funds Flow Diagram




C2. Accounting and financial reporting.
32.     The public expenditure chain is computerized. The expenditure chain, which covers the
budget execution and control cycles, is fully computerized and interfaces well with the
procurement (SIGMAP) and the treasury system (ASTER). In-year budget reports are produced
quarterly and published on the MEF’s website, within about eight weeks after the end of the
quarter. The information is extracted from the budgeting and accounting information systems
(SIGFIP and ASTER). The quarterly budget execution reports are put on the MEF’s website
(www.finances.bj). The accounting software (ASTER) has a double way interface with SIGFIP.
ASTER has recently been fully decentralized at departmental level to allow timely generation of
accounts. Since 2013, all annual accounts are submitted by the Government, within 4 months from
the receipt of the financial statements (on time) to account authorities (Chambre des
comptes). Still, there are some delays in the approval of state accounts (Comptes de Gestion) by
the Supreme Court (which is outside Government control). For the purpose of the Program, the
transfer of budget and funds through the public expenditure channel will be recorded in the country
computerized accounting and budget software.

33.    According to the 2018 Finances Law, interim financial reports as well as annual financial
statements of the Program will be prepared using ANAEPMR accounting and financial reporting
systems that are described in the Agency procedures manual. The IFSA revealed that the Agency
has not fully implemented its accounting to accommodate the new Program. All the expenditure
supporting documents will remain at ANAEPMR for recording of transactions and evidence of

                                                75
expenditures. ANAEPMR will prepare and submit bi-annually, Interim Financial Reports (IFRs)
and annual financial statements. ANAEPMR has made arrangements to extend the accounting
software currently being used in the PEPRAU project to the PforR operation.

C3. Procurement processes and procedures.
34.     The Program's resource-based procurement will follow the national procedures of Benin.
The World Bank and the African Development Bank have conducted the last assessment of the
procurement system in 2015. This assessment revealed some weaknesses relating to lack of
transparency, lack of efficiency and low capacities. On the basis of recommendations made and
within the framework of the transposition of WAEMU Directives, the GoB adopted a new
procurement code in 2017. The main issues addressed to improve the procurement system are: (i)
separation of the provisions on public procurement from those on public service delegations; (ii)
extension of cases of derogation from the Public Procurement Code (Code des Marchés Publics -
CMP) to take account of recurrent practical difficulties, which include arbitration, conciliation,
legal assistance and representation services; financial services relating to the issue, purchase for
sale and transfer of securities or other financial instruments, the acquisition in case of stock-outs
of essential drugs or products used in emergency medicine or in case of epidemic, etc.; (iii)
provisions for the professionalization of the public procurement chain; (iv) strengthening of the
public procurement control system through the replacement of Chiefs procurement Control Cell
formerly appointed by the contracting authorities by the Public Procurement Control Delegates at
the level of the ministries and institutions of the State, attached to the DNCMP; (v) introduction
into the regulation of - contracts awarded following unsolicited offers in public contracts; - markets
economically or technically complementary to a basic contract concluded in a call for tenders, etc.;
(vi) new measures to simplify public procurement procedures by introducing the concept of the
exemption threshold and the price solicitation method. These new measures also contribute to
enhancing transparency, especially at the level of markets below the award threshold; (vii)
reductions in the legal deadlines of public procurement processes, in particular advertising
deadlines in the event of a Notice of Expressions of Interest, in case of urgency, deadlines for
drafting the contract, approval; and (viii) strengthening of the Public Procurement Regulatory
Authority (Autorité Nationale de Régulation des Marchés Publics – ARMP) sanctions regime.

35.     The open tender procedure is the procurement method used as a matter of principle. This
method is mandatory for contracts above a certain threshold. The new thresholds should be
increased through the decree of application of the new procurement law. The information and price
request procedure and the direct contract option are other methods accepted by the code, under
certain conditions. The procurement law stipules that the total amount of contracts concluded
through direct contract will not exceed 10 percent of the total amount of the contracts concluded
in the year. There is no statistics to prove that this direct contract percentage was respected. It is
recommended to conduct all the procurement process through e-Gov (SIGMAP).

36.    The use of national standard tendering documents is mandatory for open tender calls. The
evaluation criteria must be clearly defined in the tender documents and be used for the evaluation
of tenders. All these documents are under revision.in accordance with the new procurement law.
In the particular case of procurement under PPP arrangements, the Program will use bidding


                                                 76
documents developed under the subsidized concession pilot (see P132114) with support from the
International Finance Corporation (IFC), amended with procurement criteria.

C4. Contract administration.
37.     Articles 123 and 124 of the Procurement Code describe the contract performance
conditions while article 125 refers to contract cancellation procedures and penalties applied to the
different parties. The approach described seems simplified and equitable. The overall capital
expenditure payment period is still long and does not comply with the contractual obligations. The
direct consequences of the payment delay are that:
       9 The tenderers are reticent to participate in tender calls financed through Government
         funds, the tenders are higher because tenderers justifiably estimate the cost of payment
         delays and include it in their proposals (rolling stock securement, storage costs,
         resources on hold and possible bank charges in case of loans and various guarantees);
       9 The successful tenderers with limited financial capacities may have to interrupt the
         works or confiscate the supplies to be delivered pending payment, which can lead to
         serious delays; and
       9 The Contracting Authorities do not apply penalties on ongoing contracts because the
         State’s commitments are not fulfilled and the interests for delayed payments stipulated
         on the contracts are never paid.
38.     The ANAEPMR is newly created and has no past experience in contract management. The
recruitment of technical staff who may be in charge of contract management is ongoing. It is
strongly recommended to prepare implementing manuals defining the circuits, timelines,
supporting documents related to payment operations from a standpoint of prevention and risk
management and precise the provision of contract management.

C5. Authority to approve contracts:

39.     The Public Procurement Code, in its article 95, empowers the respective supervisory
authorities to approve contracts concluded in Government ‘budget’. The ANAEPMR is under the
supervision of the Presidency. It is recommended to designate the person authorized to approve
the contract.

   D. Internal Controls
D1. Internal controls (including internal audit)
40.    The institutional framework for control is adequate at central government level but the
overall performance of institutions of internal control requires additional improvements.
According to the 2014 PEFA report, Indicators PI-20 and PI-21 scored C and C+, respectively.
Rules of ex ante control of expenditure are in place, but there is duplication of tasks over
commitments and payments. The control bodies do not have sufficient human and financial
resources, and their capacities remain limited. The mission noted the following weaknesses: (i) the
existence of several internal control structures, whose missions and reporting mechanisms overlap,
thereby reducing the effectiveness of control mechanisms; (ii) weaknesses in monitoring the

                                                   77
implementation of the recommendations of the control and investigation missions; (iii) limited
human resources of several inspection bodies. For example, the IGM of the MEM has 4
professional staff (auditors) and the IGF have fewer than 10 professional staff members. None of
the staff of the IGM team has a diploma (e.g. engineer) with practical experiences in hydraulic and
sanitation. In addition, modern aspects of the PFM, such as the risk-based approach for internal
and external oversight institutions, are not yet in place in all these institutions. It is expected that
the internal audit function of ANAEPMR will be fulfilled by an independent audit firm recruited
by the BAI. However, the internal auditor of ANAEPMR was not appointed yet at the time of the
negotiations.

41.     Therefore, inappropriate or misused or inefficient use of the Program funds may not be
detected on time or never identified because of the ineffective internal controls systems and weak
internal audit bodies. The revision of the legislative framework of internal audit function as well
as the increase in the number of staff of these institutions will be critical actions to be considered
in a PforR operation.

42.      There are some on-going discussions to improve the overall internal control legislative and
institutional control arrangements in Benin. A reform of the State Administrative Control Corps is
under way. This reform aims to set up Ministerial Risk Management Committees (Comités
Ministériels de Maitrise des Risques - CMMR) and Internal Audit Committees (Comités
Ministériels d’Audit Interne - CMAI) and measures to make the IGM and IGF more efficient.
However, at the time of Program IFSA, draft texts related to these reforms have not been approved
and implemented yet.

43.     Therefore, for the purpose of this Program, a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) will
be signed between ANAEPMR and IGF including IGM and DNCMP to conduct periodic internal
audit missions. IGF will be the lead to allow the inspections of audit mission of ANAEPMR which
is an Agency under the supervision of the Presidency. Each mission will cover six months of
Program activities (semester) and will focus on the Program technical, financial and procurement
aspects. The MOU will clarify the modality including the due date for submission of the report. A
summary of the internal audit reports presented in an agreed format, will be published. A copy of
the reports will be shared with Chamber of Accounts.

44.    The capacity constraints faced by these institutions of controls (e.g. IGF, IGM) could be
addressed through the Program.

D2. Control and integrity
45.    The procurement control unit: In accordance with articles 11, 12 and 15 of the Public
Procurement Code, agencies must have respectively the person in charge of Procurement, the
procurement commissions and the procurement control units. The head of the procurement control
unit must be designated by the DNCMP. The procurement control unit has not been established. It
is recommended to establish this procurement unit in accordance with the new law.

46.     In Benin, the contract files go through two types of control: Ex ante control and ex post
control:

                                                  78
47.     Ex ante control: The National Public Procurement Directorate (DNCMP), the
Departmental Directorate of Procurement (DDCMP) and the Procurement controls (CCMP) are
responsible for ex ante control. The DNCMP has been reinforced by 32 agents recruited by the
Government as contractual agent. These agents will be trained and nominated as Chief
Procurement Control unit in Ministries. The ex-ante control thresholds of contracts are fixed by a
decree. The Study on the implementation of investment budgets in West African Economic and
Monetary Union (also known by its French acronym, UEMOA) countries, undertaken by the
World Bank in 2013 revealed that ex ante review thresholds were low and that this control caused
delay in the implementation of budgets. Two key recommendations of this study were: (i) to set
timelines for ex ante review; and (ii) to increase the ex-ante review thresholds. Benin has
implemented these recommendations and this will be revised in the decree in accordance with the
new procurement law. To facilitate this review, the DNCMP prepared a guidance that describe the
points of control. This guidance will also be revised.

48.     Ex post control: Ex post control is the responsibility of the ARMP. According to article
123 of the Public Procurement Code, in addition to its advisory role, the ARMP is also mandated
to conduct the annual audits of contracts awarded by all contracting authorities. In practice, the
ARMP recruits private firms to audit contracts on an annual basis. But the audits are not regular.
For example, the 2015, 2016 and 2017 audits are not done yet. The ARMP is willing to accompany
the program if it is provided with more resources and a multiannual program of structures to be
audited is defined beforehand.

49.    Citizen control: Usually citizen control was not instituted. During the discussions, it was
revealed that this third level of control could assist the Program significantly, but the Program’s
implementing agency is yet to be familiarized with the mechanism. The recommendation is that
the Program supports the Local Governments through training and mechanisms so as to convince
them to develop and organize citizen control.

D3. Complaint management
50.     Chapter I and II of title V of the procurement code provide that in Benin, the provider may
complain both during the procurement phase and during the contract performance period. During
the procurement process, three levels of complaints are possible: (i) appeal to the contracting
authority for reconsideration; (ii) contentious appeal to the Dispute Settlement Committee of the
ARMP; and (iii) seeking legal remedy before the competent courts.

51.    The code provides for three levels of complaints that can be used during the contract
performance, namely: (i) amicable settlement; (ii) arbitration; and (iii) the competent
administrative courts. ARMP publishes on its web site, all decisions taken by the Dispute
Settlement Commission (Commission de Règlement des Différends - CRD) on dispute settlement.
In the past, there were delays in complaints resolution. But the new procurement law sets a
timeframe for complaint resolution. The private sector is confident with the mechanism of
complaint.


D4. Program Governance and Anti-Corruption arrangements.


                                                79
52.     The Government has taken various measures to foster good governance and tackle
corruption. Benin is a signatory to the United Nations Anticorruption Convention. In 2011, an
Anti-Corruption Law42 was passed which criminalizes fraud, embezzlement, misuse of public
funds, influence peddling, party and electoral financing, abuse of public procurement, and
nepotism in hiring practices. This legislation foresees stiff penalties, particularly for those in key
positions within the Government. In addition to the legislative framework, the Government has
also strengthened the institutional framework through the creation of several entities charged with
tackling corruption. These include the ARMP, the National Anti-Money Laundering Unit (Cellule
nationale de traitement des information financières, CENTIF) and the Ombudsman’s Office
(Mediateur de la Republique de Benin). At the center of the anti-corruption institutional framework
is the National Anti-Corruption Authority (Autorité nationale de la lute contre la corruption,
ANLC) which was created in 201343. The effectiveness and performance of these institutions
required some improvements. Therefore, the design of the Program has considered additional
mechanisms to mitigate fraud and corruption risks as well as increased transparency and
accountability in the Program. Further details are provided in the report of the TA.

53.    Regarding procurement, article 148 of the Public Procurement Code described the penalties
applicable in the event of fraud and corruption related to contracts. The standard procurement
documents prepared on the basis of those of the World Bank also contain clauses on fraud and
corruption. The ARMP through the Regional Development Committee (CDR) is in charge of
applying sanctions.

54.     The judiciary is poorly equipped to handle its administrative law and audit review
(accounts) functions, which has served over time to reinforce a lack of accountability in the
administration. Access to information to online services, which is necessary to hold the executive
and public administration to account, is very limited per the 2017 Mo Ibrahim Index of African
Governance, Benin’s performance on accountability has been uneven, with an overall 10 years
decrease of 2.6 (2007-2016) but with slightly positive +0.2 performances during the most recent 5
years’ period (2012-2016). Overall, its ranking on accountability has slipped to 26th in the 2017
index, a deterioration from 21st position in 2015 from and 23rd in 2014. Implementation of the
asset declaration for key public officials at all levels of Government continues to be weak and
uneven, with widespread failure to file declarations. The National Anti-Corruption Agency,
charged with enforcement of this and other anti-corruption measures remains relatively weak in
terms of enforcement and technical capacities.

55.     The 2016 Transparency International Corruption Perception Index ranked Benin the 95th
position in the world – a significant deterioration from 83rd and 80th in 2015 and 2014, respectively,
though better than some neighboring countries.

56.     ANAEPMR is expected to emphasize citizen engagement as an overarching strategy for
its Programs. Openness of budget process entails citizens’ inputs from public consultations are

42 Law 2011-20 of October 12, 2011 on the fight against corruption and other related offenses in the Republic of Benin (Loi

2011-20 du 12 octobre 2011 portant lutte contre la corruption et autres infractions connexes en République du Bénin.)
43 Decree n ° 2012-336 of 02 October 2012 on attributions, organization and functioning of the National Anti-Corruption

Authority (Décret n° 2012-336 du 02 octobre 2012 portant attributions, organisation et fonctionnement de l’Autorité Nationale
de Lutte contre la Corruption).

                                                               80
reflected in the pre-budget statements. Citizen engagement increases local ownership, enables
greater information sharing and transparency, and should be the basis of beneficiary engagement
and trust building. However, citizen engagement needs to be supported by institutional capacity
and a vision. The following action will be put in place: (i) a Citizen Engagement Committee is
established through a MoU between ANAEPMR and civil society to oversee key aspects of the
PforR operation; (ii) reports of the sector annual spending (budget execution) will be prepared by
the MEM and the Executive Summary published on the ministry website.

57.    The PforR will support the development and implementation of Grievance Redressal
Mechanisms for the main activities supported by the Program. Thus, under the PAP, tailored
Grievance Redressal Mechanisms will be implemented to ensure that stakeholders concerns are
documented and resolved in a timely manner.

   E. Auditing
58.     According to the 2014 PEFA report, improvements were observed in the score of PI-26
and PI-27 compared to the 2012 evaluation. Indicators PI-26 and PI-27 scored D+ and C+,
respectively. The improvements are due to the widening of the scope of reviews conducted by the
Chamber of accounts as well as the quality of follow up on audit recommendations. The Chamber
of accounts meets the internationally defined criteria for independence and the scope of its reviews
conforms to the INTOSAI standards. The Supreme Audit Institution (SAI) conducts some
performance audits in line with the WAEMU directives. The SAI has judicial power to monitor
and sanction irregularities committed by users of the budget as well as the accountants. However,
the SAI faces some challenges: (i) inadequate budget allocation to fulfil its mandate; (ii) under-
staffing with fifteen auditors and three advisors as of December 31, 2017; (iii) capacity of the staff
needs some strengthening; and (iv) SAI does not have regional offices. Despite these constraints,
the Chamber of accounts has been able to fulfill its mandate, and over the past three years has met
the deadline for submitting its report on the draft Settlement Laws to the National Assembly on
time.

59.     Although this is not required for the proposed Program, SAI’s capacity development may
focus on the following priority actions: (i) revision of legislative and institutional framework for
the SAI to become of a Court of Accounts in line with the PFM acts and WAEMU directives; (ii)
increasing SAI’s independence through the creation of a budget line and sufficient budget
allocations; (iii) increasing the number of staff and capacity of auditors through a program of
recruitment and training of young professionals; and (iv) developing staff capacities to conduct
performance audits, assessment of Government policy and controls.

60.     The texts creating ANAEPMR state that the annual financial statements of the Agency will
be audited by a Statutory auditor “Commissaire aux comptes” appointed by its Board of Directors.
At the time of the assessment, the auditor was not appointed yet.

61.    Noting the Program boundary of the Operation, the annual audited financial statements of
ANAEPMR, inclusive of the transactions in the DA, the TSSAI and the transaction accounts will
be considered as constituting the basis for the annual financial assurance required by the World
Bank. The annual audit of the Program will be conducted by the “Commissaire aux Comptes”.

                                                 81
The audited financial statements of ANAEPMR shall be submitted to the World Bank within six
(6) months of the end of government fiscal year. The terms of reference of the mission will be
agreed between the World Bank and ANAEPMR. The statutory auditor will be appointed in
accordance with applicable public policy




                                             82
             Annex 6: Summary Environmental and Social Systems Assessment

Introduction

1.     The ESSA has been conducted by the World Bank as part of the preparation of the Program.
The draft ESSA was disclosed to public on April 22, 2018. ESSA reviews the environmental and
social management systems of the program to assess their compliance with the provisions of the
World Bank's Policy on PforR. ESSA especially identifies and analyzes gaps between national
systems and the core principles applying to the program, and recommends actions for improvement
aimed at aligning environmental and social management systems on World Bank requirements.

2.      To adequately manage inherent risks and promote sustainable development, ESSA focuses
on the six Core Principles of the World Bank's Policy, namely: (i) General Principles of
Environmental and Social Assessment; (ii) Natural habitats and physical Cultural Resources; (iii)
Public and worker Safety; (iv) Land acquisition; (v) Indigenous people and Vulnerable groups;
and (vi) Social conflict.
Environmental and Social effects of the Program

3.      Activities under the Program will focus on: construction of new drinking water access
systems; rehabilitation of existing drinking water access systems; and extension of existing
drinking water systems/infrastructure.

4.      Beneficial environmental and social impacts. Program activities will generate major
beneficial effects both on the environment and communities (access to drinking water, less
hardship in drinking water supply, time savings for women, reduction of waterborne diseases,
improvement of living conditions, fight against poverty, reduction of unemployment). Such
positive effects are numerous and should be maintained over the long term.

5.     Limited negative social impacts. The investments’ negative environmental and social
impacts will be limited, low to medium scale, reversible and easily controllable and manageable.

6.      Diverse negative environmental and social risks. During the preparation phase, the main
risk is neglect in the preparation of tender documents on environmental and social aspects and
their lack of consideration when developing technical studies and/or preparation of unsatisfactory
environmental and social studies. During the works phase, several types of environmental and
social risks may occur on construction sites: (i) Environmental risks linked to: deep excavation;
digging of trenches for laying extension and densification pipes; noise nuisances to local residents
and construction workers; fairly high level of air pollution; accidents for workers; degradation of
the landscape and the communities’ living environment; etc; (ii) Social risks: Some works may
require or result in: acquisition of private land; expropriation for public purposes/involuntary
resettlement; temporary physical displacement of household residences or businesses; temporary
disruptions to craft and economic activities of individuals and households, causing loss of income;
temporary difficulties in accessing housing, shops and other public facilities; specific needs of
people with reduced mobility etc.



                                                83
7.     All sub-projects to be funded by the Program will have to be reviewed using an appropriate
screening mechanism. Environmental and social screening will be conducted for each project to
determine the type of planning tool required based on the scale and significance of environmental
and social impacts.

8.      The environmental monitoring system that will support the operation phase should allow
for identifying such malfunctions in real time in order to make any correction required.

Assessment of National Systems

Environmental system
9.       In Benin, environmental protection is one of the priority areas in policies designed for
sustainable development. Several legal and regulatory texts have thus been adopted. Following the
1990 National Conference, which marked the return to pluralistic democracy and market economy,
a clear direction for environmental management was adopted as evidenced by: the inclusion of the
principle of environmental protection and management in the constitutional law; the
institutionalization of a Ministry of Environment (since 1990) and its technical structures,
including the Benin Environmental Agency (1995); the adoption of the Environmental Framework
Law (1992); the adoption of the Environmental Action Plan (1993); and the adoption of the
National Agenda 21 (1997).

10.      Benin has a large legal arsenal for environmental management. Among the legislative texts,
the most relevant are related to the national environmental policy and water management. These
constitutional provisions are reinforced by Benin's international commitments through the
ratification of almost all international conventions and agreements on the environment. Key
provisions of the Environmental Framework Law in the Republic of Benin make strategic
environmental assessments (SEA) and EIA mandatory before undertaking developments,
operations, facilities, plans, projects and programs or construction of structures.

11.     Benin also has an extensive legal framework as regards land tenure and land acquisition
and restructuring mechanisms. Other social aspects such as social protection of vulnerable people,
labor management, child labor, and abuse on communities living in works implementation site are
also addressed. Benin’s Constitution states that everyone has the right to own property. The State
land ownership system is based on acts of 2013, more recently modified in August 2017. The land
tenure system in force in the Republic of Benin governs all rural, peri-urban and urban land and is
based on a joint procedure for confirming land rights that results in the issuance of a land title.

Adequacy of applicable systems

12.      The strengths, weaknesses, threats, and opportunities associated with the national systems
are set forth in the light of the Core Principles applicable to the Program - as described in the World
Bank Policy and World Bank Directive for Program-for-Results (PforR) funding.

      x Core Principle 1: General principle of environmental and social impact assessment and
         management. This Principle applies to the Program. The ESSA has been prepared and its
         recommendations have been integrated into the overall Program action plan. In line with

                                                  84
   the principles set forth in ESSA, an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)
   will be prepared for any individual investment project that the initial diagnostic and
   screening system set up have deemed to have moderate environmental impact.
        Strengths: Benin has adequate regulatory and legal frameworks. The national EIA
           system is based on a well-oiled impact assessment process. Responsibilities of the
           stakeholders are accurately defined.
        Weaknesses: The institutions in charge lack human and financial means to enforce
           the legislation.
        Opportunities: Initiatives to sensitize all actors and stakeholders on Environmental
           and Social Management issues will be organized. Actions to build the capacities of
           central and local officers will be initiated to update them on national mechanisms
           and World Bank PforR arrangements.
        Threats: Environmental and social management rules and procedures are not
           implemented adequately. Environmental regulations are not enforced in timely
           manner.

x Core Principle 2: Natural habitats and physical and cultural resources. This Principle
   does not apply to the Program.

x Core Principle 3: Public and workers safety apply to the Program, because construction
   site workers could be exposed to occupational accidents/injuries, water pollution, air
   pollution, solid wastes, and toxic or hazardous materials on site. The populations living
   close to the construction sites could also be exposed to the same hazards.
        Strengths: The legal/regulatory system of Benin includes construction site safety
           provisions. There are policies and guidelines on public and worker safety and
           health.
        Weaknesses: The national EIA system does not address all aspects of public and
           worker safety.
        Opportunities: Information and training on site safety measures.
        Threats: Inability to enforce current environmental, social, and safety regulations
           in timely manner.

x Core Principle 4: Land acquisition. This principle applies to the Program, because it
   could: (i) involve temporary physical relocations of resident households or businesses; (ii)
   require the acquisition of private land, and, as a consequence, expropriation public
   purposes and involuntary resettlements of resident households or businesses; and (iii)
   temporarily disrupt local small-scale and economic activities. A Resettlement Action Plan
   (RAP) will be prepared for any investment sub-project with moderate environmental
   impact.
       Strengths: The amount of the allowances or compensation granted to the affected
           people is set on the basis of the nature and value of the assets.
       Weaknesses: Customary land ownership is recognized, but needs to be confirmed
           to receive compensation. Informal property titles are not recognized by the national
           legislation. There are no formal measures for assisting the resettlement of
           vulnerable people.


                                           85
              Opportunities: Ensure a system of compensation in kind and/or cash, depending on
               the case. Set up a system of assistance to resettlement. Set up a genuine joint
               administration/civil society mechanism for claims management and monitoring.
              Threats: Non-compliance with the existing legislation. National and local
               institutions lack human and financial resources.

      x Core Principle 5: Social considerations: indigenous peoples and vulnerable groups
         This principle applies (except that there are no indigenous people in Benin).
             Strengths: Actions are conducted to inform populations on the implementation of
                the project and collect their concerns, expectations, and observations; informational
                posters are displayed to this end in public places. The law provides for the services
                of an Ombudsman for vulnerable people.
             Weaknesses: The Benin legislation does not provide for specific measures for
                vulnerable groups. There is no real claims management system at the local level.
             Opportunities: Define and set up a sound stakeholder engagement strategy as part
                of the sensitization program, targeting vulnerable groups more particularly.
             Threats: Lack of clarity and consistency of the mechanism for implementing public
                consultations and engaging stakeholders.

      x Core Principle 6: Social considerations - Social conflict does not apply to the Program.

Environmental and Social Management Action Plan (ESM/AP)

13.    The Program will support specific measures to improve the conditions governing the
performance of the environmental and social management system in the implementation and
monitoring of Program activities. These measures are proposed as part of an Environmental and
social management action plan (ESM/AP), which identified three components of
recommendations, with each one including distinct and complementary activities.
First component of ESM/AP: Strengthening of the environmental and social management
system of Program investments. This component includes the following elements:
 Preparation and adoption of GRGES of investments for the National Rural Water Supply
    Agency (ANAEPMR) and all technical services.
 Inter-institutional coordination between ANAEPMR and ABE.
Second component of ESM/AP: Strengthening of the institutional capacities of key actors and
representatives of the Program. This component includes two separate types of activities:
 Trainings on the GRGES for the stakeholders directly involved in the implementation of
    Program.
 Human Resources of ANAEPMR for Environmental and Social Management.
 Support to municipalities’ stakeholders and institutions

14.     All the costs of these elements of the ESM Action Plan will be integrated to the general
budget of the Program. The cost of the environmental and social remedial actions will be integrated
to the very budgets of the investment sub-projects.




                                                  86
                       Annex 7: Systematic Operations Risk Rating (SORT)

                         Risk Category                               Rating (H, S, M, L)

 1.   Political and Governance                                           Substantial

 2.   Macroeconomic                                                       Moderate

 3.   Sector Strategies and Policies                                        High

 4.   Technical Design of Project or Program                              Moderate

 5.   Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability          High

 6.   Fiduciary                                                             High

 7.   Environment and Social                                              Moderate

 8.   Stakeholders                                                        Moderate

 9.   Other                                                                 N/a

OVERALL                                                                     High




                                                87
                                              Annex 8: Program Action Plan

                                                                         Responsible                          DLI or Loan
N°          Action                Completion Measurement                                    Due Date
                                                                           Agency                              Covenant
1. TECHNICAL ACTIONS
1.1 Technical               Recruitment of :                           ANAEPMR         January 31, 2019     Loan Covenant
      Assistance for the    • The Technical Assistant for the
      ANAEPMR is in         preparation of the preliminary designs
      place                 for the construction, rehabilitation and
                            expansion of rural water supply systems
                            supported by the Program
                            • The Engineering Consulting firm in
                            charge of the detailed design and works
                            supervision for the construction,
                            rehabilitation and expansion of rural
                            water supply systems supported by the
                            Program
                            • The Task Force for the preparation of
                            the bidding documents and support for
                            the recruitment of regional operators
1.2   Adoption of           Preparation and adoption of                ANAEPMR         September 30, 2018   Loan Covenant
      standardized design   standardized design parameters and
      parameters and        construction standards for rural water
      construction          supply systems
      standards for rural
      water supply
      systems
1.3   Establishment of an   Establishment at the ANAEPMR of an         ANAEPMR         June 30, 2019        Loan Covenant
      information system    information system for water supply
      for rural water       systems in rural areas with an updated
      supply systems        inventory of all the assets and allowing
                            the transmission of operational data
2. FIDUCIARY ACTIONS
2.1 New Public              ● Adoption and promulgation of             ARMP / BAI /    90 days after        Loan Covenant
      Procurement Code       application decrees of the new            ANAEPMR         Program’s
      and compliance of      procurement law no 2017-04 dated of                       effectiveness
      the ANAEPMR            October 19, 2017.
      with the provisions    ● Adoption and promulgation of
      of the new Public      national standard bidding documents in
      Procurement Code       conformity with the new procurement
                             law.
                             ● Application of the new Public
                             Procurement Code by the ANAEPMR
                             through:
                            • The establishment of the Procurement
                            Control Unit (Cellule Contrôle des


                                                                 88
                                                                         Responsible                           DLI or Loan
N°          Action                Completion Measurement                                      Due Date
                                                                           Agency                               Covenant
                            Marchés Publics-CCMP) within
                            ANAEPMR
                            • The formal designation of the person
                            in charge of approving the contracts of
                            ANAEPMR
2.2   Conducting the        Maintaining the entire procurement        ANAEPMR            Throughout the      Loan Covenant
      procurement           process through the SIGMAP system                            implementation of
      process through       during the implementation of the                             the Program
      SIGMAP                Program
2.3   Public Procurement(i) Conduct an audit by the ARMP of           ARMP /             Every two years     Loan Covenant
      Audit of the      the Public Procurement of the Ministry        ANAEPMR            from the second
      Ministry in chargein charge of the water sector, including                         year of
                        ANAEPMR; (ii) Procurement audit
      of the Water Sector                                                                implementation of
                        reports are submitted to the World Bank                          the Program
                        within the agreed period and published
                        on the ARMP website.
2.4 Annual preparation Annual preparation of the procurement          DPP Ministry in    Every year          Loan Covenant
     of the Procurement plan of the Ministry in charge of the         charge of the
     Plan               water sector to accompany its general         water sector
                        budget                                        /ANAEPMR
2.5 Internal audit and  Signature of a MoU between                    ANAEMPR / BAI      180 days after      Loan Covenant
     internal control   ANAEPMR and IGF as leader of the              / IGF              effectiveness
                        IGM and the DNCMP for conducting
                        joint bi-annual inspection missions
                        covering the operational, financial and
                        procurement aspects
3. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL ACTIONS
3.1 Guidelines for      (i) Preparation and adoption of a             ANAEPMR            90 days after       Loan Covenant
     Social and         GRGES that will include the following         in collaboration   Program’s
     Environmental      as a minimum:                                 with ABE           effectiveness
     Management         • Procedure for the screening of sub-
     (GRGES)            projects
                        • Procedure for the elaboration of
                        Environmental and Social Impact
                        Studies (ESIA)
                        • Procedure for the elaboration of social
                        assessment and RAP
                        • Procedure for land acquisition
                        • Standard elements (environmental and
                        social clauses, minimum staff, price
                        item template) for the contracts of (i)
                        works contractors, (ii) engineering
                        consultant, (iii) regional private
                        operators
                        • Grievance Redress Mechanism
                        • Citizen engagement mechanism

                                                                89
                                                                          Responsible                          DLI or Loan
N°           Action              Completion Measurement                                      Due Date
                                                                            Agency                              Covenant
                           (ii) Development of a training program
                           for the application of the GRGES for                         90 days after
                           the various stakeholders involved in the                     adoption of the
                           implementation of the Program:                               GRGES
                           • Staff of ANAEPMR, ABE, ANDF,
                           Departmental Directions MoE,
                           MCVDD, municipalities, ACEP
                           • Works contractors and engineering
                           consultant
                           • Piped rural water supply systems’
                           operators
3.2   Interinstitutional   Signing of an interinstitutional             ANAEPMR and     90 days after        Loan Covenant
      coordination         agreement between ANAEPMR and the            ABE             Program’s
      ANAEMPR - ABE        ABE for the issuance of environmental                        effectiveness and
                           certification in accordance with the                         throughout Program
                           timeframe defined in the decree n °                          implementation
                           2017-332 of the 06 July 2017
3.3   Human Resources      Maintain at least one social specialist      ANAEPMR         After Program’s      Loan Covenant
      of ANAEPMR for       and one environmental specialist within                      effectiveness and
      Environmental and    ANAEPMR who are employed full-                               throughout Program
      Social Management    time throughout the implementation of                        implementation
                           the Program and have:
                           • Basic training in environmental and /
                           or social sciences
                           • A minimum of one year of experience
                           in conducting similar programs /
                           projects in the drinking water supply
                           sector
3.4   Support to           Provision of Technical Assistance to         ANAEPMR         Before the works     Loan Covenant
      municipalities for   the municipalities for the creation of the                   start
      land management      Village Committees for Land
                           Management (Structures Villageoises
                           de Gestion Foncière - SVGF) in charge
                           of identifying the sites for construction
                           works under the Program and facilitate
                           compensation for land acquisition
                           whenever required.




                                                                 90
                             Annex 9: Implementation Support Plan

1.      The implementation of the Benin Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program will
require a substantial support from the World Bank’s Task Team especially during its first year.
There is a need for the World Bank to work closely with the ANAEMPR and other involved
stakeholders given the ambitious scope of the Program both in terms of expanding access and
implementing reforms for service quality and sustainability.

2.      Particular emphasis of the implementation support will be on reviewing implementation
progress (including that of the Program Action Plan) and achievement of Program results and
DLIs, providing proactive support on resolving emerging Program implementation issues,
monitoring compliance with legal agreements, supporting the Government in monitoring changes
in risks.

Main focus of Implementation Support

         Time                                            Strategic Focus
 Throughout the        x Provide comprehensive technical support to pro-actively identify implementation
 Program                 bottlenecks or support the GoB to solve existing implementation issues
 implementation        x Review the Program implementation progress with respect to the Results
                         Framework and DLIs
                       x Review the implementation of the recurrent actions of the Program Action Plan
                       x Assist the GoB to develop a communication strategy around the implementation of
                         the Program
 Year 1-2              x Review and support the finalization of the Program Operational Manual
                       x Review and support the hiring of the Independent Verification Agent
                       x Review the implementation of the actions of the Program Action Plan that need to
                         be executed during the early stage of the Program
                       x Review the compliance with the legal covenants associated with the effectiveness
                         of the operation
 Years 2-6             x Assist the GoB in the preparation of mid-term evaluation of the Program and in the
                         identification of possible restructuring actions
                       x Assist the GoB in capturing lessons learned from the Program implementation


Resources and Task Team Skills Mix Requirements for Implementation Support

3.     The Task Team will closely work with the ANAEPMR and other stakeholders involved in
the implementation undertaking joint and periodic supervision missions, including field visits in
accordance with the planning below:
     x   Year 1-2: four supervision missions, including one between approval and effectiveness
     x   Years 3-6: three supervision missions each year

                                                  91
The Task Team will provide a comprehensive package of technical support for the GoB throughout
the implementation. Skills needed are listed below.

                                                       Other Skills Needed based on specific Demand or
         Core Skills Needed for Supervision
                                                                              Issue
 x Rural water supply institutional specialist        x Anti-corruption and governance specialist
 x Rural water engineer                               x Lawyer
 x Environmental specialist                           x Disbursement specialist
 x Social specialist                                  x Financial analyst and economist
 x Communication specialist
 x Procurement specialist
 x Financial management specialist




                                                 92
Annex 9: Map




     93
