Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                    Republic of Benin




                                PROGRAM FOR UNIVERSAL ACCESS TO DRINKING WATER
                                               IN RURAL AREAS (P164186)
                                   ___________________________________________________




Public Disclosure Authorized                PROGRAM FOR RESULTS (PforR)




Public Disclosure Authorized
                               ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SYSTEMS ASSESSMENT (ESSA)

                                  ____________________________________________________




                                                   Report prepared by




Public Disclosure Authorized                             Draft



                                                     15 March 2018
                                                      TABLE OF CONTENTS


 LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ............................................................................ iii
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .................................................................................................................. iv

 SECTION I. INTRODUCTION ...........................................................................................................1
    I.1 BACKGROUND ............................................................................................................................ 1
        I.2 PURPOSES AND APPROACH OF ESSA ......................................................................................... 1
        I.3 METHODOLOGY.......................................................................................................................... 2
 SECTION II. PROGRAM DESCRIPTION ........................................................................................4
    II.1 BACKGROUND ........................................................................................................................... 4
        II.2 KEY PROGRAM CHARACTERISTICS............................................................................................. 4
        II.3 ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL EFFECTS OF THE PROGRAM .................................................... 5
        II.4 MAIN RISKS AND MITIGATION MEASURES ............................................................................. 12
        II.5 OVERVIEW ............................................................................................................................... 16
        II.6 PREVIOUS EXPERIENCES OF INSTITUTIONS INVOLVED IN THE PROGRAM ............................. 18
 SECTION III. DESCRIPTION OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SYSTEM ..........20
    III.1 ENVIRONMENTAL SYSTEM ..................................................................................................... 20
        III.2 SOCIAL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM ............................................................................................. 25
        III.3 CONSTITUTIONAL APPEAL BODIES ......................................................................................... 28
 APPENDIX ............................................................................................................................................29

 SECTION IV. EVALUATION OF INSTITUTIONAL CAPACITY AND PERFORMANCE ....30

 SECTION V. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT ACTION PLAN ..............35

 ANNEXES .............................................................................................................................................40
 Annex 1: Capacities of the institutions in charge of implementing mitigation measures ......................41
 Annex 2: Environmental acts and regulations in force in Benin ............................................................43
 Annex 4: Selected articles from the new Act #2017-15 on land tenure .................................................46
 Annex 5: Simplified social and environmental screening form .............................................................48
 Annex 6: Environmental and Social Management Plan and Resettlement Action Plan ........................52
 Annex 7: List of key references .............................................................................................................53
 Annex 8: List of people met during the preparation of ESSA................................................................55
 Annex 9 : Compte rendu des consultations institutionnelles et communales .........................................59

 LIST OF TABLES
Table 1 : Main environmental risks/impacts and mitigation measures ...................................... 12
Table 2 : Main social risks/impacts and mitigation measures ................................................... 14
Table 3 : Institutional actors and Responsibilities ..................................................................... 29
Table 4 : Core Principles ............................................................................................................ 31
Table 5 : Environmental and Social Management Action Plan ................................................. 35




 BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                                                                    page     ii
                  LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
            __________________________________________________________



ABE      Benin’s Environmental Agency (Agence Béninoise pour l’Environnement)
ACEP     Drinking Water Users’ Association (Association des Consommateurs d’Eau
         Potable)
ANAEPMR National Rural Water Supply Agency (Agence Nationale d’Approvisionnement
         en Eau Potable en Milieu Rural)
ANDF     National Agency of State Property and Land Tenure (Agence Nationale du
         Domaine et du Foncier)
CDQ      Neighborhood Development Committee (Comité de Développement du
         quartier)
CFD      Land Tenure Code
DDCVDD   Directorate of Living Conditions and Sustainable Development (Direction du
         Cadre de Vie et du Développement Durable)
DGEC     Directorate General of Environment and Climate
DNSP     National Directorate of Public Health (Direction Nationale de la Santé
         Publique)
DPC      Directorate of Cultural Heritage (Direction du Patrimoine Culturel)
ECC      Environmental Compliance Certificate (Certificat de Conformité
         Environnementale)
EI       Environmental Inspection (Inspection environnementale)
EIA      Environmental Impact Assessment
EPP      Expropriation for Public Purpose
ESIES    Environmental and Social Information Sheet
ESA/AP   Environmental and Social Action Plan
ESSA     Environmental and Social Systems Assessment
GAP      Government Action Program
GoB      Government of Benin
GRS/WB   World Bank Grievance Settlement Service
IWRM     Integrated Water Resources Management
MCVDD    Ministry of Living Conditions and Sustainable Development
         (Ministère du Cadre de Vie et du Développement Durable)
RAP      Resettlement Action Plan
PDDAEPMR National Rural Water Supply Sector Development Master Plan
         (Plan Directeur National de Développement du Secteur de
         l'Approvisionnement en Eau rurale)
PforR    Program for Results
PREPAU   Small Town Water Supply and Urban Septage Management Project (Projet
         d’Approvisionnement en Eau potable en Milieu rural et d’Assainissement des
         Eaux usées urbaines
SEA      Strategic Environmental Assessment
SAIC     Services in support to Community Initiatives (Services d’Appui aux Initiatives
         Communautaires)
TMESM    Technical Manual for Environmental and Social Management
WSS      Water supply and sanitation



BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                        page   iii
                                 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
                       __________________________________________
I. OBJECTIVE AND CONTEXT

   1. This Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) was undertaken by the
   World Bank as part of the preparation of the Program for results Financing (PforR) under
   the Rural Supply Universal Access Program in Benin (P164186).

   2. This Program is linked to the National Master Plan for the Development of the Rural
   Water Supply Sector (PDDAEPMR) that defines the Government of Benin's expenditure
   program to achieve universal access to water in rural areas. The PDDAEPMR identifies the
   investments needed for new or existing water systems as well as for hand pumps in all
   Benin’s communes. The investments needed under the PDDAEPMR to achieve universal
   water supply in rural areas amount to FCFA 314 billion (or USD 560 million).

   3. The PforR will finance part of the expenditures of Benin's Government Action Program
   (PAG) for universal water supply in rural areas. More specifically, over period 2018-2024
   period, with a funding of USD 220 million, the Program will support the development of
   rural drinking water supply systems and professional service delivery models in selected
   communes with more limited access to rural water supply services.

II. OVERVIEW OF THE PROGRAM

   4. Program Development Objective (PDO). The proposed PDO is to increase access to
   water supply service and to strengthen service delivery arrangements in selected rural areas.

   5. Result Area 1 - Increase access to water supply services. The Program will support
   investments in piped rural water supply systems to rapidly expand access (at a pace not
   previously experienced in the country). This will be supported through : (i) construction of
   new water supply system systems; and (ii) rehabilitation and expansion of existing water
   supply systems.

   6. Results Area 2 – Strengthen service delivery arrangements. The Program will
   strengthen service delivery arrangements of the rural water supply sector through: (i)
   establishment of performance-based contracts with regional operators; (ii) Training to rural
   water supply professionals; (iii) Capacity-building of the ANAEPMR and overall sector
   institutional strengthening.

Implementation of institutional arrangements
   7. The ANAEPMR will be in charge of implementing the Program, including the
   execution of all Program’s activities, the management of the environmental and social
   effects, monitoring & evaluation, handling result-based disbursements requests and
   Program’s financial reports consolidation.

   8. To perform its functions, the ANAEPMR will count on its internal structure and on a
   substantial deployment of technical assistance. Technical assistance provided to the
   ANAEPMR will be financed by different sources including the Program’s itself,
   Development Partners and by the Small Town Water Supply and Urban Septage


BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                page   iv
   Management Project (PEPRAU). The Government of Benin will also organize the
   delegation of responsibilities for the provision of water supply services in rural areas through
   regional affermage from municipalities to the ANAEPMR through the signing of a
   Framework Partnership Agreement. The ANAEPMR will prepare and let contractual
   arrangements signed with regional private operators.

III. ESSA APPROACH, OBJECTIVES AND METHODOLOGY

   9. The ESSA serves to review the country's environmental and social management systems
   as they apply to the Program, to assess their compliance with the provisions of the World
   Bank's PforR policy. The aim is to ensure that the program does not involve significant
   environmental and social risks and that the systems put in place allow for identifying and
   adequately managing potential risks. In particular, the ESSA identifies and analyzes gaps
   that exist between national systems and the core principles applying to the program, and
   recommends actions to improve the alignment of environmental and social management
   systems with the requirements of the Bank.
   10. Unlike conventional investment programs or projects, the PforR supports a government
   program, with the following objectives: (i) fund Borrower’s specific program expenditures;
   (ii) link the disbursement of funds directly to the achievement of specific results; (iii) use
   and, in this case, strengthen systems to ensure that funds are used in an appropriate manner,
   appropriately addressing the Program’s environmental and social impact; and (iv) build
   institutional capacity to achieve expected results.
   11. The preparation of the ESSA and the development of measures to strengthen
   environmental and social management systems has benefited from a wide range of
   information and a broad consultation process, including:
                  A review of documents and data available on national environmental and
                   social procedures and related regulatory frameworks, an analysis of capacities
                   of institutions involved in the Program in terms of environmental and social
                   safeguards; and World Bank documentation on PforRs and ESSA;
                  Interviews and working meetings with representatives of governmental and
                   non-governmental institutions involved in the Program and key stakeholders,
                   including through public consultations at the commune level;
                  Consultation meetings to clarify the results expected from the ESSA, identify
                   the environmental and social issues associated with the Program, assess
                   technical assistance and capacity-building needs to improve environmental
                   and social management systems, and develop a better understanding of the
                   procedures, standards and approach to be adopted with the technical staff of
                   the ministerial departments involved;
                  Meetings to provide a restitution on the preliminary document were held in
                   December 2017 and February 20182018, with the participation of communes,
                   the Drinking Water Users’ Associations (ACEPs), the Directorate of Living
                   Conditions and Sustainable Development (DDCVDD) and civil society
                   organizations. The outcomes of the meetings are documented in the annex to
                   this ESSA (with a complete list of participants).
                  A Public Consultation Workshop will be held on April 3rd 2018 [date to be
                   confirmed], with the participation of communes, ACEP, development
                   partners, civil society organizations and the private sector. The observations



BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                   page   v
                   coming out of the workshop will be incorporated into the final version of the
                   ESSA (with a complete list of participants).
   12. The ESSA report will be publicly disseminated in the country and through the Bank's
   external website. Public comments will be sought over a set period.
   13. In order to adequately manage the risks associated with the Program and promote
   sustainable development, the ESSA focuses on six Core Principles of the Bank’s Policy,
   namely: (i) General Principles of Environmental and Social Assessment; (ii) Natural habitats
   and physical Cultural Resources; (iii) Public and worker Safety; (iv) Land acquisition; (v)
   Indigenous people and Vulnerable groups; and (vi) Social conflict.

IV. MAIN ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL IMPACT OF THE PROGRAM

   14. Activities under the Program will focus on:
             Construction of new drinking water access systems;
             Rehabilitation of existing drinking water access systems;
             Extension of existing drinking water systems/infrastructure.

Beneficial environmental and social impacts
  15. Program activities will generate major beneficial effects both on the environment and
  communities (access to drinking water, less hardship in drinking water supply, time savings
  for women, reduction of waterborne diseases, improvement of living conditions, fight
  against poverty, reduction of unemployment). Such positive effects are numerous and should
  be maintained over the long term.

   16. The investments’ negative environmental and social impacts will be limited, low to
   medium scale, reversible and easily controllable and manageable mainly because of the
   following reasons:
              the exclusion, by the very nature of a PforR, of any investment involving
                 major environmental risks (i.e. World Bank Class A projects);
              the type and nature of the planned developments and infrastructure (small,
                 well-located, limited geographical scope with excavation works limited in
                 terms of surface area);
              the nature of the activities planned, based on the findings of prior diagnostic
                 studies, taking into account specific social, economic and environmental
                 parameters;
              works and development operations that should not generate major air or noise
                 pollution, significant degradation of the urban environment or destruction or
                 reduction of green spaces;
              the feasibility, effectiveness and relevance of the activities planned, based on
                 the results of prior diagnostic studies in the sector;
              the existence of various controllable and effective measures to mitigate
                 potential risks and ensure impact monitoring, both during the construction
                 phase and during the operation of structures established;
              the existence of institutions with the capacities to manage most of the
                 Program’s environmental and social aspects;
              the existence of an appropriate institutional and legal framework to
                 effectively address all aspects of the Program's environmental and social
                 management (ESM).



BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                page   vi
Limited negative social impacts
  17. The Program’s negative social impacts, especially those that may be associated with the
  acquisition of private land, will be limited both over time and space (due to the relatively
  low land requirements of the various investments planned under the Program). Though it
  may not be ruled out at this stage, the investments may include some forms of involuntary
  resettlement of household residences or business, acquisition of private land or restrictions
  of access to local social and economic infrastructure, all of which may be more or less
  temporary.

Diverse negative environmental and social risks
  18. During the preparation phase, the main risk is neglect in the preparation of tender
  documents on environmental and social aspects and their lack of consideration when
  developing technical studies and/or preparation of unsatisfactory environmental and social
  studies. Failure to rigorously review other technical options for project design and consider
  aspects relating to public information and participation in a culturally appropriate and
  socially acceptable manner could aggravate this risk.

               The main mitigation measures recommended at this stage consist mainly in
                screening all sub-projects under the Program in reference to agreed parameters,
                as well as establishing an assessment sheet of the impacts of activities prior to
                their implementation, including in the Tender Specifications a section on
                compliance with environmental (including site safety) and social provisions, and
                closely monitoring the implementation of the mitigation measures specified in
                the Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMP) and the Resettlement
                Action Plans) (RAP).

   19. During the works phase, several types of environmental and social risks may occur on
   construction sites.

Environmental risks:
       the construction of new drinking water access systems and the rehabilitation and
           extension of existing drinking water supply systems may involve deep excavation
           and, most importantly, the digging of trenches for laying extension and
           densification pipes;
       in the case of new works, the works will include excavations for the foundation of
           reservoirs (water towers);
       construction machinery and noisy equipment (jackhammers, air compressors, etc.)
           will cause noise nuisances to local residents and construction workers;
       the movement of machineries and vehicles may generate a fairly high level of air
           pollution (resulting from dust emission);
       the movement of construction machinery and possible non-compliance with safety
           instructions may lead to accidents for workers;
       works (trenches for pipe laying) and inappropriate storage of materials (such as
           cement) and the movement and use of materials (cement, iron) may also generate
           dust;
       works may lead to large amounts of excavation that may temporarily degrade the
           landscape and the communities’ living environment;
       works carried out as part of the new investments may require use of heavy
           construction equipment (such as a drilling plant), which is likely to generate dust;


BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                 page   vii
             construction vehicles may cause GHG emissions from exhaust fumes, as well as
              odor nuisance, health risks and pollution, especially if the vehicles have been
              intensively used and are poorly maintained;
             works sites may generate waste from cuttings that come from trenches dug for
              pipe laying;
             pumping tests to test flows from groundwater sources may generate stagnant water
              in temporary puddles;
             stagnant water may be produced when rinsing and disinfecting pipes;
             construction, rehabilitation or extension works may require temporary deviations
              for car traffic or restrictions on pedestrian access and access to housing and
              disruptions in the daily activities of communities;
             works could also affect some sources of drinking water and contaminate the water
              table, impacting water quality;
             water generated by borehole pumping tests may influence groundwater;
             some of the works may involve cutting down trees or grubbing up vegetation -
              especially excavation work on undeveloped trails with grass, shrubs or trees;
             works may result in temporary deviations for car traffic or pedestrian crossing
              restrictions.

Social risks: Some works may require or result in:
         acquisition of private land, expropriation for public purposes/involuntary
              resettlement in the case of investments in the construction of new drinking water
              supply systems;
         temporary physical displacement of household residences or businesses (in the
              case of investments to strengthen existing structures);
         temporary disruptions to craft and economic activities of individuals and
              households, causing loss of income (loss of profits);
         temporary difficulties in accessing housing, shops and other public facilities
              (schools, clinics, etc.);
         inconvenience to local communities, and especially the most vulnerable people,
              due to noise and dust emission from construction sites;
         accidents and safety problems especially for the most vulnerable people (children,
              elderly people, women);
         disturbances of traffic and activities;
         conflicts due to the effects of works on the property and assets of residents;
         potential impacts on tombs and other religious sites.

   20. Finally, during the operation phase, negative environmental and social effects would
   result from poor design, lack of awareness and information of communities, lack of
   maintenance and upkeep of infrastructure and facilities, improper use of infrastructure,
   degradation of infrastructure, or inadequate enforcement of safety measures.

   21. The environmental monitoring system that will support the operation phase should
   allow for identifying such malfunctions in real time in order to make any correction required.

OVERVIEW
  22. The Program will have limited environmental and social impacts. Designed as a PforR,
  the Program automatically excludes, as a matter of principle, any investment that
  potentially comes with significant environmental and social risks and may cause significant
  negative, diverse, varied, irreversible and unprecedented impacts.

BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                page   viii
   23. Therefore, any sub-project pertaining to the following will be deemed ineligible:

             construction, rehabilitation and extension of works that involve social risks, i.e.
              physical resettlement of a large number of people, acquisition of large areas of
              private land, demolition of a large number of individual houses and/or significant
              access restrictions to economic resources;
             construction, rehabilitation and extension of structures that could exacerbate
              existing land-based social conflicts;
             structures/works that could have an irreversible impact on physical cultural
              resources of an archaeological or historical nature or on places of worship;
             works in areas classed as biological or ecological interest sites.

   24. All sub-projects to be funded by the Program will have to be reviewed using an
   appropriate screening mechanism. Environmental and social screening will be conducted
   for each project to determine the type of planning tool required based on the scale and
   significance of environmental and social impacts

                               SUB-PROJECT SCREENING
                   AND ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT TOOLS

     In accordance with environmental assessment procedures in Benin and the requirements of the World
     Bank's PforR funding policy, all sub-projects submitted under the Program will be subject to a mandatory
     screening or selection process, in reference to the following principles:

              a)    First and foremost, using a Screening Form (see Annex 5), sub-projects submitted will be
                    screened in terms of environmental and social risks and impacts levels, as well as the type
                    of management instrument required (according to both Beninese and Bank policies).

              b)    Depending on the outcomes of the screening process:
                       All subprojects whose environmental and social risks are considered to be significant
                        will be excluded and the negative impacts will be considered as diverse, varied,
                        irreversible and unprecedented (subproject not eligible under the PforR);
                       For sub-projects with minimal or no environmental and social impact: they are
                        classified as Non-Subject under the Beninese procedure and as such require only a
                        sub-project Data Sheet.
                       For sub-projects with low environmental and social impact: according to Benin
                        procedures, a simplified Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) will be prepared,
                        with the submission of the Impact Notice and an Environmental Compliance
                        Certificate is to be obtained. To comply with the Bank's PforR policy, these will be
                        completed by the preparation of a simple Environmental and Social Information
                        Sheet (ESIS).
                       For sub-projects with a moderate and fairly moderate environmental and social
                        impact: Benin's provisions must imperatively be complemented by the preparation of
                        an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (see Annex 6) in
                        accordance with all the fundamental principles of the World Bank's PforR policy,
                        especially as regards public consultations of stakeholders, citizen engagement and
                        complaint management.
                       Finally, for a sub-project with a moderate impact in terms of involuntary
                        resettlement of populations, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) (see Annex 6) will be
                        prepared in line with the World Bank's policy on financing of PforRs.

     The Specifications for contractors and regional operators (Cahier des Charges) in charge of implementing
     works will imperatively include all technical provisions and environmental and social mitigation measures

BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                               page   ix
     provided and will specify a monitoring and control system that meets the standards in force (including
     safety of construction site workers and local communities).

     All EIAs and RAPs prepared for moderate risk subprojects will require appropriate public disclosure.

     Local beneficiaries will be informed of the commitments included in these instruments and will have
     access to a grievance redress mechanism in the event of non-compliance with the commitments. Each
     beneficiary commune supported by the ACEP will ensure the implementation of this mechanism, as part
     of a more comprehensive monitoring, evaluation and control system.




V. ASSESSMENT OF NATIONAL SYSTEMS

The environmental system
  25. In Benin, environmental protection is one of the priority areas in policies designed for
  sustainable development. Several legal and regulatory texts have thus been adopted.

   26. Following the 1990 National Conference, which marked the return to pluralistic
   democracy and market economy, a clear direction for environmental management was
   adopted as evidenced by:
        the inclusion of the principle of environmental protection and management in the
             constitutional law;
        the institutionalization of a Ministry of Environment (since 1990) and its technical
             structures, including the Benin Environmental Agency (1995);
        the adoption of the Environmental Framework Law (1992);
        the adoption of the Environmental Action Plan (1993);
        the adoption of the National Agenda 21 (1997).

   27. The Environmental Framework Law is the base text of the national environmental
   policy. It covers all aspects, from the identification of sources of pollution to their control
   and repression, to environmental assessments (strategic environmental assessment,
   environmental impact assessment, environmental audit, environmental inspection, (IE)), to
   environmental capacity building and environmental information management. Among other
   things, this Act makes it mandatory to conduct Environmental Impact Assessments prior to
   undertaking developments, operations, facilities, plans, programs and projects or
   construction of structures, and provides for the filing of a written application to the Minister
   for the issuance of an environmental compliance certificate, describing the general nature of
   the operation planned.

   28. The Environmental Action Plan (EAP) has been the framework document for
   environmental management in the Republic of Benin. It comprises seven sub-programs
   planned over an initial timeframe of 15 years and whose overall objectives relate to: (i)
   strengthening national capacities; (ii) conservation and sustainable use of biological
   diversity and natural resources; (iii) improvement of the living environment of both rural
   and urban communities; and (iv) improved decision-making and good governance in
   relationship to the environment.

   29. The Constitution of 11 December 1990 stipulates in Article 27 that: “Everyone has the
   right to a healthy, satisfying and sustainable environment and has the duty to defend such
   an environment. The State ensures the protection of the environment”. Other Articles of the


BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                             page     x
   Constitution criminalize some environmental offenses as high treason crimes for which the
   President of the Republic is liable.

Legal framework and provisions

   30. Benin has a large legal arsenal for environmental management. Among the legislative
   texts, the most relevant are the following:
         Act # 030-98 dated February 12, 1999 on the environmental framework law in
              the Republic of Benin is the base text of the national environmental policy. Indeed,
              it covers all aspects from the identification of sources of pollution to their control
              and repression, to environmental assessments (Strategic Environmental
              Assessment (SEA); Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA); Environmental
              Audit (EA); and Environmental Inspection (IE)).
         Act 2010-44 date October 21, 2010 on water management in the Republic of
              Benin: it advocates for Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) as a
              core principle for water management in Benin.

   31. These constitutional provisions are reinforced by Benin's international commitments
   through the ratification of almost all international conventions and agreements on the
   environment.

   32. Key provisions of the Environmental Framework Law in the Republic of Benin make
   strategic environmental assessments (SEA) and environmental impact assessments (EIA)
   mandatory before undertaking developments, operations, facilities, plans, projects and
   programs or construction of structures.

   33. Furthermore, Decree # 2017-332 dated July 6, 2017, on the organization of
   environmental assessment procedures in the Republic of Benin, replacing Decree # 2015-
   382 dated July 9, 2015, clarifies responsibilities and sets the administrative procedure for
   the issuance of Environmental Compliance Certificates (ECC) by the Minister of the
   Environment. According to the provisions of this Decree, there are two types of
   environmental impact assessments in the country, namely:
          In-depth Environmental Impact Assessments: they apply to large projects
              whose potential impacts are considered significant or to medium-scale projects
              to be implemented in sensitive ecosystems; and
          Simplified Environmental Impact Assessments: they apply to individualized
              micro-projects, to medium-scale projects that are not located in a sensitive
              ecosystem, and to specific activities.
          Finally, all projects of a very small-scale environmental or social that are not
              located in a sensitive environment are not subject to the impact assessment
              procedure.

   34. The main actors involved in environmental management in Benin include:

               Benin’s Environmental Agency (ABE) is a public institution created in 1995 to
                implement the national environmental policy adopted by the Government as part
                of its development plan (Art.12). ABE is under the supervision of the Minister
                of Environment. As such, it works in collaboration with other sector ministries,
                local communities, non-governmental structures, civil society and the private
                sector. It also manages all environmental assessment procedures.

BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                    page   xi
               The Ministry of Living Conditions and Sustainable Development (MCVDD)
                is in charge of defining the national environmental policy and monitoring its
                implementation. The national environmental policy must be in synergy with
                sectoral policies for the management of natural resources and with policies
                applying to activities that may generate environmental nuisance (industry,
                agriculture, mining and energy, equipment).

               The Directorate General of Environment and Climate (DGEC) is responsible
                for the development of the national environmental policy and its implementation
                strategy.

               Prefectures, as per the texts on decentralization, ensure the enforcement of
                national guidelines by the communes in their constituencies. As such, they are
                in charge of implementing all environmental issues at the Government’s
                decentralized levels.

               Communes implement their own policies as regards environmental and natural
                resources management, but in accordance with national laws and guidelines. The
                project will be implemented at the commune level according to institutional
                arrangements that guarantee participation of communities at the grassroots level.

Social management

   35. Benin also has an extensive legal framework as regards land tenure and land acquisition
   and restructuring mechanisms. Other social aspects such as social protection of vulnerable
   people, labor management, child labor, and abuse on communities living in works
   implementation site will also be addressed.
   36. Benin’s Constitution, in Article 22, states that everyone has the right to own property.
   No one may be deprived of his/her property except for public purpose and in such case shall
   receive fair and prior compensation. This provision of the Constitution ensures the protection
   of immovable property, land being the fundamental element.

   37. The State land ownership system is based on other texts that make up Benin’s legal
   arsenal on this matter. Much of this arsenal dates back to the colonial era. However, they
   were completed and modified in 2013 and more recently in August 2017:
                Act # 2013-01 dated August 14, 2013 on the land tenure and State property
                 code in the Republic of Benin and its implementing decrees first addressed all
                 aspects of land tenure law in Benin from access to land to the institutional
                 organization of the sector, and to expropriation for public purposes. Among
                 other things, this law recognizes individuals’ right of property (Article 42) and
                 right of use (Article 49).
                The later and very recent Act # 2017-15 dated August 10, 2017 amending and
                 completing the Act # 2013-01 dated August 14, 2013 on the land tenure and
                 State property code in the Republic of Benin.

   According to this law, the land tenure system in force in the Republic of Benin governs all
   rural, periurban and urban land and is based on a joint procedure for confirming land rights
   that results in the issuance of a land title. The land rights confirmation process focuses on:

BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                 page   xii
                in urban and periurban areas: confirmation of rights based on land ownership
                 presumption documents or on a final court decision;
                in rural areas: confirmation of rights on land ownership presumption
                 documents, a register of claimants of the rural land plan or a final court
                 decision.
   38. As it relates to the law on land tenure and associated fields, the implementation of socio-
   community infrastructure projects (including wells, schools, market sheds, shops, grain
   banks, etc.) calls for compliance with a number of legislative and regulatory provisions,
   namely:

                Act # 2007-03 dated October 16, 2007 on rural land tenure establishes the
                 principle of recognition of customary law and its protection as regards land
                 matters. By doing so, it makes local authorities responsible for such
                 recognition.
                Decree # 89-112 dated March 24, 1989 regulating the issuance of building
                 permits in the Republic of Benin.
                Decree #2001-128 dated April 4, 2001 on the creation, organization and
                 functioning of the National Commission of State Property Affairs.

   39. The main stakeholder involved in the management of State property and land in Benin
   is the National Agency for State Property and Land Tenure (ANDF). It is a public
   technical and scientific institution of a specific type set up in 2014. ANDF acts as a
   coordination unit for land and State property management with a mission of ensuring land
   security at the national level. It is in charge implementing the land tenure and estate policy
   defined by the Government. Under the supervision of the Ministry of the Economy, Finance
   and Denationalization Programs, the Commune-level Offices of the State and Land (BCDF)
   are its decentralized branches. Its scope of intervention covers rural, periurban and urban
   areas throughout the national territory. On behalf of the State, it carries out the expropriation
   and resettlement of populations affected by public projects.

Legislation concerning child labor
  40. The main provisions concerning child labor (individuals under 18 years of age) are
  contained in Act # 2015-08 dated January 23, 2015 on the Child Code in the Republic of
  Benin. Among others, the law prohibits the exploitation of children and protects them against
  all forms of economic exploitation or abuse for economic purposes; some forms of work
  (debt bondage and serfdom, forced or compulsory labor); all work that, by its nature or the
  conditions of its performance, is likely to harm children’s health, safety, education, morality
  and harmonious development. The law also sets specific working hours for children.

Constitutional appeal bodies
  41. Act # 2009-22 dated August 11, 2009 established the Ombudsman of the Republic of
  Benin, an independent administrative authority, free from the authority of any political,
  administrative, legislative or judicial entity, to receive citizens’ grievances on the
  functioning of the central governmental administrations, decentralized authorities, public
  institutions and to review such grievances to provide equitable solutions.

   42. Benin has also a Human Rights Committee (CSDH), which is an independent national
   institution for the promotion and protection of human rights.


BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                   page   xiii
VI. ADEQUACY OF APPLICABLE SYSTEMS
  43. The strengths, weaknesses, threats, and opportunities associated with the national
  systems are set forth in the light of the Core Principles applicable to the Program - as
  described in the Bank Policy and Directive for Program for Results (PforR) funding.

    ➔ Core Principle 1: General principle of environmental and social impact assessment
        and management. This Principle applies to the Program. Indeed, the works funded
        could have negative impacts with a risk level ranging from low to moderate. ESSA has
        been prepared and its recommendations will be integrated to the overall: action plan of
        the program. In line with the principles set forth in ESSA, an ESMP will be prepared
        for any individual investment project that the initial diagnostic and screening system set
        up have deemed to have moderate environmental impact.

             Strengths: Benin has adequate regulatory and legal frameworks. The national
              environmental impact assessment system is based on a well-oiled diagnostic and
              impact nature assessment process. The responsibilities of the different
              institutions are accurately defined.
             Weaknesses: The institutions in charge lack human, as well as financial means
              to enforce the legislation. Awareness of environmental management issues is
              low at the level of all actors.
             Opportunities: Initiatives to sensitize all actors and stakeholders on ESM issues
              will be organized. Actions to build the capacities of central and local officers
              will be initiated to update them on national mechanisms and World Bank PforR
              arrangements.
             Threats: Environmental and social management rules and procedures are not
              implemented adequately. Current environmental regulations are not enforced in
              timely manner.

    ➔ Core Principle 2: Natural habitats and physical and cultural resources
        This Principle does not apply to the Program. Indeed, no Program activity will occur
        within biodiversity protection areas. Any investment that poses threats to fragile
        ecosystems will not be eligible. Any investment that poses a direct threat to the cultural
        and religious heritage of a region will not be eligible.

    ➔ Core Principle 3: Public and workers safety
        This principle applies to the Program. Indeed, the works undertaken under the Program
        could have an impact on public safety and on the safety of site workers. Construction
        site workers could be exposed to occupational accidents/injuries, water pollution, air
        pollution, solid wastes, and toxic or hazardous materials on site. The populations living
        close to the construction sites could also be exposed to the same hazards.
             Strengths: The legal/regulatory system of Benin includes construction site
                safety provisions. There are national policies and guidelines on public and
                worker safety and health.
             Weaknesses: The national EIA system does not address all aspects of public and
                worker safety. A general lack of sensitization on public health and safety issues
                prevails, especially as regards exposition to hazardous materials.
             Opportunities: Information and training on site safety measures.
             Threats: Inability to enforce current environmental, social, and safety
                regulations in timely manner.


BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                 page   xiv
    ➔ Core Principle 4: Land acquisition
        This principle applies to the Program. Indeed, the works could: (i) involve temporary
        physical relocations of resident households or businesses; (ii) require the acquisition of
        private land, and, as a consequence, expropriation public purposes and involuntary
        resettlements of resident households or businesses; and (iii) temporarily disrupt local
        small-scale and economic activities. In line with the principles set forth in ESSA, a RAP
        will be prepared for any investment sub-project that the initial diagnostic and screening
        system set up have deemed to have moderate environmental impact.
             Strengths: The amount of the allowances or compensation granted to the
                affected people is set on the basis of the nature and value of the assets. The added
                value or depreciation from the projected implementation of the non-expropriated
                part is taken into account.
             Weaknesses: Customary land ownership is recognized but needs to be confirmed
                to receive compensation. Informal property titles are not recognized by the
                national legislation. No specific formal measure for assisting the resettlement of
                vulnerable people exists.
             Opportunities: Ensure a system of compensation in kind and/or cash, depending
                on the case. Set up a system of assistance to resettlement. Set up a genuine joint
                administration/civil society mechanism for claims management and monitoring.
             Threats: Non-compliance with the existing legislation. The national and local
                institutions in charge lack human resources and financial means to enforce the
                legislation and mechanisms.

    ➔ Core Principle 5: Social considerations: indigenous peoples and vulnerable groups
        This principle applies (except that there are no indigenous people in Benin).
            Strengths: Actions are conducted to inform populations on the implementation
               of the project and collect their concerns, expectations, and observations;
               informational posters are displayed to this end in public places. The law provides
               for the services of an Ombudsman for vulnerable people.
            Weaknesses: The Benin legislation does not provide for specific measures for
               vulnerable groups. There is no real claims management system at the local level.
            Opportunities: Define and set up a sound stakeholder engagement strategy
               (sensitization, consultation, information disclosure, and grievance redress
               mechanism) as part of the sensitization program, targeting vulnerable groups
               more particularly.
            Threats: The lack of clarity and consistency of the mechanism for implementing
               public consultations and engaging stakeholders could alienate poor and
               vulnerable groups.

    ➔ Core Principle 6: Social considerations - Social conflict
        This principle does not apply to the Program. Indeed, the Program is not implemented
        in an area of conflict.

VII. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT ACTION PLAN (ESM/PA)

   44. The Program will support specific measures to improve the conditions governing the
   performance of the environmental and social management system in the implementation and
   monitoring of Program activities. These measures are proposed as part of an Environmental
   and social management action plan (ESM/AP) - this Plan forms part of the Program’s


BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                   page   xv
   general Action Plan as such. ESM/AP identified three components of recommendations,
   with each one including distinct and complementary activities.

    ➢ First component of ESM/AP: Reinforcement of the environmental and social
      management system of Program investments. This component includes the following
      elements:

         Technical manual. Preparation of a Technical Manual for Environmental and
          Social Management (TMESM) of investments. This Manual will be used for the
          implementation of both the Program and other ANAEPMR projects. It will comply
          with both national environmental and social assessment procedures and World Bank
          policy provisions on PforR funding. The Manual will especially set forth the
          procedures and tools relating to the preparation of an Environmental and Social
          Management Plan (ESMP) for structural sub-projects that involve moderate
          environmental risks and a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for structural sub-
          projects involving moderate social risks. Furthermore, the Manual will also aim to
          define and set up the local grievance management mechanism - concurrently with
          the relating procedures (including with respect to the services of the Ombudsman
          and the grievances submitted to the Grievance Redress Service (GRS) of the World
          Bank).

           The TMESM will present, among other things, the following elements :
              • Procedures for the screening of sub-projects;
              • Procedures for the elaboration of Environmental and Social Management
                 Plans (ESMPs) and Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs);
              • Procedures for the preparation of the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) ;
              • Process of land acquisition and land property;
              • Key elements (environmental and social provisions, minimum required staff,
                 price details) for contracts with (i) work contractors, (ii) works supervisory
                 offices, (iii) drinking water operators ;
              • Grievance management mechanisms ;
              • Citizen engagement mechanism ;
              • Guidelines to good environmental and social practices.

          The Manual will be prepared for the National Rural Water Supply Agency
          (ANAEPMR) and all technical services, as well as all stakeholders who will be
          involved in Program implementation at the national, regional, and local levels, to
          ensure that environmental and social management procedures are properly
          understood, perfectly owned, and monitored.
         Inter-institutional coordination between ANAEPMR and ABE. Preparation and
          implementation of an interinstitutional coordination agreement between
          ANAEMPR and ABE. The content of this agreement will establish the conditions
          for collaboration for the review and rapid certification of program subproject reports
          and the environmental and social monitoring of the implementation of the
          safeguarding documents. It will also take into account aspects of institutional
          support and capacity building.

    ➢ Second component of ESM/AP: Capacity building on environmental and social
      management of the key actors and representatives of the Program. This component
      includes two separate types of activities:

BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                               page   xvi
         Training on the TMESM. A training program will be elaborated for the use of the
          TMESM by the different stakeholders involved in the implementation of the
          Program, namely:

           •    Staff of ANAEPMR, ABE, ANDF ; MoE and MCVDD departemental
                directions; Municipalities, ACEP
           •    Contractors and works control offices.

            This training will aim to sensitize and inform a fairly broad audience on the content
            of the TMESM. This will include, in particular: (i) understanding of TMESM and
            its procedures and practices; and (ii) mastery of environmental and social
            management tools, namely: screening form, EIA, ESMP and Resettlement Action
            Plan (RAP), which will be prepared for individual sub-projects, according to the
            extent of their respective environmental and social risks, in line with the national
            arrangements and the World Bank's policy for funding of PPR. It has to be pointed
            out that these initiatives will support the establishment and operationalization of the
            citizen engagement and grievance management systems (including with respect to
            grievance procedures to the Ombudsman, on the one hand, and the Grievance
            Settlement Service (GRS) of the World Bank, on the other hand).

         Human Resources of ANAEPMR for Environmental and Social Management.
          For an effective implementation of the program, ANAEPMR will have to recruit
          and maintain at least one social specialist and one environmental specialist, who will
          be employed full time throughout the implementation of the Program and having:

                •   Basic training in environmental and/or social sciences;
                •   A minimum number of years of experience in conducting similar programs /
                    projects in the drinking water supply sector.

             The number of such staff will be reviewed as needed based on the workload. These
             specialists will be responsible for ensuring, in close collaboration with all
             stakeholders: (i) the coordination and monitoring of the implementation of all
             actions related to the environmental and social management of the Program; (ii) the
             organization of all training, information and awareness initiatives on the
             environmental and social risks of the Program; (iii) the collection and centralization
             of all information relating to the monitoring of mitigation measures; (iv) the
             monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of mitigation measures and the
             integration of data at the information system level (in accordance with the principles
             described and presented in the TMESM); and (v) preparation of reports on the
             environmental and social aspects of the Program.

         Supporting Commune’s stakeholders and institutions
          Technical assistance and capacity building of the actors and institutions of the
          Communes involved in the implementation of the environmental and social aspects
          of the program are needed.
            These aspects of technical assistance and capacity building will target the communal
            structures of environmental and social and land management and Drinking Water
            Users’ Associations (ACEP).


BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                 page   xvii
            Main themes concern; (i) monitoring of the implementation of safeguard documents;
            (ii) the social aspects of land management; (iii) grievance management and general
            issues of social intermediation
            The program will build on the capacity building strategy of municipal actors already
            developed by the Small Town Water Supply and Urban Septage Management
            Project (PEPRAU) to facilitate the efficient execution of its activities.

   45. Table below summarizes all the elements of the ESM Action Plan, which forms an
   integral part of the general Action Plan of the Program:

         All the costs of these elements of the ESM Action Plan will be integrated to the
          general budget of the Program.
         On the other hand, the cost of the environmental and social remedial actions will be
          integrated to the very budgets of the investment sub-projects.




BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                              page   xviii
      Table : ESM Action Plan

                                                                 Responsible                      DLI or Loan
N°          Action            Completion Measurement                              Due Date
                                                                   Agency                          Covenant
1. STRENGTHENING OF ESM SYSTEMS OF PROGRAM INVESTMENTS
 1.1 Technical          Preparation and adoption of a           ANAEPMR       90 days after      Loan Covenant
      Manual for        MTGES that will have include the        in            Program’s
      Social and        following as a minimum:                 collaboration effectiveness
      Environmental     • Procedure for the screening of        with ABE
      Management        sub-projects
      (MTGES)           • Procedure for the elaboration of
                        Environmental and Social
                        Management Plans (ESMP) and
                        Environmental and Social Impact
                        Studies (ESIA)
                        • Procedure for the elaboration of
                        social assessment and Resettlement
                        Action Plans (RAP)
                        • Procedure for land acquisition
                        • Standard elements (environmental
                        and social clauses, minimum staff,
                        price details) for the contracts of (i)
                        works contractors, (ii) engineering
                        consultant, (iii) regional private
                        operators
                        • Grievance Redress Mechanism
                        • Citizen engagement mechanism
                        • Good practices guidelines for
                        environmental and social
                        management
 1.2 Interinstitutional Signing of an interinstitutional        ANAEPMR       90 days after
      coordination      agreement between ANAEPMR               and ABE       Program’s
      ANAEMPR -         and the ABE in which the                              effectiveness
      ABE               ANAEPMR commits to respect the
                        conditions, measures of
                        certification prescribed by the
                        decree n ° 2017-332 of the 06 July
                        2017 defining the procedures of the
                        environmental assessment
2. STREGTHENING OF INSTITUTIONAL CAPACITIES
2.1    Training on the    Development of a training program      ANAEPMR       90 days after
       TMESM              for the application of the MTGES       and ABE       Program’s
                          for the various stakeholders                         effectiveness
                          involved in the implementation of
                          the Program:
                          • Staff of ANAEPMR, ABE,
                          ANDF, Departmental Directions
                          MoE, MCVDD, Municipalities,
                          ACEP
                          • Works contractors and
                          engineering consultant
                          • Operators
2.2    Human              Maintain at least one social           ANAEPMR       After Program’s   Loan Covenant
       Resources of       specialist and one environmental                     effectiveness
       ANAEPMR for        specialist within ANAEPMR who
       Environmental      are employed full-time throughout
       and Social         the implementation of the Program
       Management         and have:


      BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                      page   xix
                                                                 Responsible                   DLI or Loan
N°          Action            Completion Measurement                              Due Date
                                                                   Agency                       Covenant
                          • Basic training in environmental
                          and / or social sciences
                          • A minimum of one year of
                          experience in conducting similar
                          programs / projects in the drinking
                          water supply sector
2.3                       Provision of Technical assistance      ANAEPMR       Before the    Loan Covenant
       Supporting
                          and capacity building of the actors                  works
       stakeholders and
                          and institutions of the Communes
       institutions of
                          involved in the implementation of
       Communes
                          the environmental and social
                          aspects of the program are needed.

                          Main themes concern; (i)
                          monitoring of the implementation
                          of safeguard documents; (ii) the
                          social aspects of land management;
                          (iii) grievance management and
                          general issues of social
                          intermediation


                          ____________________________________________

              The World Bank is in charge of the organization of a Public Consultation
              with the representatives of the key stakeholders, civil society organizations,
              and private sector to present and discuss the preliminary version of ESSA.

              Afterwards, throughout the whole duration of the Program, it will fall to the
              Beninese counterpart to organize consultations on specific Program
              activities (investment sub-projects).

              The final revised version of ESSA will be made public on the external
              website of the World Bank and the site of the National Agency for Drinking
              Water Supply in Rural Areas (ANAEPMR). Public comments will be
              requested during the set period.
                         ____________________________________________




      BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                    page   xx
                              SECTION I. INTRODUCTION


I.1 BACKGROUND
1.    This Environmental and Social System Assessment (ESSA) has been conducted by the
World Bank as part of the preparation of the Program-for-Results (PforR) for Rural Supply
Universal Access Program in Benin (P164186).

2.      The National Master Plan for the Development of the Rural Water Supply Sector
(MPDDWSRA) defines the expenditures of the Benin Government's program for achieving
universal access to water in rural areas. MPDDWSRA plans the investment needs of all
communes of Benin relating to the new Water supply and sanitation (WSS) systems and
existing systems, as well as manual pumps. The investment needs of MPDDWSRA to achieve
universal drinking water supply in rural areas are estimated at FCFA 314 billion
(USD 560 million).

3.     PforR will fund part of the expenditures of the Government Action Program (GAP) for
universal water supply in rural areas. More particularly, with a funding of USD 220 million,
the Program will support, over the 2018-2024 period, the development of drinking water supply
systems for rural areas and professionalized service delivery models in selected communes
having more limited access to rural water supply services.


I.2 PURPOSES AND APPROACH OF ESSA

4.      ESSA reviews the environmental and social management systems of the program to
assess their compliance with the provisions of the Bank's Policy on PforR. It aims to ensure that
the Program does not involve high environmental and social risks and that the systems set up
allow for identifying and managing any risk. ESSA especially identifies and analyzes gaps
between national systems and the core principles applying to the program, and recommends
actions for improvement aimed at aligning environmental and social management systems on
Bank requirements.

5.       Unlike conventional investment programs or projects, PforR supports a program of the
government, serving especially the following objectives: (i) fund the specific program
expenditures of the borrower; (ii) link fund disbursement to the achievement of specific results;
(iii) use, and, in this case, reinforce the systems to ensure that the funds are used properly,
giving due consideration to the environmental and social impact of the program; and (iv) build
the institutional capacities allowing for achieving the expected results.

6.       The preparation of a PforR requires an assessment of the environmental and social
system applicable to the program, to ensure that the systems set up allow for properly
identifying and mitigating any risk, including those relating to report preparation and the
verification and disclosure of information relating to the potential environmental and social
effects of the activities funded as part of the program. The assessment of environmental and
social systems must especially aim to: (i) promote the environmental and social sustainability
of a program; (ii) avoid, reduce, or mitigate any negative environmental and social impact; and
(iii) support informed and participatory decision-making.


BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                  page   1
7.      The World Bank policy for PforR funding describes the basic environmental and social
management principles that need to be complied with in ESSA. The Program assesses the
consistency of its systems against: (i) the systems defined by some legislation, regulations,
procedures, etc. ("the system as defined"); and (ii) the capacity of Program institutions to
effectively implement the systems ("the system as practically implemented"). It identifies and
analyzes the gaps between national systems and the core principles applying to the Program on
the two abovementioned levels. It should be underscored that owing to the nature of
programmatic interventions, ESSA focuses on the system as such, by providing only indications
on the type, nature, and characteristics of the activities set up as part of the Program.

8.     The core principles that need to be complied with in the assessment of the environmental
and social systems are as follows:
    promote environmental and social sustainability in the program design;
    avoid, minimize, or mitigate negative impacts, and promote informed decision-making
       on the environmental and social impacts of the program;
    avoid, minimize, or mitigate any negative impact on tangible cultural resources arising
       from the program;
    protect public and workers safety, especially from potential risks associated with: (i)
       facility construction and/or operations as part of the program; (ii) exposition to toxic
       chemicals, hazardous wastes, air pollution, and sound pollution as part of the program;
       and (iii) reconstruction or rehabilitation of infrastructures located in the urban perimeter;
    manage any private land acquisition and loss of access to economic assets and public
       services in a way that avoids or reduces physical and economic relocations, and help
       affected people improve, or, at minimum, restore their livelihoods and standard of
       living;
    consider the cultural relevance and fair access to program benefits by granting special
       attention to rights and interests and the needs and concerns of all social categories,
       including vulnerable groups;
    contribute to the prevention, reduction, or even elimination of social conflicts.

9.     As such, the program approach excludes any activity that involves significant risks of
environmental and social impacts and any investment that would normally belong to Category
A will be excluded, i.e. investments requiring a comprehensive Environmental and Social
Impact Assessment (ESIA) as per Beninese procedures, posing a potential significant
environmental and social risk and diverse, varied, irreversible, and unprecedented negative
impacts.

10.     ESSA aims to identify the strengths and weaknesses of the environmental and social
system applicable to the program to identify the actions that need to be taken to improve its
performances. Specific actions to remedy to or fill the identified weaknesses or gaps are also
proposed under a consistent Program Action Plan to improve current practices and procedures
to increase their compliance with Bank mechanisms, especially as part of the preparation of the
annex of the Program Manual of Procedures relating to environmental and social safeguard
aspects.


I.3 METHODOLOGY
11.    ESSA reviews the environmental and social management systems of the Country that
apply to the program to assess their compliance with the provisions of the Bank's Policy on
PforR. It aims to ensure that the latter does not involve significant environmental and social

BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                    page   2
risks and that the systems set up allow for identifying and managing any risk. ESSA especially
identifies and analyzes gaps between national systems and the core principles applying to the
program, and recommends actions for improvement aimed at aligning environmental and social
management systems on Bank requirements.
12.      Unlike conventional investment programs or projects, PforR supports a program of the
government, with the aim of achieving the following objectives: (i) fund the specific program
expenditures of the borrower; (ii) link fund disbursement to the achievement of specific results;
(iii) use and, in this case, reinforce the systems to ensure that the funds are used properly, giving
due consideration to the environmental and social impact of the program; and (iv) build the
institutional capacities allowing for achieving the expected results.
13.    The preparation of ESSA and development of measures aimed at reinforcing
environmental and social management systems benefitted from various pieces of information
and a consultation process with institutional actors, including:
         The review of documents and data available on national environmental and social
          procedures and matching regulatory frameworks, analysis of the environmental and
          social safeguard capacities institutions involved in the Program; and World Bank
          documentation on PforRs and ESSAs;
         Interviews and working meetings with representatives of State and non-State
          institutions involved in the Program and key stakeholders;
         Consultation meetings to further clarify the results expected from ESSA, identify
          Program environmental and social challenges, assess needs in technical assistance
          and capacity building to improve environmental and social management systems,
          develop better understanding of procedures, standards, and the approach to be
          adopted with the technical staff of the relevant ministerial departments;
         Meetings to provide a restitution on the preliminary document were held in
          December 2017 and February 20182018 with the participation of communes,
          ACEPs, DDCVDD, and civil society organizations. The results of these meetings
          were documented in the paper attached to the present ESSA (with the full list of
          participants) (See Annex 9).
         A Public Consultation Workshop will be held on April 3rd 2018 [date to be
          confirmed], involving Communes, ACEPs, development partners, civil society
          organizations, and the private sector. Observations from the workshop will be
          incorporated to the final version of ESSA (with a full list of participants).
         The ESSA report will be publicly disseminated in the country and through the
          external website of the Bank. Public comments will be requested during the set
          period.

14.     To adequately manage inherent risks and promote sustainable development, ESSA
focuses on the six Core Principles of the Bank's Policy, namely: (i) General Principles of
Environmental and Social Assessment; (ii) Natural habitats and physical Cultural Resources;
(iii) Public and worker Safety; (iv) Land acquisition; (v) Indigenous people and Vulnerable
groups; and (vi) Social conflict.




BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                     page   3
                      SECTION II. PROGRAM DESCRIPTION


II.1 BACKGROUND
15.    Benin has a population of 10.8 million residents, 45 percent of which live in urban areas
and 55 percent in rural areas.
16.    In rural areas, the population accesses drinking water through VWS systems and manual
pumps. Only 30 percent of the rural population has access to running water and 41 percent to
improved water sources through manual pumps. In urban areas, 57 percent of the population
has access to running water.

II.2 KEY PROGRAM CHARACTERISTICS
17.     The Program will support the implementation of the National Strategy for Rural Water
Supply 2017-2030 adopted in May 2017 and the associated National Master Plan for the
Development of the Rural Water Supply Sector (PPDAEPMR). The Program will contribute to
funding improved access to 1.6 million people, or close to 30 percent of the overall national
target to reach universal coverage by 2021. The prioritization of the Program’s interventions
will seek to redress substantial disparities in rural water service coverage across the country’s
departments. It will support the core intervention included in the PPDAEPMR, which consists
of extending existing and constructing new piped waters supply systems in rural areas and to
provide greater access through household connections, in line with the Sustainable
Development Goals’ targets.
18.    The Program’s focus on the rural sector will benefit a substantial portion of Benin’s
population (estimated at 70 percent of Benin’s population by 2021), which also tends to be the
poorest with limited economic development opportunities. Important disparities between urban
and rural poverty persist and have tended to increase, with poverty rates estimated at 35.8
percent and 43.6 percent respectively.
19.      PforR Program financing. The Program has an estimated total cost of US$240 million.
The World Bank will provide the majority of financing (US$220 million) whereas the GoB will
provide US$20 million from its own resources. The total budget represents 42 percent of the
total estimated financial needs to implement the PPDAEPMR.
20.    Program Development Objective (PDO). The proposed PDO is to increase access to
water supply service and to strengthen service delivery arrangements in selected rural areas.
21.     Result Area 1 - Increase access to water supply services. Under this Result Area, the
Program will support investments in piped rural water supply systems to rapidly expand access
(at a pace not previously experienced in the country). This will be supported through:

      1.1. Construction of new water supply systems, including (i) the construction of production,
      pumping, treatment and storage infrastructure, distribution networks, standpipes, household
      connections, (ii) associated studies and works supervision. It is estimated that the Program
      will finance the construction of 270 new water supply systems.

      1.2. Rehabilitation and expansion of existing water supply systems, including (i) the
      rehabilitation and/or expansion of production, pumping, treatment and storage
      infrastructure, distribution networks, and the construction of new standpipes and household
      connections, (ii) associated studies and works supervision. It is estimated that the Program
      will finance the rehabilitation and/or expansion of 360 existing water supply systems. The


BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                   page   4
      responsibility for the operation of existing water supply systems in defined regional areas
      will be progressively transferred to the regional operators..
22.   Results Area 2: Strengthen service delivery arrangements. Under this Result Area, the
Program will strengthen service delivery arrangements of the rural water supply sector through:

      2.1. Establishment of performance-based contracts with regional operators, including (i)
      preparation of a Framework Partnership Agreement (FPA) between the Government and
      municipalities; (ii) technical assistance for the preparation of the bidding documents and
      bidding process for the recruitment of regional operators; (iii) preparation of a Planning
      Contract between the Government and the ANAEPMR defining their multi-year
      commitments and obligations for the achievement of the development objectives of the
      rural water supply sector; (iv) definition of a tariff policy that will apply to the regional
      operators’ performance-based; (v) definition and implementation of regulatory
      arrangements by the DG-Eau; and (vi) a communication campaign among the Program’s
      stakeholders to prepare and accompany the implementation of the above activities.
      2.2. Training to rural water supply professionals, including (i) strengthening of SONEB’s
      existing training center (CFME – Centre de Formation aux Métiers de l’Eau; (ii)
      development of a specific curriculum to train local rural water supply professionals
      (training activities will aim at promoting the participation of women in the provision of
      rural water supply services).

      2.3. Capacity-building of the ANAEPMR and overall sector institutional strengthening,
      including the capacity-building of the ANAEPMR to fully discharge its functions of asset-
      holding company for rural water supply services.

23.     Expected results and beneficiaries. It is expected that the Program will finance the
construction of 270 new water supply systems and the rehabilitation and/or expansion of 360
existing water supply systems. This will include the construction of approximatively 34,500
household connections and 3,300 standpipes providing access to a total of 1,660,000 on the
basis of a household connection providing access to 24 people and a standpipe providing access
to 250 people.

Institutional implementation arrangements.
24.     The ANAEPMR will be in charge of implementing the Program. In that respect, the
ANAEPMR will execute the Program’s activities, will be responsible for its environmental and
social management, M&E, requesting result-based disbursements and consolidating Program’s
financial reports.

II.3 ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL EFFECTS OF THE PROGRAM
25.      Overall impacts of the Program. The activities planned under the Program will mainly
pertain to the following aspects:
         Construction of new systems of access to drinking water;
         Rehabilitation of existing systems of access to drinking water;
         Extension of existing drinking water supply systems/infrastructures.

26.    Program activities will have major positive impacts both on the environment and
population (access to drinking water, less hardship in drinking water supply and time savings
for women, reduction of waterborne diseases, improvement of living conditions, poverty



BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                    page   5
control, and reduction of unemployment). These positive effects are numerous and should be
maintained over the long term.

27.     The negative environmental and social impacts of the investments will generally be
limited, of low to moderate extent, reversible, and easy to control and manage. The associated
risks are deemed moderate to low. They will be rather easy to identify in advance, prevent, and
minimize with good simple practices and effective mitigation measures.
28.     Environmental and social screening of the different sub-projects that will receive
funding will allow for identifying both the extent of any negative impact and required planning
tools, as well as the required control and monitoring systems (through simple and effective
screening). However, the largest part of these sub-projects eligible to the funding will probably
involve lifting structures.
29.     Considering the abovementioned, this ESA has been prepared in accordance with the
six principles described under paragraph 8 of the World Bank Policy on PforR funding, with
the aim of managing program risks and promoting sustainable development. These principles
are:
       Core Principle 1 - Environment: Promote environmental and social sustainability in
        program design, avoid, minimize, or mitigate adverse impacts, promote evidence-based
        decision-making regarding program environmental and social impacts.

       Core Principle 2 - Natural habitats and cultural resources: Avoid, minimize or
        mitigate adverse impacts on natural habitats and cultural resources resulting from the
        program.

       Core Principle 3 - Public and workers safety: Protect public and workers safety, namely
        against potential risks associated with: (i) construction and/or infrastructure works or
        other works depending on the program; (ii) exposition to toxic chemicals, hazardous
        wastes and other hazardous materials dependent on the program; (iii) reconstruction or
        rehabilitation of infrastructures located in areas subject to natural hazards.

       Core Principle 4 - Land acquisition: Manage land acquisition and loss of access to
        natural resources in a way that avoids or minimizes resettlements and assist affected
        people by promoting, or at least restoring, their livelihoods and living conditions.

       Core Principle 5 - Vulnerable groups: Grant special attention to cultural relevance, to
        fair access to program benefits, and to the rights and interests and needs and concerns
        of vulnerable groups. Vulnerable groups will include women and disabled people.

       Core Principle 6 - Social conflict: Avoid exacerbating social conflicts, especially in
        fragile States, post-conflict areas, or contested territorial areas.

II.3.1 ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS OF THE PROGRAM
30.     The Program will have limited environmental and social impacts. This is mainly due
to the following aspects:

        ➢      the ruling out of any investment involving major environmental risks (i.e. World
               Bank Class A projects ), by the very nature of a PforR;



BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                  page   6
      ➢       the type and nature of the planned developments and infrastructure (small, well-
              located, limited geographical scope with excavation works limited in terms of
              surface area);
      ➢       the nature of the activities planned, based on the findings of prior diagnostic
              studies, taking into account specific social, economic and environmental
              parameters;
      ➢       works and development operations that should not generate major air or noise
              pollution, significant degradation of the urban environment or destruction or
              reduction of green spaces;
      ➢       the feasibility, effectiveness and relevance of the activities planned, based on the
              results of prior diagnostic studies in the sector;
      ➢       the existence of various controllable and effective measures to mitigate potential
              risks and ensure impact monitoring, both during the construction phase and during
              the operation of structures established;
      ➢       the existence of institutions with the ability to manage most of the Program’s
              environmental and social aspects;
      ➢       the existence of an appropriate institutional and legal framework to effectively
              address all aspects of the Program's environmental and social management (ESM).

Positive environmental impacts
31.     Undoubtedly, Program investments will have a positive environmental impact - both
directly and indirectly, and temporary and permanent. Indeed, the Program will contribute,
among other things, to:

      substantially improving rural populations' access to drinking water;
      reducing the frequency and incidence of waterborne diseases;
      improving the quality of life and living environment of rural populations;
      establishing regular interactions between the population and people in charge of the
       developments that may induce the latter to better honor their commitments, including
       when it comes to implementation times and the quality of the projected infrastructures,
       as well as cost control;
      promoting the social and economic development of rural areas in Benin;
      reducing poverty and unemployment;
      improving the institutional capacities of the actors involved in DWS service provision
       in rural areas;
      improving hygiene and health conditions;
      changing the populations' behaviors regarding the use of collective equipment;
      creating jobs;
      improving income generation opportunities for local communities;
      creating temporary income and subsequently improving incomes for employees;
      promoting the sustainability of the different investments by professionalizing the
       management of WSS, while concurrently sensitizing beneficiaries on paying the
       service provided by the operators.

Negative environmental impacts during the preparation phase
32.      During the preparation phase, the main risk is neglect in the preparation of tender
documents on environmental and social aspects and their lack of consideration when developing
technical studies and/or preparation of unsatisfactory environmental and social studies. Failure
to rigorously review other technical options for project design and consider aspects relating to


BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                   page   7
public information and participation in a culturally appropriate and socially acceptable manner
could aggravate this risk.

33.     Additionally, the structural interventions contemplated as part of the Program should
not raise special risks regarding public and worker safety. Safeguards against these risks will
be ensured in compliance with applicable national and international rules. The measures for
mitigating these risks will mainly involve: (i) public and stakeholder consultation during site
selection, and preparation and validation of studies; (ii) quality control and implementation of
environmental and social study validation procedures and their dissemination; and (iii)
construction site supervision by environmental and social experts.
34.     The key mitigation measures recommended during this phase will mainly consist in
screening all sub-projects according to agreed parameters, such as drawing up an activity impact
assessment sheet before conducting them and integrating a section on compliance with
environmental and social and construction site security clauses in the Specifications of calls for
tender.
Negative environmental impacts during the works
35.    The works phase will involve the opening of construction sites that may generate solid
waste (bags of cement and other types of packaging, waste materials from drinking water
networks, domestic wastes of the workers, etc.), nuisances associated with vehicles and
equipment (dust, noise, emissions and accidental spillages of hydrocarbons and used oil), or
involve negative effects (uprooting of trees, reduction of green spaces, etc.).
36.    Although not permanent (since they will cease with the closure of the sites), these
impacts may have lasting effects (especially solid wastes and probable discharges of used oil
and grease from the equipment) if environmental protection procedures are not applied at the
implementation and closure of the sites. Especially:
         the construction works of new drinking water access systems and the rehabilitation
          and extension of existing drinking water supply systems might require deep
          excavation works and especially the digging of trenches to lay extension and
          densification mains;
         in the case of new structures, the works will include excavations for the foundation
          of the tanks (water towers);
         noisy machines and equipment (jackhammers, air compressors, etc.) might create
          noise pollution for riparian populations and workers on the sites;
         the traffic of machines and vehicles might produce relatively important air pollution
          (related to dust emission);
         the traffic of machines and any non-compliance with safety instructions might cause
          occupational accidents;
         the works (trenches for laying mains), any inappropriate storage of materials (such
          as cement), and the transportation and use of materials (cement, iron) are also may
          generate dust;
         the works executed as part of new investments might require the deployment of
          heavy machinery (such as drilling equipment) which could generate dust;
         site vehicles will generate GHG emissions due to exhaust gases, as well as health
          risks and odor nuisances, especially when the said vehicles are heavily used and
          poorly maintained;
         the pumping tests of the catchments to test the flow rates of the ground water
          catchment sources might cause water to stagnate in temporary puddles;
         the rinsing and disinfection of mains might create stagnating waters;

BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                   page   8
         construction, rehabilitation, or extension works might require diversions of the car
          traffic or restrictions of pedestrian traffic and access to housing, and disrupt the
          daily lives of the populations;
         the works might also affect some drinking water sources and contaminate
          groundwater, impacting water quality;
         the waters generated from the pumping tests of the boreholes might affect the
          groundwater;
         some works might involve the cutting or uprooting of trees and vegetation -
          especially excavation works in the surroundings of non-developed dirt roads,
          covered with grass, bushes, or trees;
         inconveniences caused by the noise and on-site dust emissions to local populations,
          especially the more vulnerable ones;
         accidents and safety issues, especially for the most vulnerable people (children,
          elderly people, women);
         potential damages to cultural heritage and local religious items.

37.      The mitigation measures applying to this works phase consist in rigorously
implementing the measures proposed in ESMP and regularly monitoring the enforcement of
site instructions, as defined in contractor specifications, establishing any non-compliance, and
identifying corrective measures, as well as monitoring their implementation.
Negative environmental impacts during the operation phase
38.     The negative environmental effects of the structural investments associated with this
phase might result from inadequate design, lack of upkeep and maintenance, inadequate use of
structures, degradation of infrastructures, or inadequate enforcement of safety measures. They
could result in malfunction or degradation of structures and generate specific negative impacts.
39.   The mitigation measures recommended relate to good works site management practices.
They generally consist in setting up emergency measures in case of accidental contaminations.
40.     The environmental monitoring system that will support the operation phase should
allow for identifying these malfunctions in real time so as to take the required corrective actions.

II.3.2 SOCIAL EFFECTS OF THE PROGRAM

41.    The negative social impacts of the Program - especially those potentially associated with
the acquisition of private land - will be limited in time and restricted in space as land needs
under the different investments planned under the Program are relatively small. Indeed, the
probability that any kind of involuntary resettlement of resident households or businesses, even
temporary, will be needed, is very low. However, at this stage, social risks linked with private
land acquisition cannot be excluded.
Positive social impacts
42.    The activities proposed should, by their very nature, be beneficial to the beneficiary
populations. The benefits include, among others:
       the improvement of the living and hygiene conditions of the populations;
       the social and economic development of rural areas in Benin;
       reduction of poverty and unemployment;
       reduction of the amount of medical costs associated with the treatment of water
        pollution-related illnesses;
       the implementation of strategically identified investments that meet the needs of all
        social categories, including the most vulnerable ones;

BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                    page   9
       reduction of the time that women traditionally spend on fetching drinking water and
        increase in the time dedicated to child care and leisure;
       training initiatives aiming to incorporate specific tools that will allow for stimulating
        the participation of women and youth to the planning process of the local jurisdictions'
        development;
       citizen engagement, through the reinforcement of information access mechanisms,
        citizen consultation, as well as grievance management, and setting up of measures
        aiming to establish the right to petition and monitor water service user satisfaction;
       establishment of regular interactions between the population and people in charge of
        the developments that may induce the latter to better honor their commitments,
        especially when it comes to implementation times and the quality of the projected
        infrastructures, as well as cost control; improvement of the performance and
        governance of Communes not only through the setting up of an effective local public
        administration that all citizens (including the most vulnerable ones), but also
        improvement of the responsiveness and social accountability of the local
        administration towards citizens;
       sensitization of citizens on local concerns that might reinforce their understanding of
        the operation of the institutions and encourage them to further require communes or
        local jurisdictions to perform their roles and responsibilities and honor their
        commitments, especially as regards service provision.

43.     To ensure that the Program has positive social impacts, a Resettlement Action Plan
(RAP) should be prepared for each structural investment sub-project that involves any physical
resettlement of people, land acquisition and/or loss of access to economic assets or workplaces
(even for people who do not have formal land titles). A RAP aims to assess the social impacts
associated with the temporary or permanent reinstallation of people and proposing
compensations for losses and support, in consultation with the affected people. The populations
affected by the resettlement will fully benefit from the allowances and support measures they
are entitled to, before the beginning of the works.
Social risks during the preparation phase
44.     Generally speaking, the biggest social risks that may occur are linked with land
acquisition or temporary land use. However, the inconveniences caused by the works, such as
difficulties of access, traffic diversions, noise, vibrations, dust, etc., could result in other risks
of lesser extent as they could disrupt daily activities in districts. Depending on the type, scope,
and extent of the works eligible under the Program, social risks will be those typically linked
with and limited to the construction phase and generally specific to the works site. Nevertheless,
if the ESMP is poorly designed and implemented, it might have negative incidences on public
health and safety.
45.     During the preparation phase, the main social risk should be associated with works
potentially requiring temporary or permanent use of private lands (the surface areas that may
be required will be small). This impact is relatively restricted, since, as a general rule, the
Program will not proceed to any expropriation or involuntary resettlement of resident
households or businesses - the approach adopted consisting in using the public domain,
rescreening to technical alternatives to avoid crossing private lands and encroaching on housing
or businesses. In a small number of cases, private lands might be used to implement sub-projects
as a result of voluntary transfer or social pressure on specific individuals to give up their space
without compensation.
46.     Under this Program, the rule will be to use State property and resort to technical
alternatives that avoid the use or crossing of private property.

BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                     page   10
47.     To avoid any private land acquisition or demolition of individual housing, the Program
will always seek alternative solutions, without forcing land cession.
48.     When private land acquisition or individual housing demolition cannot be avoided,
acquisition procedures need to give precedence to acquisition by mutual agreement, after
consultation and informed and documented consent of the cession and amount of the
compensation, which will be handed over to the entitled person before any work is started.
49.      While, in a few rare cases, physical relocations will be hard to avoid due to the lack of
technical and/or land alternatives, the social impacts linked with land acquisition will be duly
identified and analyzed, and mitigation measures will be set up. A precise screening process
will first of all allow for excluding from Program funding any sub-project associated with major
social impact (Category A activities requiring comprehensive ESIA according to the Benin
nomenclature) which would require the resettlement of resident household or businesses and/or
involuntary acquisitions of vast surface areas of land; subsequently, where the impacts are
moderate, it will allow for setting up initiatives aiming to inform affected people of the
compensation measures even before the launching of the works.
50.      For any sub-project submitted for approval with the designated instances, it is important
to have ANAEPMR safeguard specialists consistently verify beforehand that the relevant
populations have been duly informed and consulted, especially when the proposed structures
require any form of temporary or permanent resettlement of people or land acquisition or
restriction of access to resources or infrastructures or economic assets, or interruption of public
services as a result of the works.
         ➔ Public consultations will be conducted in the appropriate language(s) by the
             Contractors in charge of works, taking into account the time constraints and
             availability of the people consulted, and where necessary, providing for separate
             meetings with men and women, to give all participants the possibility to voice their
             concerns as needed. It is also important to ensure full consultation of the most
             vulnerable populations to minimize the risk that Program benefits end up captured
             by the elite.

         ➔ A grievance redress mechanism should be developed to manage claims. The
             requirements that need to be met are (i) enable illiterate people to submit claims, (ii)
             not be obliged to travel out of their locality, (iii) have the possibility of referring to
             several bodies, and (iv) expect an answer within a known timeframe.

 Negative social effects during the works
51.     The works phase will involve the opening of structure construction and development
sites that will have negative social effects to the extent that they might:
       require temporary access restrictions to resident households or businesses (case of
        investments pertaining to the reinforcement of existing structures);
       require partial or total acquisition of private land, and as a consequence, where new
        mains need to be laid, the expropriation for public interest and involuntary resettlements
        of resident households or businesses;
       generate temporary disturbances of small-scale and economic activities of people and
        households, causing loss of income;
       temporarily hinder resident access to their housing, trades, and other public
        establishments (schools, clinics, etc.);



BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                      page   11
       cause drinking water and power supply cuts and the temporary closing of public
        institutions (schools, clinics, hospitals) and collective infrastructures (e.g. markets,
        slaughterhouses, etc.);
       affect local populations, especially precarious districts;
       cause accidents and safety problems, especially for unprotected users;
       cause accidents on site or around sites - cuttings from the drillings can cause road
        accidents if not disposed of in timely manner;
       require temporary diversions of car traffic or restrictions of pedestrian traffic and disrupt
        activities - especially holds true for trench works for the laying of mains;
       contribute to increased potential violence and acts of sexual harassment against women
        because of the presence of site workers;
       damage cultural heritage and local religious items.

52.     Moreover, considering the social risks that will occur during the works mainly, the latter
will be organized consequently and alternative access roads will be set up and affected people
will be duly informed. These issues will be addressed through specific clauses in the
Contractor’ Requirements and regular monitoring will be ensured by regional operators and the
Commune. Considering what is said earlier and past experiences, the foreseeable social risks
of the works are deemed low.
Negative social impacts during the operation phase
53.    Like with environmental impacts, negative social impacts during the operation phase
might be due to inadequate design, lack of sensitization of the populations, lack of upkeep and
maintenance, inadequate use, degradation of infrastructures, or inadequate enforcement of
safety measures.
54.     The environmental monitoring system that will support the operation phase should
allow for identifying these malfunctions in real time so as to take the required correctives
actions. Contractors in charge of the works will be duly informed of all their social obligations
and ensure regular monitoring.

II.4 MAIN RISKS AND MITIGATION MEASURES

Main environmental and social risks and mitigation measures
55.    Tables 1 and 2 summarize the environmental and social risks associated with the
program, their respective levels, as well as the main mitigation measures that should be
considered.

Table 1 : Main environmental risks/impacts and mitigation measures
      Type of risk             Assessment             Risk level           Mitigation measure
 1. Calls for tender   Neglect of environmental        Low to      Preparation of adequate Terms of
 (preparation          aspects                        moderate     Reference
 phase)
 2. Soil excavation     For the construction works   Moderate
                                                                    Choice of specialized businesses
 or pollution            of new drinking water
                         access systems and the
                                                                    Conducting prior technical
                         rehabilitation and
                                                                     studies
                         extension of existing
                         drinking water supply
                                                                    Preparation of detailed
                         systems: risks linked with
                                                                     specifications
                         deep excavation works;
                         digging of trenches to lay


BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                        page    12
                         extension and
                         densification mains
                      For new structures: risks
                         linked with the excavation
                         of the foundations of tanks
                         (water towers)
                     Risk of accidental soil               Low    Conducting prior geotechnical
                     pollution                                    studies, where applicable

  3. Water           Potential pollution of                Low    •   Conducting prior technical
 pollution           groundwater and                                  studies
                     contamination of the latter                  •   Control of risks of
                     (accidental spillage of                          contamination/ infiltration of
                     hydrocarbon and lubricating                      used waters from pumping and
                     oil)                                             rinsing tests
                                                                  •   Quality control of the drinking
                                                                      water
                                                                  •   Equipment of the areas dedicated
                                                                      to hydrocarbon and lubricating
                                                                      oil distribution with pumps set
                                                                      up on impervious surfaces.
 4. Poor             Drilling and trench digging       Moderate   •   Appropriate management of
 management of       works                                            cuttings according to established
 drilling cuttings                                                    standards
                                                                  •   Adequate storage of products
                                                                      and wastes (impervious
                                                                      stockroom)
                                                                  •   Potential waste disposal by
                                                                      specialized businesses
 5. GHG emissions    Exhaust gases                         Low    Regular maintenance of site
                                                                  equipment and vehicles
 6. Vegetation       Some structures involve the           Low    Planting of trees to compensate for
 destruction         cutting or uprooting of                      any destruction of green spaces and
                     vegetation (trees, shrubs) and               loss of income relating to CO2
                     the reduction or destruction of              sequestration capacities
                     green spaces
 7. Air quality       Potential impact of heavy           Low    •   Air pollution control system
                       machinery on site and                          (compliance with the air
                       vehicles                                       pollution control regulations and
                      Emissions of dust and                          standards governing exhaust
                       exhaust gases by rolling                       gases from site machinery
                       stock                                          [works phase])
                                                                  •   Watering of sites; systematic
                                                                      removal of unused cuttings
                                                                  •   Frequent maintenance of
                                                                      vehicles
 8. Air pollution     Construction sites could         Low to    •   Strict safety standards in areas in
                       contribute to increasing air    moderate       the vicinity of construction sites
                       pollution, pollution, and                  •   Use of techniques to mitigate
                       dust generation                                this risk on sites
                      Increase of dust (trenches                 •   Public sensitization and
                       for laying mains) and                          information campaigns
                       inappropriate storage of                   •   Watering of construction sites
                       materials and
                       transportation and use of
                       materials (cement, iron)




BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                         page   13
 9. Sound pollution      Increase of air pollutions         Low to       •   Setting up of regular measures
                         (rolling stock, jackhammers,      moderate          for controlling sound pollution
                         air compressors)                                    intensity
                                                                         •   Compliance with established
                                                                             work hours on the construction
                                                                             sites
                                                                         •
 10. Accidentology  Accidents on sites                    Moderate      •   Setting of safety rules on sites
                    Road accidents due to the                               and enforcement of instructions
                     works                                               •   Public sensitization
                                                                         •   Traffic signs
                                                                         •   Creation of alternative routes
                                                                             during the works

Table 2 : Main social risks/impacts and mitigation measures

    Type of impact                  Assessment              Risk level          Mitigation measure
1. Involuntary             Some structural sub-projects   Low to         •   Promote amicable agreements
resettlement:              may require:                   moderate           with affected people
physical                    Temporary physical                          •   Plan fair and equitable
relocations                     relocations of resident                      compensations for all people,
                                households and                               assets, households, or
                                businesses;                                  businesses affected.
                            Temporary of access to
                                economic assets or
                                collective public
                                services.
 2. Involuntary            The infrastructure             Moderate       •   Be more open when defining
restriction of access      construction works might                          the locations of the
to assets, services,       have impacts on users                             infrastructures
natural resources, and     (formal and informal                          •   Restrict to minimum the
loss of sources of         commercial and economic                           involuntary resettlement of
income                     activities) and cause a loss                      people (limit works and
                           of income and jobs for some                       developments to the public
                           socio-professional                                domain as much as possible)
                           categories.                                   •   Promote amicable agreements
                                                                             by defining a participatory
                                                                             approach based on
                                                                             transparency
                                                                         •   Consider as soon as alternative
                                                                             measures are adopted

3. Acquisition of          In the case of new             Low            Compliance with the national
private lands              investments, some projects                    legislation regarding provisions on:
                           may require the acquisition                   • Public consultations
                           of private lands                              • Amicable agreements
                                                                         • Expropriations for public
                                                                              purposes
                                                                         • Payment of adequate
                                                                              compensations to affected
                                                                              people
4. Reduction of            Works can cause:               Low to         Compliance with the national
incomes                     Temporary disruptions        moderate       legislation regarding provisions on:
                              of the small-scale and                     • Public consultations
                              economic activities of                          Amicable agreements
                              people, households, and                    • Payment of adequate
                              businesses.                                     compensations


BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                              page      14
                         Economic temporary
                           losses due to temporary
                           restrictions of access to
                           active assets,
                           businesses, and
                           economic
                           infrastructures
5. Social disruptions   Works can cause:                 Low to       Compliance with the national
                         Temporary social               moderate     legislation regarding provisions on:
                           disruptions with respect                   • Public consultations so that
                           to the residents' access                        people may prepare themselves
                           to their housing and/or                         and have access to alternatives
                           public facilities                          • Setting up of temporary
                           (schools, clinics, etc.);                       alternative services
                         Temporary interruptions
                           of drinking water and
                           power supply services
                           during the rehabilitation
                           of standpipes,
                           repair/rehabilitation of a
                           generator, connection of
                           densification or
                           extension mains to the
                           network, and any
                           pumping test;
                         Temporary diversions
                           of car traffic and
                           restrictions of
                           pedestrian traffic.

6. Noise and            During the works phase           Low          •   Regulations and measures on
discomforts             especially, noise could affect                    noise minimization (especially
                        people's health, especially                       in some sensitive areas) and
                        that of the most fragile and                      compliance with hours of rest
                        vulnerable ones (children,                    •   Potential construction of
                        elderly people).                                  temporary noise barriers at
                                                                          specific locations (areas close
                                                                          to hospitals, for example)
7. Communication,       The people affected by the       Low          •   Public information and
consultation,           works are not consulted and                       sensitization initiatives on
information sharing,    do not have all the                               Program characteristics and its
as well as              information needed on the                         impacts, by SAICs and CDQs
management of           nature of works and                           •   Resort to the channel of civil
population grievances   associated risks/impacts.                         society associations and district
                                                                          associations and local radios to
                                                                          disseminate information and
                                                                          promote their participation in
                                                                          options and potential decision-
                                                                          making
                                                                      •   Holding of public consultation
                                                                          meetings
                                                                      •   Participation in meetings to
                                                                          consult representatives of civil
                                                                          society associations and district
                                                                          associations
                                                                      •   Setting up of a request
                                                                          management system
8. Disabled people      The specific needs of              Moderate   •   Holding of public consultation
                        disabled people (blind,                           meetings.


BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                           page      15
                         reduced mobility, etc.) might                •   Participation in the meetings to
                         not be systematically taken                      consult representatives of civil
                         into account during the                          society organizations working
                         works and developments.                          with disabled people
                                                                      •   Setting up of a request
                                                                          management system that is
                                                                          straightforward and effective
                                                                          and offering several ways of
                                                                          submitting requests
                                                                      •   Developments suited to
                                                                          disabled people (during the
                                                                          works and operation phase)
9. Accidentology         The inflow of workers and       Low to       •   Definition of and compliance
                         equipment can cause             moderate         with precise safety rules on the
                         accidents:                                       sites and immediate
                          to the vulnerable                              surroundings of the sites
                             categories of people                         (traffic signs, etc.)
                             (women, children,
                             elderly people);                         •   Regular monitoring of the
                          to construction site                           enforcement of site instructions
                             workers.                                     as defined in the specifications,
                                                                          establishment of cases of non-
                                                                          compliance, and identification
                                                                          of corrective measures, as well
                                                                          as monitoring of their
                                                                          implementation

10. Violence and         The presence of foreign site       Low to     Compliance of workers with
conflicts                workers can cause increased       moderate     safety and good conduct rules
                         violence and acts of sexual                   Public consultations
                         harassment against women.                     Management of grievances at
                                                                        the populations' level
11. Child labor          Children under 18 might be         Low to    • Compliance with the
                         employed on certain works         moderate     provisions of the law of Benin
                                                                      • Contractor control and
                                                                        monitoring measure
12. Affecting cultural   The works might affect              Low       Compliance with all adequate
and religious sites      graves and other local                         preventive measures
                         cultural and religious sites                  Public consultations
                                                                       Seeking of alternative solutions
                                                                       Supporting of expenditures in
                                                                        case of resettlement of graves,
                                                                        convents, or other cultural and
                                                                        religious sites

II.5 OVERVIEW

56.     In the light of what has been said in the previous sub-sections, it is highlighted that the
Program will involve limited or moderate environmental and social impacts. This is essentially
due to the fact that the Program was designed as a PforR, i.e. as a principle, any investment
involving major environmental and social risks (namely activities classified under Category A
requiring comprehensive ESIA under the Benin nomenclature) are excluded.

        ➔ As such, in compliance with this policy, the program will ex officio exclude any
             activity that poses a substantial environmental and social risk and significant,
             diverse, varied, irreversible, and unprecedented negative impacts.


BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                           page      16
57.      As a consequence, any project involving the following will be considered as ineligible:
       the construction or rehabilitation of structures that involve social risks, namely large
        physical relocations of people or the acquisition of vast surface areas of private land, or
        the demolition of a big number of individual housing, or significant restrictions of access
        to economic resources;
       the construction or rehabilitation of structures that could exacerbate existing land-based
        social conflicts;
       structures/works that could have irreversible impact on the physical cultural resources
        of archaeological or historical nature or on places of worship, etc.; 1
       works with sensitive or irreversible impact on areas classed as biological or ecological
        interest sites.

58.     Different measures that can be controlled and are effective, will allow for mitigating
any risks associated with eligible sub-projects and ensuring impact monitoring, both during the
works phase and the operation of the structures. These measures match those generally
implemented when supervising construction sites and will be included in the specifications of
awardee contractors and tools (monitoring sheets) will be used to monitor their enforcement.
59.      In any case, Benin has both an appropriate legal arsenal - that allows for effectively
managing all environmental and social management aspects of the Program - and specialized
institutions, capable of managing most environmental and social management aspects of the
Program.
60.   Lastly, it is good to remind that as part of the Bank's policy on PforR, structure/works
whose estimated cost could exceed some specific levels (contracts pertaining to high amounts)
and would require mandatory review from the Operations Procurement Review Committee
(OPRC) of the World Bank, are also excluded.

Regarding potential social conflicts
61.    The Program does not work in a conflict-affected environment. Nevertheless, its design,
especially its component on citizen engagement, precisely aims to enable citizens (including
women, youth, and the most vulnerable populations) to have access to information, be
consulted, and easily have access to appropriate grievance management mechanisms.
62.    Additionally, the Program aims to support each participating Commune in setting up
procedures and mechanisms for petitioning which citizens can use. To that end, the Program
will contribute to mitigating social tensions and promoting better social cohesion.

Environmental and social management instruments
63.    All sub-projects submitted for funding by the Program will have to be reviewed using
appropriate screening instruments (cf. Box 1 hereafter). Environmental and social diagnostics
will be conducted for each of the projects to determine the type of planning tool required
according to the scale and importance of the environmental and social impacts.




1
  In cases where excavation work identifies archaeological or cultural property, regulatory preventive measures
would be taken, with the involvement of the Directorate of Cultural Heritage, Ministry of Culture, Handicrafts
and Tourism (in accordance with provisions contained in Articles 4, 5, 6 and 7 of the UNESCO Convention on
the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage – ratified by Benin in 1982).

BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                                page   17
      Box 1 : SUB-PROJECT SCREENING AND INSTRUMENTS FOR ENVIRONMENTAL
      AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT
      In accordance with environmental assessment procedures in Benin and the requirements of the World
      Bank's PforR funding policy, all sub-projects submitted under the Program will be subject to a
      mandatory screening or selection process, in reference to the following principles:

              a)     First and foremost, using a Screening Form (see Annex 5), sub-projects submitted will be
                     screened in terms of environmental and social risks and impacts levels, as well as the type
                     of management instrument required (according to both Beninese and Bank policies).

              b)     Depending on the outcomes of the screening process:
                        All subprojects whose environmental and social risks are considered to be significant
                         will be excluded and the negative impacts will be considered as diverse, varied,
                         irreversible and unprecedented (subproject not eligible under the PforR);
                        For sub-projects with minimal or no environmental and social impact: they are
                         classified as Non-Subject under the Beninese procedure and as such require only a
                         Sub-project Data Sheet.
                        For sub-projects with low environmental and social impact: according to Benin
                         procedures, a simplified Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) will be prepared,
                         with the submission of the Impact Notice and an Environmental Compliance
                         Certificate is to be obtained. To comply with the Bank's PforR policy, these will be
                         completed by the preparation of a simple Environmental and Social Information
                         Sheet (ESIS).
                        For sub-projects with a moderate and fairly moderate environmental and social
                         impact: Benin's provisions must imperatively be complemented by the preparation of
                         an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) (see Annex 6) in
                         accordance with all the fundamental principles of the World Bank's PforR policy,
                         especially as regards public consultations of stakeholders, citizen engagement and
                         complaint management.
                        Finally, for a sub-project with a moderate impact in terms of involuntary
                         resettlement of populations, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) (see Annex 6) will be
                         prepared in line with the World Bank's policy on financing of PforRs.

      The specifications for contractors and regional operators (Cahier des Charges) in charge of implementing
      works will imperatively include all technical provisions and environmental and social mitigation measures
      provided and will specify a monitoring and control system that meets the standards in force (including
      safety of construction site workers and local communities).

      All EIAs and RAPs prepared for moderate risk subprojects will require appropriate public disclosure.

      Local beneficiaries will be informed of the commitments included in these instruments and will have
      access to a grievance redress mechanism in the event of non-compliance with the commitments. Each
      beneficiary commune supported by the ACEP will ensure the implementation of this mechanism, as part
      of a more comprehensive monitoring, evaluation and control system.




II.6 PREVIOUS EXPERIENCES OF INSTITUTIONS INVOLVED IN THE
PROGRAM

64.   The program will be implemented by ANAEPMR, an autonomous government agency
which already has an internal audit facility and has already set up an adequate financial
management system.


BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                                page   18
65.    ANAEPMR is in the process of building its capacities through the implementation of
the Project for Drinking Water Supply in Rural Areas and Urban Wastewater Sanitation
(PEPRAU) funded by the World Bank.
66.      To date, the other institutions involved in the program (DGEC/MCVDD, ABE, ANDF,
communes) have no experience in PforR programs - no program similar to this type of financial
tool is being developed in Benin.
         Nevertheless, ABE has proven experience in environmental and social safeguards,
          as part of other World Bank operations. However, it does not have enough human
          and financial resources to fully take on its role (cf. Annex 1).
         As for ANDF, it has moderate capacity in RAP implementation. It already has
          experiences in conducting expropriation and involuntary resettlement operations for
          public projects such as the construction of the Glo Djigbe airport, the deep water
          construction of Seme-Podji, and the construction of the thermal power plant of
          Maria Gleta.
         Communes do not all have the same level of experiences in project management and
          public project support/monitoring. Nevertheless, a large number of them have
          garnered experience in environmental and social monitoring through various
          programs/projects funded by technical and financial partners, especially in the field
          of drinking water supply (cf. Annex 1).




BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                               page   19
      SECTION III. DESCRIPTION OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL AND
                         SOCIAL SYSTEM


III.1 ENVIRONMENTAL SYSTEM
67.     In Benin, environmental protection is one of the priority focuses of policies designed
for achieving sustainable development objectives. Several legal and regulatory texts have been
adopted to this end.

National legal framework for environmental management
68.    Following the 1990 National Conference, which marked the return to pluralistic
democracy and market economy, a clear direction for environmental management was adopted
as evidenced by:
             the inclusion of the principle of environmental protection and management in the
              constitutional law;
             the institutionalization of a Ministry of Environment (since 1990) and its technical
              structures, including the Benin Environmental Agency (1995);
             the adoption of the Environmental Framework Law (1992);
             the adoption of the Environmental Action Plan (1993);
             the adoption of the National Agenda 21 (1997).

69.     The Environmental Action Plan (EAP) has been the framework document for
environmental management in the Republic of Benin. It comprises seven sub-programs planned
over an initial timeframe 15 years and whose overall objectives relate to: (i) strengthening
national capacities; (ii) conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity and natural
resources; (iii) improvement of the living environment of both rural and urban communities;
and (iv) improved decision-making and good governance as regards the environment. The EAP
was revised in 2001 after five years of implementation. The different objectives of the EAP
remain the environmental benchmarks for any sectoral policy, program or environmental
support program at the national and local levels.
70.    In addition, the Paper on Growth Strategy for Poverty Reduction (GSPR) and the
Government Action Program (GAP) incorporate all the specific objectives of the National
Environmental Management Program (NEMP), thus demonstrating Benin's political will to
consider the environment as one of the key pillars of sustainable development. This will is
further strongly demonstrated through the country’s commitment to the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs), whose first national report was published in July 2001 to better
target and guide national investments. Finally, the share of the environment in the
Government’s budget has increased significantly in recent years.

71.     Several other actions complement the political efforts mentioned above and bind all
parties to address environment in development actions, including, inter alias:
               the adoption of the National Biodiversity Management Strategy and its Action
                Plan;
               the adoption of the National Action Plan to Combat Desertification (PANLCD);
               the adoption of the National Strategy to Combat Atmospheric Pollution;
               the preparation of the Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM)
                strategy;

BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                  page   20
               the development of the National Wetland Management Strategy;
               the development of a National Pollution Control Plan (PNLPo).

72.     Thus, overall, the environment and natural resources sector remains important and
crucial in Benin's investment priorities.

National legal framework

73.     The Constitution of December 11, 1990 stipulates in Article 27 that: “Everyone has the
right to a healthy, satisfying and sustainable environment and has the duty to defend such an
environment. The State ensures the protection of the environment”. Other Articles of the
Constitution criminalize environmental offenses as crimes of high treason for which the
President of the Republic is liable.
74.  Benin has an important legal arsenal for environmental management (see Annex 2).
Among the legislative texts, the most relevant are the following:
            Act # 030-98 dated February 12, 1999 on the environmental framework in the
             Republic of Benin includes provisions relating to the clarification of concepts,
             penalties, protection and enhancement of receiving environments, protection and
             enhancement of the natural and human environments, pollution and nuisances,
             impact assessments, public hearings on environmental issues, emergency plans
             and incentives. This act serves as the basic text of the national environmental
             policy, covering all aspects from the identification of sources of pollution to their
             control and repression, to the various forms of environmental assessments:
             Strategic Environmental Assessment (EES); Environmental Impact Assessment
             (EIA); Environmental Audit (EA); and Environmental Inspection (IE).
            Act # 87-015 dated September 21, 1987 on the public hygiene code of the
             Republic of Benin sets the law on housing, noise, water, pollution of the natural
             environment, industrial facilities, beaches, classified establishments, and animal
             health.
            Act # 2010-44 dated October 21, 2010 on water management in the Republic of
             Benin advocates for Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) as a core
             principle for water management in Benin.
            Decree # 2001-096 dated February 20, 2001 on the authority, organization and
             functioning of the environmental police aims to ensure the enforcement of
             environmental legislation and to allow for searching, establishing and punishing
             infringements to this legislation.
            Decree # 97-624 dated December 31, 1997 on the structure, composition and
             operation of animal health department.
            Act # 2002-016 dated October 18, 2004 on the law applicable to fauna in the
             Republic of Benin: it lays down provisions on rational and participatory
             management of wildlife and its habitats, the creation and management of
             protected areas, the protection of endangered, vulnerable or endemic species,
             and finally offenses and penalties.
            Act # .93-009 dated July 2, 1993 on the law applicable to forest in the Republic
             of Benin: it lays down the provisions on “the management, protection,
             exploitation of forest, trade and industry of forest and related products”. The
             Forest Code defines the different types of forest regime (State-owned, private,
             community, classified), their management, as well as wildlife reserves,
             addresses hunting issues, and provides for the repression of offenses related to

BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                 page   21
                  poaching and irrational logging. Article 11 contains one of the provisions
                  favorable to the Project stating that “[...] forests necessary […] for the
                  preservation of sites and the conservation of nature" may be classified.”

75.    These constitutional provisions are reinforced by international commitments that Benin
has committed to through the ratification of almost all international environmental conventions
and agreements.2 (see Annex 3)

Other relevant policies
Decentralization
76.     Decentralization has become effective in Benin since March 2003. It now gives the local
level very broad responsibilities in terms of environmental management and land use planning.
Specifically, Act #97-029 dated January 15, 1999 on the organization of communes in Benin
states that communes have authority to rule in the areas of sanitation, waste management,
environmental management and natural resources in particular. The commune is the level where
all national strategies for the protection of the environment and natural resources in their
respective territories must be implemented. In addition, “communes shall develop and adopt
their development plans. They shall ensure their implementation in line with national guidelines
to ensure the best living conditions for the entire population.” In this context, communes are to
develop the planning documents required, including:

                 the municipal development master plan;
                 the economic and social development plan;
                 urban development plans in agglomerated areas;
                 rules on land use;
                 urban development and subdivision detail plans.

Fight against poverty
77.     According to the Paper on Growth Strategy for Poverty Reduction (2011-2015), in
Benin, more than one person out three (35.21%) live below the subsistence level and one person
out of three (30.8%) %) still suffers many deprivations in terms of living conditions and wealth.

78.     An analysis of these different forms of poverty, with a rural/urban disaggregation, shows
that poverty is more prevalent in rural areas. The analysis of the factors that account for the
persistence of poverty and the entry into and the exit from poverty shows the importance of the
level of education, the sector of activity, access to credit, basic infrastructure, and initial income
as factors that contribute to the reduction of and exit from poverty. On the other hand, the large
size of the household (8 persons or more) appears to be a very limiting factor in reducing and
exiting poverty.

79.    In this regard, the Government intends to implement policies of accelerated economic
growth and redistribution that are expected to result in significant reduction of poverty and to
give impetus to Benin's progress towards the achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs), namely through:

                   promotion of the local economy with a view to reducing poverty in rural areas;

2
  Among these conventions are the following: African Convention on the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources
(1998); United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (1994); Convention on the Protection of the World Cultural
and Natural Heritage (1982); Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs) (2001); etc. See Appendix 2.



BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                                      page   22
                control of population growth, based on the understanding of the strong
                 correlation between poverty and the large size of households;
                reduction of gender inequalities;
                strengthening of social protection, especially for the elderly;
                strengthening of basic infrastructure; and
                strengthening of the microcredit policy in order to allow access to credit for the
                 poor, especially women.

Competences of the Commune
80.     Act 97-029 dated January 15, 1999 on the organization of communes in Benin gives
authority to communes in the fields of sanitation, waste management, environmental and natural
resources management in particular. The commune is the level where all national strategies for
the protection of the environment and natural resources in their respective territories are to be
implemented.

81.    In addition, Communes are to draft and adopt their development plans. They ensures its
implementation in line with national guidelines to ensure the best living conditions for the entire
population. In this context,

            ➢ Communes are to develop the planning documents required, including:
               the municipal development master plan;
               the economic and social development plan;
               urban development plans in agglomerated areas;
               rules on land use;
               urban development and subdivision detail plans.
            ➢ They issues occupancy permits and building permits;
            ➢ They ensure ongoing control of compliance of works implemented and
              contributions with the regulation in force.

82.   Therefore, the enforcement of environmental regulations, negotiations for possible
compensation, monitoring the quality of water supplied to communities, etc. involve the mayors
of communes where such actions are located.

Inter-commune organization
83.     Act # 2009-17 dated August 13, 2009 on inter-commune organization in the Republic
opens the way for concerted management between several communes with a view to pooling
resources and improving efficiency in areas where this provision is applicable. In our case,
inter-commune organization is key to the management of sanitation and land use planning.

Legal framework for environmental assessment in Benin
84.    Two key provisions of the environmental framework law in the Republic of Benin make
environmental impact assessments mandatory in Benin:

          ➔ “No one shall undertake any development, operation, facility, plan, project and
            program or construction of works without following the environmental impact
            assessment procedure when the latter is required by law and regulations” (Article
            88). As per this Article, strategic environmental assessment (SEA) and
            environmental impact assessment (EIA) are mandatory.
          ➔ “Anyone who intends to undertake any of the activities referred to in section 88
            shall file a written notice with the Minister requesting the issuance of an

BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                  page   23
              environmental compliance certificate and describing the general nature of the
              activity. This environmental compliance certificate forms part of the exhibits to
              be submitted to the supervisory authority for the final decision on moving forward
              with the proposed activity” (Article 89).

85.     Another provision of the same Act sets out the penalty applicable in case of infringement
of the environmental impact assessment process: “Is punishable by a fine of five million
(5,000,000) to twenty-five million (25,000,000) francs and one (1) to three (3) years'
imprisonment, or either of these penalties only, anyone convicted of falsifying the findings of
an impact assessment or altering the parameters for carrying out an impact assessment. The use
of the falsified or altered findings of an impact assessment referred to in the previous paragraph
is punishable by the same penalties.” (Art.122).

86.     Decree # 2017-332 dated July 7, 2017 addresses the organization of the environmental
assessment procedure in Benin. The Decree clarifies responsibilities and sets the administrative
procedure for the issuance of the Environmental Compliance Certificate (ECC) by the Minister
of Environment. According to the provisions of this Decree, there are two types of
environmental impact assessments in Benin, namely: the in-depth environmental impact
assessment (applicable to major projects whose potential impacts are considered as large scale
or medium-size projects to be conducted in sensitive ecosystems) and the simplified
environmental impact assessment (applicable to individualized micro-projects and medium
size projects that are not located in a sensitive ecosystem and to specific activities).

87.     Finally, all very small size environmental and social projects that are not set up in a
sensitive environment are not subject to the impact assessment procedure.

88.    A series of related decrees that have their own usefulness but also supplement the EIA
decree have already been adopted and are being gradually operationalized:
              Decree # 2001-110 establishing standards for air quality in the Republic of
               Benin;
              Decree # 2001-109 establishing quality standards for wastewater in the Republic
               of Benin;
              Decree # 2001-094 establishing standards for drinking water quality in the
               Republic of Benin;
              Decree # 2001-095 dated February 20, 2001 establishing environmental units in
               sectoral ministerial departments, prefectures and communes in the Republic of
               Benin;
              Decree # 91-13 dated January 24, 1991 regulating the importation of products
               hazardous for human health and State security;
              Decree # 92-258 dated September 18, 1992 laying down detailed rules for the
               application of Act # 91-004 dated February 11, 1991.

SEA stakeholders
89.    The main institutional stakeholders involved in environmental and social management
are shown in Table 3 in the Appendix.




BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                 page   24
III.2 SOCIAL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
III.2.1 National legal framework
90.     The legal and regulatory context relates to land legislation (land laws and regulations,
land status), public participation in Benin, and land acquisition, resettlement and land
restructuring mechanisms. Other social aspects such as social protection of the vulnerable, labor
management, child work, and abuse on communities living in works implementation sites will
also be considered.

91.    Land tenure in Benin is based on the following main legal texts:
           the Constitution of the Republic of Benin;
           Act # 2017-15 amending and supplementing Act # 2013-01 dated August 14, 2013
            on the State property and land tenure code in the Republic of Benin and its
            implementing decrees;
           the Civil Code.

92.     Foundations of Benin’s land tenure system. Land tenure in the Republic of Benin is
characterized by the confirmation of land rights. This system governs all rural, periurban and
urban land and is based on a joint land rights confirmation procedure that results in the issuance
of a land title (new Article 4, Act # 2017-15 amending and supplementing Act # 2013-01 dated
August 14, 2013 on the State property and land tenure code in the Republic of Benin).

93.     The land rights confirmation process focuses on:
              in urban and periurban areas: confirmation of rights based on land ownership
               presumption documents or on a final court decision;
              in rural areas: confirmation of rights on land ownership presumption documents,
               a register of claimants of the rural land plan or a final court decision.

94.   The documents of presumption of ownership provided for in the State Property and
Land Tenure Code (CFD) are the following:
            certificate of customary ownership;
            certificate of resettlement;
            tax notice for the last three years;
            certificate of registration ;
            administrative certificate; and
            rural land certificate.

95.    The State and local authorities are guarantors of public interest. Men and women have
equal access to land (Articles 5 and 6 of the CFD).

Scope of the CFD
96.    The provisions of the CFD apply to:
             public and private property of the State and local authorities;
             real estate of private individuals; and
             the organization and operation of land tenure, and State-owned land in the
              Republic of Benin (art. 3 of CFD).

97.    The real property of the State and local authorities includes the public and private
property of the State, and the public and private property of local authorities. It is made up of



BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                  page   25
all land and real estate assets of the State that is classified or delimited, whether assigned for
public use or not. It includes the natural public property and the artificial public property.

98.     Article 264 stipulates that navigable and floatable watercourses, non-navigable, non-
floatable water sources and rivers, lakes, ponds and lagoons, groundwater irrespective of their
origin, nature and depth are part of the State property, in line with some provisions of the Water
Code.

99.     Indeed, Act # 2010-44 on water management in the Republic of Benin, especially
Articles 1 to 4 refers to this. Article 4 stipulates that: “The provisions of this Act shall apply to
developments, structures, facilities and activities carried out by any natural or legal person,
whether public or private, in inland waters, including transitional waters, and entailing as the
case may be: - withdrawal of water, whether returned or not; - modification of flows; -
temporary or permanent occupation of the public water domain or its exploitation for economic
purposes; - direct or indirect, chronic or episodic spills, discharges or deposits, even if they are
non-polluting; - risks related to the presence or proximity of water and likely to affect people
or property.

100.    The facilities, structures, installations and activities referred to above, carried out in the
context of projects receiving specific funding, in particular in cooperation with one or more
foreign States, an international organization or a non-governmental organization, are also
subject to the provisions of this Act.”

III.2.2 National land management system
101.    The National Agency for State Property and Land Tenure (ANDF) manages the State’s
private property and the State and is also in charge of conducting expropriation process for
public purpose projects of national scope in connection with the relevant ministerial
department(s). In this case, the communes where the project is to be implemented support the
Agency in its activities.

102.     For projects that are not of national scope, the relevant ministry in conjunction with the
territorially competent communes manages the expropriation process. To this end, each
commune has a land rights confirmation office and a rural land plan.
Legislation on expropriation for public purposes
103.    The main reference as regards land and State property in the Republic of Benin is Act #
2017-15 amending and supplementing Act #2013-01 dated August 14, 2013 on land tenure and
State property in the Republic of Benin. It repeals all previous texts and provisions.

104.    While Article 42 of the CFD stipulates that the right of ownership is characterized by
the fact that it “confers on its holder the use, the enjoyment and the free disposal of the goods
subject to such right, in the most absolute way, provided that the holder does not make use of
such right that is prohibited by the laws and regulation”, Article 43 rules on the conditions for
infringement of this right: “No one may be deprived of his/her property except in the public
interest and against fair and prior compensation”, which confirms Article 22 of the December
1990 Constitution.

Expropriation of private property
105.   When the State has to infringe the right to private ownership (whether of natural or legal
persons), the process of Expropriation for Public Purpose (EPP) is triggered. Title IV of the
CFD addresses infringements of the right of ownership: “The infringement of the right of

BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                     page   26
ownership shall take place by seizure of real estate, by any other legal way and when required
in the public interest” (Article 205 CFD). Article 210 specifies that this infringement may
consist of a limitation of ownership for the purpose of urban or rural development and the
enactment of right-of-ways for public purposes. The CFD grants communes the right to exercise
infringement of the ownership right, provided they comply with the CFD provisions in Section
I, Chapter II, Title IV (expropriation for public purposes).

106.    In the ordinary procedure, for operations of national or regional scope, the EPP is
triggered as the case may be by the President of the Republic or the competent regional authority
that may delegate its authority to a Minister. For local operations, the declaration of public
purpose falls to the commune.

107.   The President of the Republic may also submit the declaration of public purpose to the
National Assembly under an emergency procedure. Thus, the public purpose declaration deed
may be an act, a decree or an order according depending on who takes it (the President of the
Republic, a Minister, a regional authority or a Mayor). From the publication of the public
purpose declaration, the deadline for completing the expropriation process may not exceed
twelve (12) months in the ordinary procedure.

Removal and compensation of private property
108.    As soon as a declaration of Expropriation for Public Purpose is published, a committee
whose composition is set by a decree by the Council of Ministers conducts an on-site survey,
called commodo and incommodo procedure (or public notice). The resulting report provides
information on (i) the parcels of land and all real estate rights to be expropriated, (ii) their
owners and any persons eligible for compensation, (iii) a tentative overall mapping of properties.
From the time this deed is performed, no building can be built, no perennial planting or
improvement can be made on the lands located in the area covered by the deed.

109.    The report is then published and filed. The next steps involve the issuance of a
transferability deed (order or decree), the publication of the deed in the Official Gazette,
assessment of expropriation compensation by a committee assisted by a chartered land surveyor
(“compensation shall cover all direct, material and certain damages caused by expropriation",
Article 234 of the CFD) as well as the value of the real estate that may be subject to the capital
gain, the submission of the evaluation findings to the municipal council or to the Minister of
finance, the drafting of minutes on the agreement or disagreement over the compensation, and
taking over of the expropriated property. Disagreement over the compensation to be paid does
not stop the proceedings. It only puts an end to the mutual agreement procedure and triggers
the judicial procedure.

Disposal of the State and communes’ property
110.    According to the provisions of the CFD on the management of State property, lands and
immovable property in the State’s private property may be assigned to a legal person under
public law (Article 299).

111.    The disposal of property by communes is subject to the conditions provided by the
regulations applicable to the same operations carried out by the State (Article 293 of the CFD).

Legislation concerning child labor




BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                  page   27
112.  The main provisions concerning child labor are contained in Act # 2015-08 dated
January 23, 2015 on the Child Code3 in the Republic of Benin, including the following:

                 Article 210 prohibits the exploitation of children and protects them against all forms
                  of economic exploitation or abuse for economic purposes.
                  Abuse includes workload in relation to the child’s age; the time and duration of
                  work; inadequate or no compensation; work affecting the child’s access to
                  education or harming his/her physical, mental, moral, social and spiritual
                  development; child employment in a company before the age of 14 years.

                 Article 212 prohibits some forms of work, including the following:
                         All forms of slavery or similar practices, such as the sale and trafficking of
                          children, debt bondage and serfdom, and forced or compulsory labor,
                          including forced or compulsory recruitment of children in armed conflict;
                         any use, offer or recruitment of a child for illicit activities, including the
                          production and trafficking of drugs;
                         all work that, by its nature or the conditions of its performance, is likely to
                          harm the child’s health, safety, education, morality and harmonious
                          development.

                 Article 213 establishes the working hours for children: children may not work more
                  than four hours a day without rest; and Article 214 prohibits night work.


III.3 CONSTITUTIONAL APPEAL BODIES

Ombudsman of the Republic
113.   Act # 2009-22 dated August 11, 2009 established the Ombudsman of the Republic of
Benin:

      •       The Ombudsman of the Republic is an independent administrative authority that is free
              from the authority of any political, administrative, legislative or judicial entity.
      •       It receives grievances of citizens relating to the functioning of the State’s central,
              decentralized authorities, public establishments and reviews them in order to provide
              equitable solutions (Article 8).
      •       Any natural or legal person who believes it has matter for grievance in a case may refer
              the matter to the Ombudsman by an individual written claim (Article 11).

National Advisory Council on Human Rights
114.    Since the 1990 Conference of the Nation’s Stakeholders, human rights have been at the
heart of Benin's democracy. At that time, all rights and freedoms were reaffirmed.

115.   The Benin Human Rights Commission, created in 1988, has been effectively replaced
by the National Advisory Council on Human Rights: this council, under the supervision of the
Ministry of Justice, is in charge of validating Benin’s reports on human rights to the United
Nations. Civil society organization, including NGOs active in the field of human rights


3
    Under the law, "child" refers to any human being under the age of 18 years.


BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                        page   28
protection, who have registered with the National Advisory Council for Human Rights, are
invited to meetings and participate in the validation of reports.


APPENDIX
Table 3 : Institutional actors and Responsibilities


  Actors involved in SEA                Roles and responsibilities
  National Assembly                     In accordance with the provisions of Article 79 of the Constitution of
                                        December 11, 1990, the National Assembly passes laws (notably those
                                        relating to environmental and social issues) and controls government action.
  Ministry of Living Conditions and     It defines the national environmental policy and monitor its implementation.
  Sustainable Development               This policy must be in synergy with the sectoral policies for the management
                                        of natural resources and policies on activities that may be sources of
                                        environmental nuisance (industry, agriculture, mining and energy,
                                        equipment).
  National Agency of State Property     It is a public technical and scientific institution of a specific type that was set
  and Land (ANDF)                       up in 2014. It ensures coordination of land and State property management
                                        with a mission of ensuring land tenure security at the national level. ANDF is
                                        in charge of implementing the land tenure and State property policy defined
                                        by the Government. Under the supervision of the Ministry of the Economy,
                                        Finance and Denationalization Programs, commune-level Land and State
                                        Property Offices represent the agency at the lower levels. Its field of
                                        intervention covers rural, periurban and urban land throughout the national
                                        territory. On behalf of the State, it conducts expropriation and resettlement of
                                        populations affected by public projects
  Directorate General of Environment    It is in charge of developing the national environmental policy and its
  and Climate (DGEC)                    implementation strategy
  Benin’s Environmental Agency          A public institution set up in 1995, it is in charge of implementing the national
                                        environmental policy adopted by the Government as part of its development
                                        plan (Art. 12). It reports to the Minister of Environment. As such, it works in
                                        collaboration with other sector ministries, local communities, non-
                                        governmental structures, civil society and the private sector. It also manages
                                        all environmental assessment procedures.
  National Committee for Sustainable    Created by the Framework Law on the Environment, the Committee is a
  Development (CNDD)                    multi-stakeholder advisory body in charge of verifying the compliance of
                                        development plans with the sustainable development goals set by the
                                        Government.
  Environmental Units                   Established by the decree mentioned above, they are functional units within
                                        all sectoral ministries and communes. The units raise awareness on
                                        environmental issues among technicians in their respective sectors, and in
                                        particular, facilitate the dissemination of environmental management tools.
  Prefecture                            According to the texts on decentralization, it ensures the application of
                                        national guidelines by communes under its territorial jurisdiction
                                        (department). It also represents individual ministries as well as the
                                        Government as a whole at the decentralized level. The Prefecture is therefore
                                        responsible for managing all environmental issues at the Government’s
                                        decentralized level.
  Commune                               It implements its own environmental and natural resources management
                                        policy, but in accordance with national laws and guidelines. The project will
                                        be implemented in communes according to institutional arrangements that
                                        guarantee communities’ participation at the grassroots level.
  Civil society                         NGOs and associations: community development, environmental
                                        management, village associations, etc.




BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                                 page   29
  SECTION IV. EVALUATION OF INSTITUTIONAL CAPACITY AND
                      PERFORMANCE

116.    The strengths, weaknesses and gaps, actions and opportunities and risks associated with
the national system are presented in Table 5 below, in light of the key principles applicable to
the program, and as described in the Bank’s policy and Guidelines for the funding of Programs
For Results.

            The main constraints at the level of Local Authorities (Collectivités territoriales),
             especially as regards environmental management, point to many bottlenecks that
             are due in part to a situation where the handing over of the competence to handle
             some social issues did not come along with appropriate initiatives to provide
             information and capacity-building for coordinating environmental and social
             monitoring activities.

            At the local level, in terms of information, public consultations and grievances
             and complaints management, the citizen engagement mechanisms put in place
             have been restructured and need to be improved. Though there is a strong emphasis
             on community consultations and public hearings, people are not always consulted
             about works to be performed in their respective localities, hence poor ownership of
             such initiatives and difficulties to promote sustainability of investments.

            In addition, the lack of a strategy for communication and information on citizen
             engagement in municipal investment and development activities is also reflected in
             the lack of use to clearly defined complaint mechanisms.

117.    Generally speaking, the lack of an environmental and social control monitoring
system could be a major weakness. National and regional institutions, as well as local
communities, lack technical human resources that are capable of effectively running such a
system ; they can only use external firms, but this does not ensure consistency and continuity in
the system.

118.   In addition, beyond human resources limitations, these institutions do not have a real
guide to social and environmental management of local investments. There is a blatant lack of
a manual of procedures to organize optimal management of environmental and social issues
associated with investments at the commune or regional levels.

119.    Finally, in terms of social management, despite some similarities between the national
legal framework and the Bank's procedures, there are also differences, in particular with regard
to the eligibility for compensation of a person affected by a project/program. The WB's policy
and Beninese law are similar as regards people who can be resettled. However, the Beninese
law is more restrictive in that it focuses on formal rights holders while the WB's policy is more
protective and includes people with no formal right or title that could be recognized over the
land they occupy. The WB policy considers not only formal owners but also customary owners
and those without any property rights on the land they occupy.




BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                  page   30
120.    In addition, the Beninese legislation is not up to date in terms of benchmarks used for
calculating compensation. The texts governing the compensation scales are very often obsolete
and the prices indicated rarely reflect market prices. The WB policy considers that the valuation
of losses should be based on market price. From this point of view, affected people may be
wronged if these provisions are to conform to national practice.

Table 4 : Core Principles
       Core Principle 1: General principle for environmental and social impact assessment and management
       Policy of the Bank for      Bank guidelines on of PforR funding: program procedures will:
       PforR funding:
                                    Operate within an adequate legal and regulatory framework to guide the
       environmental and social
                                     environmental and social impact assessment at the scale of the program;
       management procedures
                                    Incorporate good environmental and social impact assessment practices,
       and processes are
                                     including: (i) preliminary screening of potential effects; (ii) consideration
       intended to (a) promote
                                     of strategic and technical aspects induced, as well as, potential cumulative
       environmental and social
                                     and transborder impacts; (iii) identification of measures intended to
       sustainability in the
                                     mitigate adverse environmental and social impacts that cannot be avoided
       program design; (b)
                                     or minimized; (iv) clear wording of institutional responsibilities and
       avoid, minimize, or
                                     resources to support the implementation of plans; and (v) responsiveness
       mitigate adverse
                                     and responsibility through stakeholder consultation, periodic
       impacts; and (c) promote
                                     communication of information on the program;
       decision-making on the
                                    The setting up of a conflict management mechanism oriented on: (i)
       environmental and social
                                     conflict resolution; (ii) systematic registration of grievances through
       effects of the program.
                                     appropriate channels; (iii) periodic reporting on the grievance
                                     management situation - specifying the nature of the grievances resolved
                                     and status of unresolved grievances and reasons for non-resolution.
       Applicable: The works funded as part of the Program could indeed generate negative impacts with low to
       moderate risks.
       ESSA has been prepared and its recommendations will be incorporated to the Program’s overall action
       plan.
       In line with the principles set forth in ESSA, an ESMP will be prepared for any individual investment
       project that the initial diagnostic and sorting system set up have deemed to have moderate impact.
       STRENGTHS
        The country has adequate regulatory and legal frameworks that allow for adequately managing the
          environmental and social impacts of the Program.
        The national environmental impact assessment system is based on a well-oiled diagnostic and impact
          nature assessment process.
        The responsibilities of the different institutions are accurately defined.
       WEAKNESSES AND GAPS
        Although a regulatory framework exists, the institutions in charge lack the human resources and
          financial means needed to enforce the legislation.
        Generally speaking, awareness on environmental management issues at the level of State and non-
          State actors is low.
       ACTIONS AND OPPORTUNITIES
        Organization of initiatives to sensitize all actors and stakeholders on environmental and impact
          management issues.
        Launching of actions to build the capacities of central and local officers to update them on national
          mechanisms and World Bank PforR arrangements.
        Sensitization on the system and Ombudsman procedures to enable affected people to benefit from the
          relating services.
        People and communities who feel wronged after the Program must be informed of the process to
          follow to use the existing national mechanism or the Grievance Redress Service (GRS) of the World
          Bank to ensure that their claims are rapidly reviewed and relevant concerns are addressed.
       RISKS
        Poor implementation of environmental and social management rules and procedures.


BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                                  page   31
     Inability to enforce current environmental regulations in timely manner.


    Core Principle 2: Natural habitats and physical cultural resources
    The Bank's policy on PforR          The Bank's guideline on PforR funding: if relevant to be supported by
    funding: environmental and          the Program:
    social management procedures  include appropriate measures for the identification and preliminary
    and processes are designed to            screening of potentially important biodiversity resources and
    avoid, minimize, or reduce               cultural sites;
    adverse impacts on Natural           support and promote conservation, maintenance, and rehabilitation
    Habitats and Cultural                    of natural habitats;
    Resources due to the Program.        avoid any significant conversion or degradation of critical natural
                                             sites and where this is not technically possible, include measures
                                             for mitigating the impacts of program activities;
                                         take into account any potential adverse effect on the physical
                                             cultural property and, where justified, take adequate actions to
                                             avoid, minimize, or mitigate such effects.
    Non-applicable: No program activity is implemented within biodiversity areas. Any investment that poses
    threats to fragile ecosystems will be ineligible. Any investment that poses a direct threat to the cultural and
    religious heritage of a region will be ineligible.


    Core Principle 3: Public and worker safety
    The Bank’s policy on PforR Bank Guideline for Program for Results funding:
    funding: environmental and social  promote the safety of the community, individuals, and workers by
    management procedures and                  ensuring adequate design, safety of any infrastructure construction
    processes are designed to ensure           and maintenance operation and activity reliant on the latter, and
    public and worker safety in                inspection of works or corrective action taking where necessary;
    relation with potential risks  promote the use of good practices for the management, storage,
    associated      with:     (a)   the        transportation, and disposal of hazardous materials from the
    construction and/or management             construction or program operations;
    of facilities or other operational  promote the adoption of integrated pesticide management practices
    practices developed under the              to manage or control disease vectors; provide workers involved in
    program;                                   the production, resupply, storage, transportation, use, and disposal
    (b) exposure to chemicals or               of hazardous chemicals with the relevant training, in compliance
    hazardous wastes; and                      with international guidelines and conventions;
    (c)     the    reconstruction    or  incorporate measures to avoid, minimize, or reduce risks to
    rehabilitation of infrastructure           communities, individuals, or workers, whenever program activities
    located in areas close to hazardous        occur in natural hazardous areas, such as during a flood, hurricane,
    natural areas.                             earthquake, and other severe meteorological or weather event.
    Applicable. The works undertaken under the Program could have an impact on public safety and on the
    safety of site workers. Construction site workers could be exposed to occupational injuries, water pollution,
    air pollution, solid wastes, and toxic or hazardous materials on site. The populations living close to the
    construction sites could also be exposed to the same hazards.
    STRENGTHS
     The legal/regulatory system of Benin includes construction site safety provisions.
     There are national policies and guidelines on public and worker safety and health. They address a range
         of key aspects, including environmental pollution control; labor law; occupational health and safety
         regulations; and emission and discharge standards in the working environment.
    WEAKNESSES AND GAPS
     The national EIA system does not address all aspects of public and workers safety.
     A general lack of sensitization on public health and safety issues prevails, especially as regards exposure
         to hazardous materials or occupational safety aspects.
    ACTIONS AND OPPORTUNITIES
     Information and training on site safety measures.
    RISKS
     Inability to enforce current environmental regulations in timely manner.




BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                                   page   32
    Core Principle 4: Land acquisition
    The Bank's policy on PforR          The Bank's guideline on PforR funding: if relevant to be supported by
    funding: Land acquisition and       the Program:
    loss of access to natural            avoid or minimize land acquisition and associated adverse impacts;
    resources are managed in such  identify and address economic and social impacts resulting from
    a way as to avoid or minimize            land acquisition or loss of access to natural resources, including
    resettlements and ensure that            affected populations who might not have legal rights on the assess
    affected people receive                  or resources that they are using;
    assistance in improving or, at       grant compensation that is sufficient to buy substitute assets with a
    minimum, restoring their                 value equivalent to the ones lost and support any transition
    livelihoods and living                   expenditure paid before the acquisition of the land or restriction of
    conditions.                              access;
                                         take additional measures to improve or restore livelihoods if the
                                             acquisition of the land has caused loss of income generation
                                             opportunities (e.g. loss of crop production or job); and
                                         restore or replace any affected public infrastructures or community
                                             services.
    Applicable. The works could: (i) involve temporary physical resettlement of resident households or
    businesses; (ii) require the acquisition of private land, and, as a consequence, expropriation for public
    purposes and involuntary resettlements of resident households or businesses; and (iii) temporarily disrupt
    local small-scale and economic activities. In line with the principles set forth in ESSA, a RAP will be
    prepared for any individual investment sub-project that the initial diagnostic and screening system set up
    have deemed to have moderate environmental impact.
    STRENGTHS
    The amount of the allowances or compensations of affected people is set against the nature and
    replacement value of the affected properties and assets. The added value or depreciation from the
    projected execution of the non-expropriated part is potentially taken into account.
    WEAKNESSES AND GAPS
     In case of disagreement, the payment of the compensation to affected people is effected after a court
         ruling or decision of the Court of Cassation. No legal action may cause suspension of the works.
     Customary land ownership is recognized but needs to be confirmed to receive compensation.
     Informal property titles are not recognized by the national legislation.
     No specific formal measure for assisting the resettlement of vulnerable people exists.
     No real claim management system exists at the local level.
    ACTIONS AND OPPORTUNITIES
     Ensure a system of compensation in kind and/or cash, depending on the case;
     Set up a system of assistance to resettlement;
     Set up a genuine joint administration/civil society mechanism for claims management and monitoring;
     Provide for social compliance monitoring indicators with respect to national standards.
    RISKS
     Non-compliance with the existing legislation.
     National and local institutions in charge of enforcing the legislation and mechanisms lack human
         resources and financial means.

    Core Principle 5: Social considerations: indigenous peoples and vulnerable groups
    The Bank's policy on        The Bank's guideline on PforR funding: if relevant to be supported by the
    PforR funding: Adequate Program:
    attention is granted to the . initiate free, prior, and informed consultation if any indigenous people are
    cultural relevance and      potentially impacted (positively or negatively) to determine whether the
    fair access to program      Program should have a general support component to the community;
    benefits, with special      . ensure that indigenous people can participate in the definition of
    attention given to the      opportunities that they can benefit from, from the use of customary resources
    rights and interests of     and endogenous knowledge;
    indigenous people and       . grant special attention to vulnerable, struggling, or underprivileged groups,
    the needs and concerns      including the poor, the disabled, women and children, elderly people, or
    of vulnerable groups.       marginalized ethnic groups, where relevant.
                                If necessary, special measures will be taken to promote equitable access to
                                program benefits.
    Applicable (except that there are no indigenous people in Benin).

BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                                  page    33
    STRENGTHS
     The Benin legislation does not provide for any measure specific to vulnerable groups.
     Surveys aim to inform populations on the implementation of the project and collect their observations;
         informational posters are displayed to this end in public places.
     The law provides for the services of an Ombudsman for vulnerable people.
    WEAKNESSES AND GAPS
    No real claim management system exists at the local level.
    ACTIONS AND OPPORTUNITIES
    Define and set up a sound stakeholder engagement strategy (sensitization and consultation, information
    disclosure, and grievance redress mechanism) as part of the sensitization program, targeting vulnerable
    groups more particularly.
    RISKS
    Lack of clarity and consistency of the mechanism for implementing public consultations and engaging
    stakeholders could alienate poor and vulnerable groups.

    Core Principle 6: Social considerations - Social conflict
    The Bank's policy on Program for The Bank's Guideline on Program for Results (PforR) funding:
    Results funding: Avoid              . grant special attention to risks of conflict, including distributional
    exacerbating social conflicts,      equity and cultural sensitivities.
    especially in fragile States, post-
    conflict area, or contested
    territorial areas.
    Non-applicable. The Program is not implemented in an area of conflict.




BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                                   page    34
    SECTION V. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT
                       ACTION PLAN

   46. The Program will support specific measures to improve the conditions governing the
   performance of the environmental and social management system in the implementation and
   monitoring of Program activities. These measures are proposed as part of an Environmental
   and social management action plan (ESM/AP) - this Plan forms part of the Program’s
   general Action Plan as such. ESM/AP identified three components of recommendations,
   with each one including distinct and complementary activities.

    ➢ First component of ESM/AP: Reinforcement of the environmental and social
      management system of Program investments. This component includes the following
      elements:

         Technical manual. Preparation of a Technical Manual for Environmental and
          Social Management (TMESM) of investments. This Manual will be used for the
          implementation of both the Program and other ANAEPMR projects. It will comply
          with both national environmental and social assessment procedures and World Bank
          policy provisions on PforR funding. The Manual will especially set forth the
          procedures and tools relating to the preparation of an Environmental and Social
          Management Plan (ESMP) for structural sub-projects that involve moderate
          environmental risks and a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for structural sub-
          projects involving moderate social risks. Furthermore, the Manual will also aim to
          define and set up the local grievance management mechanism - concurrently with
          the relating procedures (including with respect to the services of the Ombudsman
          and the grievances submitted to the Grievance Redress Service (GRS) of the World
          Bank).

           The TMESM will present, among other things, the following elements :
              • Procedures for the screening of sub-projects;
              • Procedures for the elaboration of Environmental and Social Management
                 Plans (ESMPs) and Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs);
              • Procedures for the preparation of the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) ;
              • Process of land acquisition and land property;
              • Key elements (environmental and social provisions, minimum required staff,
                 price details) for contracts with (i) work contractors, (ii) works supervisory
                 offices, (iii) drinking water operators ;
              • Grievance management mechanisms ;
              • Citizen engagement mechanism ;
              • Guidelines to good environmental and social practices.

          The Manual will be prepared for the National Rural Water Supply Agency
          (ANAEPMR) and all technical services, as well as all stakeholders who will be
          involved in Program implementation at the national, regional, and local levels, to
          ensure that environmental and social management procedures are properly
          understood, perfectly owned, and monitored.
         Inter-institutional coordination between ANAEPMR and ABE. Preparation and
          implementation of an interinstitutional cooperation agreement between ANAEMPR
          and ABE. The content of this agreement will establish the conditions for

BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                               page   35
            collaboration for the review and rapid certification of program subproject reports
            and the environmental and social monitoring of the implementation of the
            safeguarding documents. It will also take into account aspects of institutional
            support and capacity building.

    ➢ Second component of ESM/AP: Capacity building on environmental and social
      management of the key actors and representatives of the Program. This component
      includes two separate types of activities:

         Training on the TMESM. A training program will be elaborated for the use of the
          TMESM by the different stakeholders involved in the implementation of the
          Program, namely:

           •    Staff of ANAEPMR, ABE, ANDF ; MoE and MCVDD departemental
                directions; Municipalities, ACEP
           •    Contractors and works control offices.

            This training will aim to sensitize and inform a fairly broad audience on the content
            of the TMESM. This will include, in particular: (i) understanding of TMESM and
            its procedures and practices; and (ii) mastery of environmental and social
            management tools, namely: screening form, EIA, ESMP and Resettlement Action
            Plan (RAP), which will be prepared for individual sub-projects, according to the
            extent of their respective environmental and social risks, in line with the national
            arrangements and the World Bank's policy for funding of PPR. It has to be pointed
            out that these initiatives will support the establishment and operationalization of the
            citizen engagement and grievance management systems (including with respect to
            grievance procedures to the Ombudsman, on the one hand, and the Grievance
            Settlement Service (GRS) of the World Bank, on the other hand).

    ➢ Third component of ESM/AP: Capacity building for the monitoring of the
      implementation of the tools. This component includes two separate types of activities:

         Environmental and social reporting. The monitoring sheets in TMESM, once filled
          by the Contractors, then the supervision missions, will be verified and validated by
          specialists. Subsequently, they will be consolidated by the environmental and social
          specialists and entered into the integrated information and monitoring-evaluation
          system. Monitoring reports will include, as a priority, the monitoring of the
          implementation of environmental and social mitigation measures for each of sub-
          project approved and implemented.

         Human Resources of ANAEPMR for Environmental and Social Management.
          For an effective implementation of the program, ANAEPMR will have to recruit
          and maintain at least one social specialist and one environmental specialist, who will
          be employed full time throughout the implementation of the Program and having:

                •   Basic training in environmental and/or social sciences;
                •   A minimum number of years of experience in conducting similar programs /
                    projects in the drinking water supply sector.



BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                  page   36
             The number of such staff will be reviewed as needed based on the workload. These
             specialists will be responsible for ensuring, in close collaboration with all
             stakeholders: (i) the coordination and monitoring of the implementation of all
             actions related to the environmental and social management of the Program; (ii) the
             organization of all training, information and awareness initiatives on the
             environmental and social risks of the Program; (iii) the collection and centralization
             of all information relating to the monitoring of mitigation measures; (iv) the
             monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of mitigation measures and the
             integration of data at the information system level (in accordance with the principles
             described and presented in the TMESM); and (v) preparation of reports on the
             environmental and social aspects of the Program.

         Supporting Commune’s stakeholders and institutions
          Technical assistance and capacity building of the actors and institutions of the
          Communes involved in the implementation of the environmental and social aspects
          of the program are needed.
            These aspects of technical assistance and capacity building will target the communal
            structures of environmental and social and land management and Drinking Water
            Users’ Associations (ACEP).
            Main themes concern; (i) monitoring of the implementation of safeguard documents;
            (ii) the social aspects of land management; (iii) grievance management and general
            issues of social intermediation
            The program will build on the capacity building strategy of municipal actors already
            developed by the Small Town Water Supply and Urban Septage Management
            Project (PEPRAU) to facilitate the efficient execution of its activities.

   47. Table below summarizes all the elements of the ESM Action Plan, which forms an
   integral part of the general Action Plan of the Program:

         All the costs of these elements of the ESM Action Plan will be integrated to the
          general budget of the Program.
         On the other hand, the cost of the environmental and social remedial actions will be
          integrated to the very budgets of the investment sub-projects.




BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                  page   37
      Table 5 : Environmental and Social Management Action Plan


                                                                 Responsible                      DLI or Loan
N°          Action            Completion Measurement                              Due Date
                                                                   Agency                          Covenant
1. STRENGTHENING ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SYSTEMS OF THE PROGRAM
 1.1 Technical          Preparation and adoption of a           ANAEPMR       90 days after      Loan Covenant
      Manual for        MTGES that will have include the        in            Program’s
      Social and        following as a minimum:                 collaboration effectiveness
      Environmental     • Procedure for the screening of        with ABE
      Management        sub-projects
      (MTGES)           • Procedure for the elaboration of
                        Environmental and Social
                        Management Plans (ESMP) and
                        Environmental and Social Impact
                        Studies (ESIA)
                        • Procedure for the elaboration of
                        social assessment and Resettlement
                        Action Plans (RAP)
                        • Procedure for land acquisition
                        • Standard elements (environmental
                        and social clauses, minimum staff,
                        price details) for the contracts of (i)
                        works contractors, (ii) engineering
                        consultant, (iii) regional private
                        operators
                        • Grievance Redress Mechanism
                        • Citizen engagement mechanism
                        • Good practices guidelines for
                        environmental and social
                        management
 1.2 Interinstitutional Signing of an interinstitutional        ANAEPMR       90 days after
      coordination      agreement between ANAEPMR               and ABE       Program’s
      ANAEMPR -         and the ABE in which the                              effectiveness
      ABE               ANAEPMR commits to respect the
                        conditions, measures of
                        certification prescribed by the
                        decree n ° 2017-332 of the 06 July
                        2017 defining the procedures of the
                        environmental assessment
2. STREGTHENING OF INSTITUTIONAL CAPACITIES
2.1    Training on the    Development of a training program      ANAEPMR       90 days after
       TMESM              for the application of the MTGES       and ABE       Program’s
                          for the various stakeholders                         effectiveness
                          involved in the implementation of
                          the Program:
                          • Staff of ANAEPMR, ABE,
                          ANDF, Departmental Directions
                          MoE, MCVDD, Municipalities,
                          ACEP
                          • Works contractors and
                          engineering consultant
                          • Operators
2.2    Human              Maintain at least one social           ANAEPMR       After Program’s   Loan Covenant
       Resources of       specialist and one environmental                     effectiveness
       ANAEPMR for        specialist within ANAEPMR who
       Environmental      are employed full-time throughout



      BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                       page   38
                                                                 Responsible                  DLI or Loan
N°          Action            Completion Measurement                              Due Date
                                                                   Agency                      Covenant
       and Social         the implementation of the Program
       Management         and have:
                          • Basic training in environmental
                          and / or social sciences
                          • A minimum of one year of
                          experience in conducting similar
                          programs / projects in the drinking
                          water supply sector
2.3    Supporting         Provision of Technical assistance      ANAEPMR       Before the    Loan Covenant
       Commune’s          and capacity building of the actors                  works
       stakeholders and   and institutions of the Communes
       institutions       involved in the implementation of
                          the environmental and social
                          aspects of the program are needed.

                          Main themes concern; (i)
                          monitoring of the implementation
                          of safeguard documents; (ii) the
                          social aspects of land management;
                          (iii) grievance management and
                          general issues of social
                          intermediation

      Conclusion
      The World Bank will ensure the organization of a public consultation with the representatives
      of the key stakeholders, civil society organizations, and private sector to present and discuss
      the preliminary version of ESSA.
      Subsequently, throughout the entire duration of the Program, it will fall to the Beninese party
      to organize consultations on specific Program activities (investment sub-projects).
      The final revised version of ESSA will be made public on the external website of the World
      Bank and also on the site of the National Agency for Drinking Water Supply in Rural Areas
      (ANAEPMR).
      Public comments will be requested during the set period.




      BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                   page   39
                                            ANNEXES




BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA   page   40
  Annex 1: Capacities of the institutions in charge of implementing mitigation
                                    measures

         Actors                                         Capacities
                      Assets                                 Limitations
 ANAEPMR              - Skilled technical staff              First experience with this kind of
 (National Agency     - Has means to manage the              project
 for Drinking Water   program
 Supply in Rural      - Has a light organizational
 Areas)               structure and transparent and fast
 Program              procedures
 management unit      - Has an environmental specialist
                      and social specialist
 ANDF                 - Capacity to manage                   Creation of branches not yet
 (National State      expropriations for public purposes     completed (12 out of 77 branches
 Property and Land    - Capacity to manage the               set up)
 Tenure Agency)       compensation and resettlement of       No updating of the implementing
                      public project-affected people         decrees of the new 2017 Act on
                      - In addition to the national          land tenure
                      directorate, has operational and       Basic management of PAP claims
                      sustainable regional branches          (does not have any specific
                                                             mechanism for managing claims
                                                             during expropriation and
                                                             compensation)
 ABE                  - Expertise in training on             - Insufficient number of staff
 (Benin’s             environmental and social               - Limited resources
 Environmental        assessment                             - No updating of the order on the
 Agency)              - Expertise in Environmental and       organization of Environmental
                      Social Impact assessment report        Assessment procedures in Benin
                      validation                             - Environmental Assessment report
                      - Expertise in monitoring the          validation system centralized at
                      implementation of ESMP and RAP ABE
                      - Facilitation of the delivery of      - No dissemination of the new
                      Environmental Compliance               decree on Environmental
                      Certificates (ECCs)                    Assessment
                                                             - No updating of the General Guide
                                                             and Environmental Assessment
                                                             technical guides
 Communes             - Have technical senior officers       - Some communes do not have
                      with training in environmental         environmental and social units
                      management                             - weak expertise and proven
                      - Have land management                 experience in environmental and
                      committees and village land            social safeguards
                      management commissions in              - Insufficient of means to ensure
                      charge of assisting elected officials their mission
                      in managing land matters               - Elected officials and technical
                      - Communal councils have an            agents information on the
                      environmental committee                environmental issues of
                      - Sit on the validation committees     programs/projects is weak
                      of environmental and social impact - Poor involvement in the
                      assessment reports at the level of     monitoring of the
                      ABE                                    Programs/Projects



BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                          page   41
                     - Have the responsibility of
                     managing land tenure issues
                     (commune-level land management
                     office)
                     - Participation in the expropriation
                     for public purposes process
                     - Issuance of customary tenure
                     certificates

 ACEP                Experience in social intermediation    Weak institutional capacity
                     Experience in the implementation       Lack of financial means for
                     of citizen engagement and claims       operation
                     management mechanism
                     Volunteer members




BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                  page   42
           Annex 2: Environmental acts and regulations in force in Benin

REFERENCES                            DATE                                        ITEM
Act #98-030                    February 12, 1999      Framework law on the environment in the Republic of
                                                      Benin
Act #87-015                    September 21, 1987     Public Hygiene Code
Act #2010-44                   October 21, 2010       Water management in the Republic of Benin
Decree #2001-094               February 20, 2001      Drinking water quality standards in the Republic of Benin
Decree #2017-332               July 07, 2017          Organization of environmental assessment procedures in
                                                      the Republic of Benin
Decree #2001-095               February 20, 2001      Creation, roles and responsibilities, organization, and
                                                      operation of environmental units in the Republic of Benin
Decree #2001-294               August 08, 2001        Regulation of noise in the Republic of Benin
Decree #2001-109               April 04, 2001         Waste water quality standards in the Republic of Benin
Decree #2001-110               April 04, 2001         Air quality standards in the Republic of Benin
Decree #2001-096               February 20, 2001      Creation, roles and responsibilities, organization, and
                                                      operation of the environmental police
Decree #2003-332               August 27, 2003        Solid waste management in the Republic of Benin
Decree #2003-330               August 27, 2003        Used oil management in the Republic of Benin
Interministerial order #069    MISAT/MEHU/MS/D Regulation of human waste collection, drainage,
                               C/DE/DATC/DHAB – treatment, and disposal activities in Benin
                               1995
Interministerial order #136    MISAT/MEHU/MS/D Regulation of solid waste collection, removal, treatment,
                               C/DE/DATC/DHAB – and disposal activities in the Republic of Benin
                               1995
Order #0002                    MEHU/DC/DUA            Areas unfit for habitation
                               dated February 7, 1992
General order # 5926 TP        October 28, 1950       Regulation of the interior design of bulk hydrocarbon
                                                      depots
Decree #2001-092.              February 20, 2001      Classification of roads of economic, tourist, or strategic
                                                      interest




BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                            page   43
Annex 3: Multilateral conventions/agreements ratified that are directly or indirectly relevant
          to the project

   #        Conventions / agreements                           Description                          Date of
                                                                                                  ratification
   01    African Convention on          the   This is the only regional African convention           1968
         Conservation of Nature        and    of general scope addressing the protection of
         Natural Resources                    nature and natural resources. It has
                                              indisputably laid down the basis the core
                                              principles that nowadays govern Biosphere
                                              Reserves, namely:
                                                − consideration of customary rights and
                                                  uses;
                                                − natural resource conservation as an
                                                  integral part of development plans;
                                                − obligation of impact assessments;
                                                − inter-African cooperation in natural
                                                  resource conservation and management.

   02    United   Nations     Framework       This convention sets a general framework            June 30, 1994
         Convention on Climate Change         agreement on intergovernmental efforts
                                              allowing for taking on the challenge posed by
                                              climate changes. It recognizes that the
                                              climate system is a common resource whose
                                              stability can be affected by industrial
                                              emissions and other emissions of carbon
                                              dioxide and other GHGs.
   03    Convention on biological diversity   This convention, under Article 8d, promotes         June 30, 1994
         and the sustainable use of its       sustainable and ecologically rational
         components                           development in areas adjacent to protected
                                              areas, to reinforce their protection.
   05    Convention      concerning   the     Where natural, cultural, and archaeological        September 14,
         Protection of the World Cultural     assets occur on project intervention sites,            1982
         and Natural Heritage                 measures need to be taken according to the
                                              provisions under Articles 4, 5, 6, and 7 of the
                                              said convention.
   06    Convention on Wetlands of            The Convention’s mission is “The                  January 20, 2000
         International         Importance     conservation and wise use of all wetlands
         especially as Waterfowl Habitat -    through local and national actions and
         Ramsar Convention                    international cooperation, as a contribution
                                              towards achieving sustainable development
                                              throughout the world.”
   07    The Kyoto Protocol to the United     This protocol supports the UNFCCC and             February 25, 2002
         Nations Framework Convention         promotes a low-carbon, as well as low-GHG
         on Climate Change                    development.
   08    African Convention on the            This convention supports the provisions in          November 5,
         Conservation of Nature and           the convention on biological diversity.                1998
         Natural Resources
   09    Vienna Convention for the            This convention stipulates the specific            March 22, 1985
         Protection of the Ozone Layer        obligations relating to the control and
                                              elimination of Ozone-Depleting Substances
                                              (ODSs)




BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                                page     44
   #        Conventions / agreements                         Description                         Date of
                                                                                               ratification
   10    Montreal Protocol on ozone-         This protocol governs the statutory and         October 31, 1988
         depleting substances and its        regulatory provisions for the enforcement of
         amendments                          the Vienna Convention.
   11    Convention on International Trade   This convention, known under its acronym          November 2,
         in Endangered Species of Wild       CITES or as the Washington Convention, is            1973
         Fauna and Flora                     an international agreement between States. It
                                             aims to ensure that international trade in
                                             specimens of wild animals and plants does
                                             not threaten the survival of the species they
                                             belong to.
   12    Stockholm    Convention   on        This convention mainly aims to protect             May 2001
         Persistent Organic Pollutants       human health and the environment from
         (POPs)                              persistent organic pollutants (POPs).




BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                            page     45
       Annex 4: Selected articles from the new Act #2017-15 on land tenure

 ARTICLES                                CONTENT                                  OBSERVATIONS
 Article 4 new       1- The Land tenure in force in the Republic of           (cf. provisions of Title
                     Benin is that of land right confirmation                 III)
                                                                              Recognition of customary
                                                                              property
                     2- relies on the confirmation of land rights by all      The term "Certificate of
                     concerned parties and land title issuance                Land Ownership" (CLO)
                                                                              was replaced by the term
                                                                              "Land Title"
                     3- confirmation procedure oriented on:
                     - in urban and periurban area: the documents of
                     presumption of land ownership or court ruling
                     - in rural areas: documents of presumption of land
                     ownership, cadaster of the right holders of the
                     rural land plan, or court ruling
                     4- Three documents of presumption of ownership
                     were added (certificate of registration,
                     administrative certificate, rural land certificate) in
                     addition to the three defined in the former Act
                     (certificate of customary holding, certificate of
                     resettlement, tax notice of the past three years).
 Article 112 new     The land title is the only document granting full        The following sentence
                     ownership in the Republic of Benin. All attributes       was added: The
                     of the right of ownership are enshrined in it. Any       Government issues land
                     land that is not covered by a land title is deemed       titles to holders of a
                     to be under presumption of right. The                    permit to occupy a
                     Government issues land titles to holders of a            building belonging to it
                     permit to occupy a building belonging to it under        under the conditions set
                     the conditions set by a decree adopted by the            by a decree adopted by
                     Council of Ministers.                                    the Council of Ministers.
 Article 238 new     The competent judge to whom the case is referred         Magistrate has been
                     to under an emergency procedure, after verifying         replaced by judge.
                     the regularity of the procedure, sets, within thirty
                     (30) days after the submission of the case, the
                     amount of the compensation for expropriation, in
                     compliance with the provisions of the present
                     code, and orders the taking of possession by the
                     expropriating party.
 Article 240 new     An expert assessment must be ordered if                  In the new act, the
                     requested by one of the parties. It should be            number of experts has
                     conducted by a certified expert, appointed by the        decreased from 03 to just
                     court. In any case, the latter must hand his/her         01. It has also set
                     report within the deadline set by the judge, failing     deadlines for ordering the
                     that, the judge will make its own assessment and,        expert assessment.
                     where needed, will take coercive measures by
                     setting a new deadline or penalty payments, where
                     applicable.
 Article 517 new     (...) Land titles, registration certificates,            Recognition of customary
                     administrative certificates, rural land certificates     property
                     issued under earlier, enforced instruments have
                     the same force as land titles, as well as any copy
                     established under the present code.


BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                                   page   46
 Article 520 new     The rural land certificates issued prior to the
                     effective date of the present code will be
                     converted into land titles upon simple presentation
                     by the holder, according to the provisions of
                     Article 116 of Act #2013-01 dated August 14,
                     2013 on the Land Tenure Code in the Republic of
                     Benin.
 Article 522-1       The Government may rightfully declare any land         Addition of provisions
                     and immovable property belonging to private            that will cause
                     parties and located in the border area as of public    expropriations for public
                     utility. The Government will make the appropriate      purposes
                     arrangements for their gradual incorporation to its
                     public assets.
 Article 522-3       The Government will take all necessary actions to      Confirmation of the
                     gradually ensure compensation for all lands in the     principle of compensation
                     border area, except those that already form part of    in case of expropriation
                     the public or private property of the State or local   for public purposes
                     jurisdictions. No deadline will apply to the
                     payment of such compensation. However,
                     dispossession may occur only after fair and prior
                     compensation is provided.




BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                                page   47
               Annex 5: Simplified social and environmental screening form
The present selection form was designed to help in the initial selection of program sub-projects that need to be
implemented in the field. The present form is to be filled by the (environmental and social) safeguard specialists of
ANAEPMR, then forwarded to ABE for validation, in compliance with the Beninese legislation (Decree #2017-332
dated July 07, 2017, general EIA guide).

                                       Environmental and social selection form
  1 Name of the locality where the project is implemented
  2 Name of contact person
  4 Name of approving Authority
  Date:                                      Signatures:




                                                                   Part A
                                                Brief description of the sub-project
The proposed sub-project (surface area, approximate total surface area to be used, land status) and scope of the works
(construction and operations, resources, materials, staff, etc.)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------
                                                                  Pa rt B
B rief de scr i pt io n o f t he e nv i ro n me nta l s it u a tio n a n d i de ntif ica t i o n o f e nv iro n me nta l
i mp a ct s a n d/o r ri s ks
1. Natural environment
 (a) Describe the type of soil on, topography of, and vegetation on the sub-project execution site and surrounding areas.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -
(b) Estimate and indicate the vegetation that could be cleared-
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ---
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------
(c) Is the site home to environmentally sensitive areas or endangered species? -----------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2. River and lake ecology
Is there any possibility that the execution of the project will negatively impact on the ecology of rivers or lakes?
           Yes______ No______
If Yes, Observations:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -
3. Protected areas
Is the sub-project site located inside of or adjacent to any protected area delineated by the Government (national park,
national reserve, global heritage site, sacred site, etc.)?                 Yes______ No______
If Yes, Observations:
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                                                     page    48
Where the execution and commissioning of the activity occur out of a protected area (or in its surroundings), is it liable
to affect the ecology of the protected area (e.g.: interference with mammal or bird migration routes)?
           Yes______ No______
If Yes, Observations:
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -
4. Geology and soils
Is the site home to potential geological or soil instability areas (proneness to erosion, landslides, subsidence)?
           Yes______ No______
If Yes, Observations:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------
5. Landscape/aesthetics
Could the works affect the aesthetic appearance of the local landscape? (cutting of trees, dismantling, etc.)
Yes______ No______
If Yes, Observations:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6. Historical, archaeological, or cultural heritage site.
Based on the available sources, consultations with local authorities, local knowledge and/or observations, could the
sub-project alter historical, archaeological, or cultural heritage sites or should excavations be conducted very close by?
Yes______ No______
If Yes, Observations:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
7. Air pollution during the execution and implementation of the sub-project? Yes______ No______
If Yes, Observations:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
8. Noise pollution during the execution and implementation of the sub-project
Will the noise level during the implementation of the relevant project exceed acceptable noise limits?
           Yes______ No______
If Yes, Observations:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -
9. Solid or liquid wastes
Will the relevant activity generate solid or liquid wastes?                 Yes______ No______
If Yes, Observations:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -
If "Yes", does the sub-project have a plan for their collection and disposal? Yes______ No______
10. Will the sub-project pose risks to human health and safety during and/or after its implementation?
           Yes____ No___
If Yes, Observations:
 ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ --------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
11. Will the sub-project cause changes in the distribution/movements of people and/or animals in the area?
Yes______ No______

BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                                                     page    49
If Yes, Observations:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
12. Does the sub-project require large volumes of construction materials (e.g.: gravel, stone, water, firewood)?
Yes______ No______
If Yes, Observations:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -
                                                                  Pa rt C
B rief de sc ri pt io n o f t h e so c ia l env iro n me nt a n d i de nt ifi ca tio n o f so c i a l i mp a ct s
1. Land acquisition
Will the sub-project deprive or restrict access to land or other economic resources? Yes______ No______

If Yes, Observations:
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Si No, Observations---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
2. Loss of land: Will the proposed sub-project cause permanent or temporary loss of land? Yes______ No______ (to
see if there is use)
If Yes, Observations: -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------If No, Observations-------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
3. Loss of infrastructures (housing, related structures, social and community structures [soccer field, well, etc.]): Will
the sub-project cause permanent or temporary loss of infrastructures? Yes______ No______
If Yes, Observations: -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------If No, Observations-------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
4. Loss of income: Will the sub-project cause permanent or temporary loss of income (economic activities, livelihoods,
production mode...)? Yes______ No______
If Yes, Observations: -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------If No, Observations-------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
5. Loss of harvests or fruit trees: will the sub-project cause temporary or permanent loss of crops, useful trees (fruit,
shady, ornamental, etc.)? Yes______ No______
If Yes, Observations: -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------If No, Observations-------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
6. Public consultation

Are stakeholder consultation and participation sought? Yes______ No______
If Yes, Observations: -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------If No, Observations-------------------------------

BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                                                     page    50
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                   Part D
                                                          Mitigation measures

For all "Yes" answers, (environmental and social) safeguard specialists, in collaboration with ABE, will need to
provide a brief description of the relevant measures taken.

                                                              Part E
                                                          Recommendations
   1. Environment
Required environmental work:

      o   No environmental work (simple mitigation measures)

      o   Environmental impact statement
      o   Simplified Environmental and Social Impact Assessment

   2. Social
Required social work

      o   No social work to be done

      o   RAP


Form filled by:
   • Last name: ______________________________________________________________
   • First name: ____________________________________________________________
   • Address: ___________________________________________________________
   • Signature:



                                         Done in ………………………on ……./….…../201…….

Compliance approval of the Environmental Safeguard Specialist of the project

                                                     Dated ……../……../201…..



Compliance approval of the Social Safeguard Specialist of the project

                                                     Dated ……../……../201…..



Compliance approval of ABE
                                                     Dated ……../……../201…..


Form Code:


CC:


BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                                                     page    51
    Annex 6: Environmental and Social Management Plan and Resettlement
                                Action Plan
1. Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)

An Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) is a document that enables the promoter
of each sub-project that has significant environmental and/or social effects, to incorporate
environmental and social dimensions to the activity design, planning, management, and
implementation process.
An ESMP lays down the relevant procedures and measures for the mitigation of their impacts on
the environment and social setting, based on the procedures and mechanisms defined in the
Technical Manual.
An ESMP especially includes the following aspects:
• Drawing up of a full Sub-project Sheet
• Preparation of an environmental and social control/review form
• Setting up of works supervision mechanisms
• Documentation of the public consultations conducted for the ESMP
• Setting up of a simple and effective system for request and claim management
• Setting up and monitoring of the implementation and assessment of all planned mitigation and
    compensation measures
• Definition of the environmental and social reporting system
• Public disclosure of the ESMP of each of the selected sub-projects
• Etc.

2. Resettlement Action Plan

A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) is a document that enables the promoter of any sub-project that
requires the physical resettlement of people, causes the loss of property and assets, involves the
acquisition of land and/or the loss of access to natural resources or economic assets, to assess the
social impacts associated with the temporary or permanent resettlement of people and propose a
specific plan for loss compensation and support to the restoration of livelihoods, based on the
procedures and mechanisms defined in the Technical Manual, especially as regards the following
aspects:
• Definition and implementation of procedures applicable to involuntary resettlement
• Documentation of the public consultations conducted for the RAP
• Setting up of a simple and effective system for request and claim management
• Setting up of a monitoring system for land acquisition procedures, if any
• Setting up and monitoring of the implementation and assessment of all planned livelihood
    compensation and restoration measures




BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                page   52
                                Annex 7: List of key references
    1. WB, 2015 Bank Policy: Program for Results financing
    2. WB, 2015. Bank Guideline: Program for Results financing
    3. WB/Rep Senegal, 2017. Programme d’appui aux communes et aux agglomérations au
        sénégal (PACASEN): Evaluation du système environnemental et social
    4. WB/Tunisia, 2014 Programme de Développement Urbain et de Gouvernance Locale
        (PDUGL): Évaluation des Systèmes Environnementaux et Sociaux (ESES)
    5. WB/Morocco, 2014. Prêt-Programme axé sur les résultats (PPR); Transport urbain au
        Maroc: Evaluation des Systèmes environnementaux et sociaux ESES)
    6. WB/UGANDA, 2012. Uganda support to municipal infrastructure development project
        (USMID) as a program-for-results (PforR) operation: environmental and social system
        assessment (ESSA) report
    7. MEEM/ANAEPMR, 2017. Plan directeur de développement du sous-secteur de
        l’approvisionnement en eau potable en milieu rural du Bénin. Master Plan Report; IGIP
        Africa
    8. MEEM/ANAEPMR, 2017. Plan directeur de développement du sous-secteur de
        l’approvisionnement en eau potable en milieu rural du Bénin. Final Assessment Report;
        IGIP Africa
    9. Agence Nationale de l’Eau Potable en Milieu rural, 2017. Feuille de route de
        l’approvisionnement en eau potable en milieu rural (presentation document)
    10. DGE/MMEE, 2007 Intermédiation sociale spécifique aux Adductions d’Eau Villageoises:
        Guide des animateurs
    11. DGE/MMEE, 2008 Intermédiation sociale spécifique aux Adductions d’Eau Villageoises:
        Guide à l’usage des communes
    12. DGE/MMEE, 2008, Intermédiation sociale pour les Ouvrages simples Guide à l’usage des
        communes
    13. Program Concept Note for Water PforR Benin P164186
    14. Concept Stage Program Information Document +PID for Water PforR Benin - P164186
    15. ABE, 2001: Guide général de réalisation d'une étude d'impact sur l'environnement. Agence
        Béninoise pour l'Environnement: 76 p, February 2001.
    16. ABE, 2003: Guide sectoriel d'étude d'impact sur l'environnement des projets
        d'électrification. Agence Béninoise pour l'Environnement, 29 p.
    17. World Bank, 1999. Manuel d’évaluation environnementale. French edition. Vol 1, 2, and
        3.
    18. ECVR2 (2001). Profil de la pauvreté rurale et caractéristique socio-économiques des
        ménages du département de l’Atacora. Cotonou.
    19. Répertoire des indicateurs de suivi environnemental et de développement durable au Bénin.
        MEHU/ABE, 224 p.
    20. Profil de la pauvreté rurale et caractéristique socio-économiques des ménages ruraux.
        Cotonou, 324 p.
    21. 7. Aide-mémoire conjoint du Ministère de l'Eau, du Ministère de la Santé et des partenaires
        techniques et financiers issu de la revue sectorielle eau et assainissement, gestion 2014,
        tenue à Cotonou les 18 et 19 juin 2015 revue sectorielle eau et assainissement gestion 2014
    22. 8. Rapport d’exécution du budget programme par objectif 2014 de l’approvisionnement en
        eau potable en milieu rural et de la gestion des ressources en eau; DGE, June 2015


BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                               page   53
    23. Act #2017-15 amending and complementing Act #2013-01 dated August 14, 2013 on land
        tenure in the Republic of Benin
    24. Decree 2017-332 dated July 06, 2017 on the organization of environmental assessment
        procedures in the Republic of Benin
    25. Decree 2015-010 dated January 29, 2015 on the roles and responsibilities, organization,
        and operation of the National Land Tenure Agency




BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                            page   54
            Annex 8: List of people met during the preparation of ESSA

Consultation: Institutional stakeholders

 #     Full name                 Title/Structure                  Contact     E mail
 01    A. Moussa-Fils DJIBRIL    DGA/ANDF                         95451156    moussafils@gmail.com
 02    Léopold GNANCADJA         DG/ABE                           96417705    gnancadja@hotmail.com
 03    Ismail HOTO               DGA/ABE                          97599731    jismahot@yahoo.fr
 04    Rodrigue CAPO-CHICHI      DEIE/ABE                         97575610    Caprod70@yahoo.fr
 05    Philomène CHODATON        Pollution Control Officer /ABE   95853158
 06    Landry BOYA               Monitoring-Evaluation            97859227    boyalandry@yahoo.fr
                                 PEPRAU-ANAEPMR
 07    Romaric OGOUWALE          Social Safeguard Sp. PEPRAU-     95350040    Ogou25@yahoo.fr
                                 ANAEPMR
 08    Julie LOKO                Social Safeguard Sp. PEPRAU-     96086667    juliedeloko@gmail.com
                                 ANAEPMR
 09    Sylvain ADOKPO            DG/ANAEPMR                       97972067    samigan@presidence.bj



Consultation : Stakeholders of Communes

DOGBO
  N°       NOMS ET RENOMS                       TITRE                        CONTACT/ E-MAIL

  01     SOSSSOUKOUI Denis               PA/MAIRIE DOGBO                        66-78-00-65
         SEHOUBO A. M.
  02                                     SG MAIRIE DOGBO                        97-17-17-45
         Lambert
  03     TOHOUNDOM Isidore                TG/ACEP DOGBO                         62-37-23-58
  04     HOUNNOU Léon                       DDL/MAIRIE                          97-43-27-28
  05     MADJI Isaac                          FERMIER                           95-79-03-42
  06     AMOUZOUN Robert                     COLL SAEE                          96-97-62-55
  07     TCHAKADAÏ Marcel                 PDT/ACEP DOGBO                        96-24-11-08
  08     HOUNHAGNI Isidore                STAGIAIRE/SAEE                        67-86-92-01
  09     TOHOUEDE Lion                       COLL/SAEE                          66-69-14-41
  10     KATE Benjamin                      EXPLOITANT                          66-39-34-75

  11     DOHOU K. Isidore                 C/S EAU COUFFO                        97-48-56-37

  12     WOUISOIU J. Eustache                COLL/DRFM                          66-11-94-10

  13     SOSSOUKPE Yolande                  C/SAE DOGBO                         62-60-47-54
         SONOU AGOSSOU
  14                                        SP SOCIAL BM                        66-54-03-73
         Sabas
         BACHABI ALIDOU
  15                                  SP ENVIRONNEMENT BM                       95-05-98-12
         Abdoul’Ganyi
  16     GODOUVI Comlan S.                   DDEEM/MC                           95-81-90-11

  17     AGBASSOU Jérome                   AN AVPN-ONG                          65-09-92-41


BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                  page   55
KARIMAMA
  N°      NOMS ET PRENOMS                      TITRE                     CONTACT/ E-MAIL
  01     IGOUMON Ali                       C/DADE MAIRIE                    94-17-13-84
  02     MOUSSA Talhatou                      PDT ACEP                      65-44-66-12
                                                                            97-11-13-20
  03     ZERMAKOUE B. Issiaka               C/SAG MAIRIE
                                                                            95-58-19-44
  04     TOSSOU Bertin                     EXPLOITANT                       96-69-99-56
  05     LAGOUGOU Ernest                     C/SEHA                         66-22-53-06
  06     MIDOU B. Soumaila                    C/SAF                         97-47-57-31
  07     MOUSSA S. Moukaila            MEMBRE DE LA CADE                    97-13-14-33
  08     ASSOUMA Chafihi                 COORD/CPC SWB                      95-48-91-33
  09     SALIFOU Zouberou            RAPPORTEUR DE LA CADE                  94-75-76-57
  10     SONOU AGOSSOU                    SP SOCIAL BM                      66-54-03-73
         Sabas
  11     BACHABI ALIDOU               SP ENVIRONNEMENT BM                   95-05-98-12
         Abdoul’Ganyi


GOGOUNOU
  N°        NOMS ET RENOMS                              TITRE              CONTACT/ E-MAIL
  01     MAMA Abdoulaye                             Exploitant AEV            97-45-20-51
                                                 Responsable technique        66-66-81-26
  02     TOHOUEDE D. Martial
                                                        COGEF                 60-20-41-03
  03     YADISSOUNON Kassim                            C/SAFU                 96-37-07-16
                                               PDT COMMISSION ADE
  04     LAFIA MONRA Moussa                                                    95-78-37-92
                                                     PDT COGEF
  05     BELKO Arouna                                  C/SICAD                 95-10-73-36
  06     SAKA SERO Moussa                               C/DHA                  96-13-11-25
  07     OROU DARI Yacoubou                     CHEF CELLULE ACEP              95-08-48-92
  08     SARE Salamatou                       PDT ACEP COMMUNALE               95-74-14-05
  09     DAOUDA Maguerite                            AGENT IMS                 94-33-26-58
  10     BANI Soulémane                                C/SEHA                  64-04-45-04
  11     GOUNIGNAN Moutawakirou                         MAIRE                  95-58-32-06
  12     SONOU AGOSSOU Sabas                        SP SOCIAL BM               66-54-03-73
  13     BACHABI ALIDOU Abdoul’Ganyi            SP ENVIRONNEMENT               95-05-98-12
                                                         BM




BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                  page   56
MATERI
  N°     NOMS ET RENOMS                      TITRE                 CONTACT/ E-MAIL
                                                                        94-31-02-36
  01    GNAMMI Elie                           PAM
                                                                   gnammieli@gmail.com
                                                                 97-75-84-41 / 61-97-16-85
  02    SAMBIENI Dieudonné                   C/SPDC
                                                                    donnesam@yahoo.fr
  03    KASSA P. Angèle                    C/SADE                       97-35-11-86
  04    SAMBIENI Mapambor                    CA                         97-65-28-90
  05    IDANI N. Eusèbe                PRESIDENT ACEP                   69-17-94-68
                                                                        94-08-84-08
  06    SAMBIENI Y. T. Jean                  P/CADE
                                                                 Jeansambieni1@gmail.com
        TOUBOUDIENI                                                     95-48-66-98
  07                                         P/CAEF
        Mathieu                                                mathieutouboudieni@gmail.com
                                                                        97-35-50-59
  08    GNAGO Antoine                        C/DEA
                                                                 gnagoantoine7@gmail.com
                                                                        97-31-42-04
  09    KOMBIENI Kantchoa                      CA
                                                                 kantchoakomb@gmail.com
  10    NANTEKOUA Bertin                       CA                       97-35-19-59
        BACHABI A.                                                      95-05-98-12
  11                               SP ENVIRONNEMENT BM
        Abdoul’Ganyi                                               agbachabi@gmail.com
        SONOU AGOSSOU                SP DEVELOPPEMENT                   66-54-03-73
  12
        Sabas                            SOCIAL BM                   ssonou@gmail.com

SAKETE
  N°           NOMS ET RENOMS                           TITRE          CONTACT/ E-MAIL
  01     BANKOLE W. Alain                             COL/S EAU           97-57-64-60
  02     SALIMI Latif                                 C/S EAU –P          97-64-21-94
  03     ABGOURIN O. Richard                             P.A.M            97-47-87-94
  04     ALI ALABI Rafiou                              FERMIER            97-37-77-02
  05     SALAMI O. Koudousse                           V PACEP            97-41-58-37
  06     ADEGBOLA Sévérin Adéyandjou                  CA AGUIDI           97-19-57-34
  07     ATINCHOLA A. Célestin                       CA SAKETE II         97-41-55-01
  08     LAWANI A. Somadé                             GEST/OGO            66-09-07-49
  09     KOUCHIMI B. Noèl                           CA ITA DJEBOU         96-29-47-03
  10     DJOSSOU S. Ignace                                CC              97-76-98-69
  11     LASSISSI Fatai                               COL /SEHA           96-66-32-44
  12     ADEGNANDJOU A. Enock                         CA YOKO             97-29-45-83
  13     FATOLOU Hadirou L.                           SGA/ACEP            97-31-45-04
  14     EDJA Toundé François                          S.G/ACEP           97-04-18-19
  15     ELOROUNTO Claude                                 C.C             97-05-34-02
  16     THON T Sandra                                AC/MAIRE            97-62-32-82
  17     GANHOUMINDE DASSI                                C.C             97-88-00-16
  18     TELLA Sandé                                  COL/SEHA            97-32-62-51
  19     BACHABI ALIDOU Abdoul’Ganyi             SP ENVIRONNEMENT         95-05-98-12




BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                              page    57
ZOGBODOMEY
  N°      NOMS ET RENOMS                     TITRE                        CONTACT/ E-MAIL
  01     KOUADODA Fidèle M.                DG/DELCOS                         97-38-27-06
  02     HOUNDANON Habib                      C/ST                           95-17-25-52
  03     AGUEOSSI B. Ida                  C/DDC/S EAU                        97-47-61-49
  04     KPONOU Bonaventure              C/DERT- S EAU                       97-91-91-31
  05     ADJASSOHO M. Rosalie        SG/MAIRIE ZOGBODOMEY                    66-45-59-98
  06     TOWEDJE S. D. Candide               C/DEA                           64-28-16-69
  07     ATACHI Alexandre                    C.COM                           96-47-39-39
                                                                             65-20-92-13
  08     KPATENON S. Gratien          GESTIONNAIRE DELCOS
                                                                             97-60-47-45
         BACHABI A.
  09                                    SP ENVIRONNEMENT                     95-05-98-12
         Abdoul’Ganyi
         SONOU AGOSSOU
  10                                          SP SOCIAL                      95-36-89-71
         Sabas

DASSA ZOUME
 N°             NOMS ET PRENOMS                           TITRE                CONTACT/ E-MAIL
 01    BOKO A.Didier                                    Coll/SAPE             didierboko26@gmail.com
 02    OFIE K. Julien                                 Membre ACEP                    95-21-62-58
 03                                                 VICE PRESIDENTE                  64-91-78-76
       BALARO A. Edith
                                                           ACEP
  04                                                   SECRETAIRE                   94-00-97-77
       GOTOVI Noël
                                                           ACEP
  05                                                   RPT/GBAFFO                   94-06-19-41
       AGOSSADOU J. Claude
                                                          Fermier
  06   KOBA A. Dominique                              ASSIST/SADE                   95-83-48-36
  07                                                        Sp                      95-05-98-12
       BACHABI A. Abdoul’Ganyi                      ENVIRONNEMENT              agbachabi@gmail.com
                                                            BM
  08                                                  Sp SOCIAL BM                   66-54-03-73
       SONOU AGOSSOU Sabas
                                                                                 ssonou@gmail.com
  09                                                       REHA/IMES                 95-18-93-86
       DEFODJI K. Parfait
                                                                              parfaitdefodji@gmail.com
  10                                                 RPT/KERE Fermier                95-56-06-29
       MAGBOUDE Augustin
                                                                                     95-96-64-95
  11                                                   1er Organisateur              94-33-46-10
       FIDEGNON Emmanuel
                                                            ACEP
  12                                                    RPT/KPAKPA                  95-35-86-40
       OHIN Eustache
                                                           Fermier




BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                      page   58
        Annex 9: Report on consultations with institutions and communes

 REPORT ON CONSULTATIONS OF INSTITUTIONAL AND MUNICIPAL ACTORS IN THE CONTEXT
              OF THE ESES REPORT OF THE PROGRAM AQUA VIE BENIN

        1.      Objective
The program AQUA vie Benin will be implemented mainly in 74 rural communes out of the 77
existing in the Republic of Benin. It was therefore necessary to consult the strategic actors involved
in the program. These included, in addition to ANAEPMR, the national environmental and social
management institutions, namely the Ministry in charge of the environment (DC/ MCVDD), the
Benin Environmental Agency (ABE), the National Agency of State Property and Land Tenure
(ANDF), the services of communes (technical, environment, public affairs, water), mixed bodies
(devolved services, populations, municipal technical services) in charge of land management
(SVGF, COGEF), and Drinking Water Consumers’ Associations (ACEP). Since the program’s
performance will be largely reliant on the capacity of these actors, the objective was to identify the
environmental and social issues associated with the program, to assess the capacities of these
actors, and to make recommendations to fill possible gaps, as needed.
        2.     Methodological approach
As for institutional actors, iterative in-depth interviews were held with each of them. For
stakeholders in the communes, public meetings were held at seven (7) communes in Benin, namely,
in the north, Karimama, Gogounou, and Materia; in the center, Dassa-Zoumè; and in the south,
Sakete, Zogbodomey, and Dogbo.
The participatory approach allowed for presenting the program to the various actors, for collecting
their expectations, opinions and concerns, for understanding procedures, and for assessing their
capacity to take part in the program.
Consultations with institutional actors took place from December 18 to 29, 2017 and consultations
with municipal actors from February 9 to 18, 2018.
       3.      Actors’ concerns
The actors’ concerns that came out of the consultations are summarized in the table below.

Table 1: Summary of the expectations and concerns of institutional and municipal actors involved
in the program AQUA VIE Benin.

  Actors                 Concerns
  MCVDD                  Need a specific agreement with the ABE for the review of the reports of projects
                         under the Government Action Plan, including the program AQUA VIE Benin
  ABE                    Order implementing the new decree on environmental assessment not updated
                         Environmental assessment guides not updated
                         Reduced staff
                         Need for capacity building of actors (ABE, experts, partner organizations -
                         ABPEE)
                         Inadequate rolling stock
                         Inadequate IT equipment and materials
  ANDF                   Implementing decrees associated with the new Land Tenure Code not updated
                         Partial deconcentration of the Agency
  Communes               COGEF members having poor control of their responsibilities


BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                           page     59
                         Some Village-level Land Management Structures (SVGF) not in place
                         No environmental specialist available in some communes
                         Lack of or inadequate human resources in charge of environmental and social
                         monitoring
                         Poor training on environmental management tools among staff in charge of
                         environmental and social monitoring
                         Lack of travel means to follow-up on complaints in the field
                         Insufficient means for Water and Sanitation Managers to follow-up on complaints
                         Delays observed in the setting up of COGEFs in some communes
                         Lack of or inadequate experience in implementing ESMPs and RAPs
                         Lack of IT resources for the functioning of the services in charge of land and
                         environmental and social aspects
                         Land tenure not secure or inadequately secure for drinking water systems
  Farmers                Water treatment not routinely performed due to remote laboratories and high cost
                         of analyses
                         Repeated refusal by some communities to pay the price set for water
  ACEP                   Confusion on their duties and roles
                         Lack of resources to exercise their powers of social intermediation and citizen
                         control


       4.       Actors’ recommendations
Further to the consultations, the actors expressed recommendations that are presented in the table
below.

Table 2 : Summary of recommendations of institutional and municipal actors involved in the
program Aqua Vie Benin

  Actors                 Recommendations
  MCVDD                  Negotiate with ABE to reach an agreement that is different from those signed with
                         private entities in terms of speed and amount of fees
  ABE                    Update the implementing order the new decree on environmental assessment
                         Set up a mechanism (certification of experts, review of reports by a panel of
                         experts, validation by an interministerial commission, validation at departmental
                         level by DD/MCVDD) to ensure quality and speed of the review of safeguard
                         documents
                         Provide capacity building for actors (ABE, experts, partner organizations -
                         ABPEE)
                         Strengthen ABE through provision of rolling stock
                         Strengthen ABE’s computer equipment and materials
  ANDF                   Update the implementing decrees of the new Land Tenure Code
                         Broaden the deconcentration of the Agency
  Communes               Set up Village-level Land Management Structures (SVGF) in the communes
                         concerned
                         Accelerate the setting up of COGEFs in the communes concerned
                         Train COGEF members on their responsibilities
                         Provide communes without environmental and social specialists
                         Strengthen communes with human resources in charge of environmental and social
                         monitoring
                         Strengthen the training on environmental and social management tools (including
                         ESMPs and RAPs) for the staff in charge of environmental and social monitoring
                         Provide REA and IMS agents with means to travel to follow-up on complaints in
                         the field


BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                            page     60
                         Strengthen the services in charge of land tenure, environmental and social aspects
                         with computer equipment and operating resources
                         Ensure land tenure security for existing drinking water systems as well as for new
                         ones
  Farmers                Water treatment not routinely performed due to remote laboratories and high cost
                         of analyses
                         Continue awareness-raising with the communities
  ACEP                   Strengthen the training of ACEPs on their responsibilities and on action strategies
                         Support or strengthen ACEPs with material means to enable them to exercise their
                         powers of social intermediation and citizen control

5. Conclusion on public consultations
The World Bank evaluation team Bank warmly thanks ANAEPMR and its team for their support
during the preparation of this document. The team also thanks all the actors we met for their
availability, suggestions and feedback.




BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                              page     61
Photos of consultations with municipal actors




 View of a part of the consultation                        View of a part of the consultation
 session with municipal actors in                          session with municipal actors in
 Karimama                                                  Gogounou




 View of a part of the consultation                    View of a part of the consultation
 session with municipal actors in                      session with municipal actors in Dassa
 Matéri                                                Zoumè




BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA                                        page   62
Annex 10 : Minutes of the National Consultation

TO BE DONE




BENIN: Rural Water Supply Universal Access Program, ESSA   page   63
