Public Disclosure Authorized
                                         The World Bank
                                         BD Rural Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for Human Capital Development Project (P169342)




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                      Project Information Document (PID)


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                   Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 28-Jun-2020 | Report No: PIDISDSA29876




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Apr 22, 2020                                                                                          Page 1 of 12
          The World Bank
          BD Rural Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for Human Capital Development Project (P169342)



   BASIC INFORMATION

 OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA
  A. Basic Project Data

   Country                             Project ID                    Project Name                Parent Project ID (if any)
   Bangladesh                          P169342                       BD Rural Water,
                                                                     Sanitation and Hygiene
                                                                     for Human Capital
                                                                     Development Project
   Region                              Estimated Appraisal Date      Estimated Board Date        Practice Area (Lead)
   SOUTH ASIA                          12-Jun-2020                   24-Aug-2020                 Water

   Financing Instrument                Borrower(s)                   Implementing Agency
   Investment Project Financing        People's Republic of          Department of Public
                                       Bangladesh                    Health Engineering
                                                                     (DPHE), Palli Karma-
                                                                     Sahayak Foundation
                                                                     (PKSF)

   Proposed Development Objective(s)

   To (i) improve access to ‘safely-managed’ water supply and sanitation in selected areas of rural Bangladesh; and (ii)
   strengthen sector institutional capacity for water and sanitation.

   Components
   1. Investments in water supply
   2. Investments in sanitation and hygiene
   3. Institutional strengthening
   4. Project implementation and management
   5. COVID-19 emergency response
   6. Contingent emergency response



   PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

  SUMMARY      -NewFin1




   Total Project Cost                                                                                                543.50
   Total Financing                                                                                                  543.50
               of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                    200.00
   Financing Gap                                                                                                        0.00



Apr 22, 2020                                                                                                       Page 2 of 12
          The World Bank
          BD Rural Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for Human Capital Development Project (P169342)



  DETAILS      -NewFinEnh1




   World Bank Group Financing

      International Development Association (IDA)                                                                          200.00
         IDA Credit                                                                                                        200.00
   Non-World Bank Group Financing

      Counterpart Funding                                                                                                  143.50

         Borrowing Agency                                                                                                  143.50

      Other Sources                                                                                                        200.00
         Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank                                                                              200.00

   Environmental and Social Risk Classification
   Moderate

   Decision
   The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate




   Other Decision (as needed)


   B. Introduction and Context

   1.      Economic conditions in Bangladesh have continued to improve in recent years. Per capita Gross National
   Income reached US$1,751 (World Bank Atlas method) in 2018, well above the lower middle-income country
   threshold which Bangladesh crossed in 2014. The country has seen significant progress on reducing extreme
   poverty and boosting shared prosperity, especially through human development. The Human Capital Index of
   0.48 for Bangladesh surpassed the South Asian average and the lower middle-income average in all criteria except
   for stunting. Bangladesh has lowered infant mortality and increased life expectancy with 97 percent of children
   likely to survive to the age of 5 and 87 percent of 15-year-old children likely to survive to the age of 60.
   Bangladesh’s performance against the Millennium Development Goals (MDG) was also impressive relative to the
   South Asia Region average for most of the indicators.

   2.      Significant human capital development challenges remain as Bangladesh aspires to meet its target of
   eliminating poverty by 2030 and attaining the upper middle-income status by 2031. For example, the learning
   adjusted years of schooling is just 6.5 years due to the poor quality of education, 36 percent of children are
   afflicted by chronic malnutrition, and nearly half of children under five in the poorest wealth quintile are stunted,
   placing significant limits on human capital development.

Apr 22, 2020                                                                                                          Page 3 of 12
           The World Bank
           BD Rural Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for Human Capital Development Project (P169342)




   3.     Bangladesh is highly vulnerable to health hazards, including the COVID-19 pandemic, which may reverse
   the human capital development progress achieved in recent years. The country’s high population density—
   even in rural areas—and weak capacity in managing public health emergencies1 make it prone to high rates of
   morbidity from increasing outbreaks of infectious diseases, including cholera, dengue fever, diphtheria, diarrhea,
   typhoid, and COVID-19. Overall, a large section of the population is at risk of health emergencies.

   4.      Progress toward human capital development can be enhanced partly through coordinated multi-
   sectoral approaches that effectively address the underlying determinants of nutritional status. For example,
   reductions in stunting are more likely to materialize when the multiple contributing factors—such as access to
   health care, childcare practices, and access to water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH)—are adequately addressed
   for a child. WASH plays a critical role in human capital development, the key to achieving the country’s ambition
   of becoming an upper-middle income country by 2021. The Bank’s Bangladesh WASH Poverty Diagnostics
   highlighted the implications of WASH access and quality on the country’s human capital development and
   poverty reduction.2 The poorest, especially women and girls, feel the greatest burdens of inadequate WASH
   because of its negative synergies with other life deprivations such as little income, poor access to health services,
   food insecurity, and low levels of education.

   5.        Access to WASH services in rural Bangladesh improved much over time, but significant challenges
   remain for the government to achieve the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 6 on clean
   water and sanitation. In 2017, about 97 percent of the rural population had access at least to ‘basic’ water
   supply.3 This achievement was largely due to the expansion of tube wells in rural areas, with close to 95 percent
   of rural people using them.4 Meanwhile, the community led total sanitation (CLTS) approach enabled a vast
   majority of the rural population to end open defecation and use sanitation facilities. As a result, access to
   ‘improved’ sanitation increased dramatically from 30 percent to 65 percent in rural areas from 2000 to 2017.5
   Still, significant challenges remain in rural WASH to meet the SDG 6 service standards, which are recommended
   for maximizing human capital outcomes. The challenges include:
   a. Water supply. The proliferation of tube wells has given rise to concerns about: (i) sustainability, where
         excessive withdrawal may threaten water security in the long term; and (ii) water quality as there are few
         practical solutions to regulating and monitoring tube wells against arsenic and fecal contamination. Indeed,
         the rural population using ‘safely-managed’6 water supply barely increased from 59 percent in 2000 to 61


   1 In May 2016, Bangladesh conducted the Joint External Evaluation (JEE) of the International Health Regulations (IHR) core capacities to

   prevent, detect, and rapidly respond to public health threats, whether occurring naturally, or due to deliberate or accidental events.
   Bangladesh scored 2.5 (on a scale of 1 to 5), demonstrating limited capacity to prevent, detect and respond to public health emergencies.
   2 World Bank. 2018. Promising Progress: A Diagnostic of Water Supply, Sanitation, Hygiene, and Poverty in Bangladesh. WASH Poverty

   Diagnostic. World Bank, Washington, DC.
   3 UNICEF and WHO. 2019. Progress on household drinking water, sanitation and hygiene 2000-2017: Special focus on inequalities. New

   York.
   4 World Bank. 2018.

   5 UNICEF and WHO.

   6 UNICEF-WHO Joint Monitoring Programme (JMP) ladders for drinking water and sanitation divide the “improved” category to three

   further rungs: limited, basic, and safely-managed. The safely-managed category is the highest standard and is required to meet the UN’s
   SDG 6. See Annex 8 for further details. United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and World Health Organization (WHO). Joint Monitoring

Apr 22, 2020                                                                                                                             Page 4 of 12
           The World Bank
           BD Rural Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for Human Capital Development Project (P169342)


      percent in 2017.7&8
   b. Sanitation. While low cost options have significantly increased access to ‘improved’ sanitation, in 2017, only
      32 percent of the rural population had access to a ‘safely-managed’ sanitation service, and 35 percent still
      were using ‘unimproved’ sanitation facilities.9 Although inequality in access to at least ‘basic’ sanitation
      services has lessened since 2000,10 the difference between the poorest and richest wealth quintile of the
      population was still stark in 2017, nationally at 23 percent and 75 percent respectively.
   c. Handwashing. Although 86 percent of the rural population has access to a designated handwashing facility,
      only 26 percent has access to facilities that have soap and water.11 Even more concerning is the practice of
      handwashing—only 14 percent of all persons washed both hands with soap after defecation or before
      eating.12
   d. WASH in public places, healthcare facilities, and community secondary schools. Scattered evidence suggests
      that inadequate WASH access in places outside the home is a significant barrier in people’s daily lives. WASH
      in healthcare facilities is of paramount importance due to its implications for health and safety of healthcare
      workers and patrons alike. However, while 86 percent of rural healthcare facilities have access to an
      improved water source, only 42 percent have it on the premises.13 Of the 78 percent of rural healthcare
      facilities that have access to an improved sanitation facility for clients, only 12 percent have designated toilets
      for women.14
   e. Menstrual hygiene. Only 23 percent of women use appropriate menstrual materials, while many repeatedly
      use cloths that are not adequately washed and dried between uses. This is an overlooked path by which
      bacteria might affect women’s health through incidence of urinary tract infections or other complications.
   f.   WASH decision making. Women are under-represented in the sector, and WASH-related decision making is
        often dominated by men. For instance, among the 40 water management groups surveyed in Southwest
        Bangladesh, women accounted for 17-24 percent of water management group representatives, and no
        woman held the high-ranking position of president or treasurer.15
   g. Climate change. The WASH sector in Bangladesh is affected by weather and climate change events,16 which

   Programme for Drinking Water and Sanitation.
   7 UNICEF and WHO.

   8 Access to safe water on the premises decreases to 34 percent at the point of consumption due to contamination during transport and

   storage. BBS / UNICEF. 2015. Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey 2012/13.
   9 UNICEF and WHO.

   10 In 2000, the access rate to at least ‘basic’ sanitation for the poorest wealth quintile was 8 percent, while that for the richest wealth

   quintile was 63 percent.
   11 UNICEF and WHO.

   12 Halder et al. 2010. BMC Public Health 10:545 (http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2458/10/545).

   13 WHO and UNICEF. 2019. WASH in health care facilities: Global baseline report 2019. Geneva.

   14 NIPORT, ACPR and ICF. 2018. Bangladesh Health Facility Survey 2014 & 2017.

   15 Buisson, et al. 2017. The Gender Gap between Water Management and Water Users: Evidence from Southwest Bangladesh. South Asian

   Water Studies 5 (4).
   16 Research to date suggests that sea level rise due to climate change will exacerbate groundwater salinity problems in coastal regions of

   Bangladesh (Talukder, Rutherford, and Chu 2015). This is of particular concern in a country where groundwater provides 95 percent of all
   drinking water (Das Gupta et al. 2005). Studies also suggest that the burden of rising salinity caused by climate change will fall
   disproportionately on the shoulders of the poor. One study found that in just the southwest coastal region, about 2.5 million poor
   (including 1.4 million extreme poor) are already suffering shortages of drinking water, scarcity of water for irrigation for dry-season

Apr 22, 2020                                                                                                                                Page 5 of 12
           The World Bank
           BD Rural Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for Human Capital Development Project (P169342)


        translates into reduced drinking water availability and quality and also lower performance of sanitation and
        hygiene services, exacerbating the issues outlined above. It is vital that that climate resilience becomes
        integral to strategic planning for WASH.


   6.     The current administration’s vision17 to enhance the WASH service standards in rural areas to be
   comparable to those in urban areas is a step in the right direction toward meeting the SDG 6, and a new
   national WASH strategy has been drafted accordingly. This vision has drawn much public attention and allowed
   the Ministry of Local Government, Rural Development, and Cooperatives (MoLGD&C), the ministry in charge of
   the sector, to shift in focus from hand-pumped tube wells to piped water schemes in rural areas, in line with the
   SDG 6 service standards.


   C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

       7. Development Objective(s) (From PAD)
  To (i) improve access to ‘safely-managed’ water supply and sanitation in selected areas of rural Bangladesh; and (ii)
  strengthen sector institutional capacity for water and sanitation.

  The PDO will be evaluated against the following PDO-level indicators:
      (a) The number of people provided with access to ‘safely-managed’ water services;
      (b) The number of people provided with access to ‘safely-managed’ sanitation services; and
      (c) Monitoring system established and in use in project Upazilas (Yes/No).

       8. Key Results

   Through AIIB and Bank financing, it is estimated that about 4.5 million people living in 78 Upazilas in Mymensingh,
   Rangpur, Chittagong, and Sylhet Divisions18 (see Annex 1 and 4) will have access to ‘safely-managed’ WASH
   facilities at home. More people—about 1 million—will have access to ‘safely-managed’ WASH facilities in public
   spaces, including community clinics. Further 2.5 million people are expected to gain access to ‘safely-managed’
   WASH facilities through counterpart funding. The enhanced access to ‘safely-managed’ WASH facilities may
   especially benefit children, women, the vulnerable groups, since they are most susceptible to health
   consequences of non-access and subsequent deprivation of life-long economic and educational opportunities.
   The project will also benefit national and local governments by supporting institutional strengthening activities.
   In addition, the private sector will benefit from the project through increased capital for WASH loans, and market



   agriculture, and significant changes in the coastal aquatic ecosystems.
   17 Dhaka Tribune. 19 August 2018.

   18 Sylhet Division has the highest rate of children suffering from malnutrition and stunted growth, followed by Chittagong. At least 45

   percent of the children below the age of five in Sylhet have stunted growth, while 39 percent are underweight, according to a study titled
   “Undernutrition Maps of Bangladesh 2012.” In Chittagong, 42 percent of the children are suffering from stunted growth and 37 percent
   are underweight, according to the data from the Population and Housing Census 2011, Child and Mother Nutrition Survey 2012, and
   Health and Morbidity Status Survey 2012. Rangpur and Barisal Divisions have the highest poverty rates among the four.


Apr 22, 2020                                                                                                                              Page 6 of 12
          The World Bank
          BD Rural Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for Human Capital Development Project (P169342)


   creating and capacity building activities to deliver ‘safely-managed’ WASH facilities. From COVID-19 emergency
   response, it is estimated that about 700,000 people across Bangladesh will benefit.

   D. Project Description

9. 9. To achieve its objectives, the project will support following six components:

      (a) Component 1: Investments in water supply.
           (i) 1.1: Large piped water schemes will support rural water scarce communities of 300-700 households.
           (ii) 1.2: Small piped water schemes will target rural water scarce communities of 30-120 households,
                where 1-3 schemes will be provided.
           (iii) 1.3: Household loans for water improvements will enable about 60,000 households to borrow from
                 MFIs for household water facility improvements.
           (iv) 1.4: Water supply market development will provide MFI loans to local water entrepreneurs.
           (v) 1.5: Feasibility studies in high climate risk regions will identify sources for drinking water and examine
               technological options and their financial viability in five Districts in Southern Bangladesh.
      (b) Component 2: Investments in sanitation and hygiene.
           (i) 2.1: Public sanitation and hygiene facilities will invest in sanitation and hygiene facilities in high
               pedestrian traffic locations, community health clinics, and non-government schools.
           (ii) 2.2: Sanitation and hygiene facilities for households will provide two-pit latrines and handwashing
                stations to households through MFI loans or grants, depending on their income level.
           (iii) 2.3: Sanitation and hygiene market development will provide MFI loans to local sanitation and hygiene
                 entrepreneurs to expand their businesses and offer them training on proper installation and
                 maintenance of SDG 6 compliant WASH facility products.
           (iv) 2.4: Innovation will help localize innovation WASH technologies, especially in fecal sludge
                management.
           (v) 2.5: Behavioral change communication (BCC) campaign will carry out activities to change WASH
               behaviors and raise WASH awareness and willingness to pay.
      (c) Component 3: Institutional strengthening.
           (i) 3.1: Strengthening of policies and regulatory framework will support drafting policy documents that
               are critical in implementing the newly drafted National Strategy for Water Supply and Sanitation.
           (ii) 3.2: Capacity building will design and deliver a series of multi-year training to targeted central and
                local government officials working in the WASH and converging sectors.
      (d) Component 4: Project implementation and management. This component will support key project
          management activities enabling the DPHE and PKSF to coordinate and implement the proposed project.
      (e) Component 5: COVID-19 emergency response. This component will provide quick, just-in-time WASH
          services where needed, both in and outside the convergence areas, to cope with the fast-changing COVID-
          19 situation.



Apr 22, 2020                                                                                                           Page 7 of 12
          The World Bank
          BD Rural Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for Human Capital Development Project (P169342)


      (f) Component 6: Contingent emergency response (CERC). A provisional zero amount component is
          included, which will allow for rapid reallocation of loan proceeds from other project components during
  .       an emergency.
  .
  Legal Operational Policies
                                                                        Triggered?

   Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                         Yes

   Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60                                  No


  Summary of Assessment of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
  .
          10. Environmental and Social
    The project poses environmental and social (E&S) challenges, but E&S benefits are expected to be significant
    as well. In general, the project interventions are small-scale in nature, so they are not expected to have any
    significant or unmitigable environment and social (E&S) impacts. Key environmental management issues include:
    (i) the contamination of water and soil if the facilities supported are not properly designed and maintained; and
    (ii) the construction related impacts on air, noise, and water if management plans regarding workplace and
    community health and safety are not followed. The project has several implications on the social side, including:
    (i) gender (design, safety, impact on women’s health); (ii) inclusion (addressing the needs of indigenous,
    marginalized and vulnerable communities, culturally sensitized design, easing access to information and finance,
    assistance with repair and maintenance); (iii) land use (common/private property, optimizing access through
    strategic location, resettlement impacts if any); (iv) community health and safety; and (v) the type of labor used
    and associated impacts. If these impacts are well managed, the project is expected to result in better E&S
    outcomes through improved access to ‘safely-managed’ sanitation facilities, leading to better health. Especially
    for women, menstrual hygiene, privacy, security, access and comfort will be greatly improved.

   The proposed project follows the Environmental and Social Framework (ESF), consisting of 10 Environment
   and Social Standards (ESS). The relevant ESS are: ESS1 Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social
   Risks and Impacts; ESS2 Labor and Working Conditions; ESS3 Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and
   Management; ESS4 Community Health and Safety; ESS5 Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and
   Involuntary Resettlement; ESS7 Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional
   Local Communities; ESS8 Cultural Heritage; ESS9 Financial Intermediaries; and ESS10 Stakeholder Engagement
   and Information Disclosure. The required ESF documents—the draft Environmental and Social Commitment Plan
   (ESCP), Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), Financial Intermediary Study, and
   Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)—were prepared and will be disclosed in May 2020 in-country and on the
   Bank’s website. Hard copies of the documents will also be made available in all field offices for project
   implementation. The draft ESCP sets out the appropriate timeframe for plans and actions required for the project
   to meet the ESF requirements. ESF documents that need to be prepared during implementation include specific
   Environment and Social Management Plans and a Labor Management Plan. Given that most of workers will be
   from local areas and based on other project conditions, the gender-based violence (GBV) risk rating for the


Apr 22, 2020                                                                                                        Page 8 of 12
          The World Bank
          BD Rural Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for Human Capital Development Project (P169342)


   project is ‘low.’ To support implementation ESF documents, the project will hire qualified E&S specialists in the
   PMU, ensure adequate budget is allocated, and provide training.



   For environmental and social due diligence, both the DPHE and PKSF will adopt a framework approach. The
   exact locations and various physical activities related to the construction of WASH infrastructure are not
   determined yet, so their impacts cannot be assessed at this stage. Site-specific E&S screening/assessments will
   be required before carrying out any physical works to ensure that it will not negatively affect residents in adjacent
   areas and surrounding environment.

   The project will address a range of gender inequality issues. Gender considerations incorporated in project
   design include the following:
      (a) Improving access to water at home significantly reduces the burden on women for carting water for hand
          washing, bathing, menstrual hygiene management, and the flushing of latrines.
      (b) The project places women at home (rather than men in the marketplace) as the primary decision maker
          on household WASH investments. The provision of a ‘turnkey’ latrine installation service and information
          sessions within credit groups on WASH loans will enable the paradigm shift.
      (c) The design of toilet takes account of female preferences, such as lockable doors and adequate space for
          menstrual hygiene.
      (d) The extension of MFI loans to an estimated 150 women entrepreneurs will help them sell sanitary napkins
          at the doorsteps, improving the menstrual hygiene especially among adolescent girls who are shy to
          purchase them from the market. Support for this industry will also help economic empowerment of
          women.
      (e) The project will promote women’s representation and leadership in water management committees at
          the community level. Women will be encouraged to voice their concerns and ideas about WASH services
          in regular water management committee meetings. Training on the importance of participating and
          voicing in these water management committee meetings will be done through the credit group sessions
          to maximize dissemination.
           The project will have a robust citizen’s engagement approach. Consultations during implementation will
           play a key role in engaging with stakeholders and receiving beneficiary feedback. The project will set up
           grassroot-level committees (e.g., water management committees) to support community participation
           and monitoring. These committees will, for instance, review the performance and effectiveness of the
           piped water schemes and support the functioning of the Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) at the
           community level with the members playing an active role in resolving grievances and generating feedback
           on the progress of the project’s activities. The GRM will link with the project’s web-based monitoring
           platform to collect information on the beneficiary feedback and close the feedback loop with the
           stakeholders. The project will also conduct at least three beneficiary satisfaction surveys, the first at the
           start of the project to establish the baselines, the second by the time of mid-term evaluation and the third,
           at the end of the project, and the satisfaction of the project beneficiaries will be tracked with a beneficiary
           feedback indicator.




Apr 22, 2020                                                                                                            Page 9 of 12
          The World Bank
          BD Rural Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for Human Capital Development Project (P169342)


   E. Implementation

   Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

       11. The Department of Public Health and Engineering and Palli Karma-Sahayak Foundation (PKSF) will be
           the implementing agencies of the project. The project will be managed by two PMUs collaborating
           closely.
       a. DPHE. It will play the main role in the development of public infrastructure under the project. It has
       considerable experience in executing Bank projects, with capacity for design and procurement, construction,
       and commissioning of WASH facilities. The DPHE will be responsible for the construction of piped water
       schemes (Sub-components 1.1 and 1.2), providing public WASH facilities, including in healthcare centers and
       non-government schools (Sub-component 2.1), and offering sanitation grants for the poorest (Sub-
       component 2.2.b). The DPHE will also carry out water supply feasibility studies in high climate risk areas (Sub-
       component 1.5), pilot innovations (Sub-component 2.4), implement most of WASH behavioral change
       communications (BCC) campaign (Sub-component 2.5) and carry out institutional reforms and capacity
       building activities (Sub-component 3). The PMU will comprise a full-time project director, a deputy project
       director, and personnel with specialization in financial management, procurement, monitoring and
       evaluation, environment and social and others, posted from within the DPHE and recruited from the open
       market. The DPHE will be the nodal agency responsible for project reporting.
       b. PKSF. It will play the main role in the development of private assets under the project. It is a ‘not-for-profit’
       financing institution owned by the Ministry of Finance and works with MFIs that offer microcredits to poor
       and non-poor borrowers. The PKSF has considerable experience in managing Bank projects in various sectors
       and recently managed the OBA Sanitation Program. Under this project, the PKSF will use IDA and AIIB
       financing to offer capital to retail MFIs, which in turn will give loans to households to upgrade the WASH
       facilities at their residence in the project areas (Sub-components 1.3 and 2.2.a). In addition, PKSF will extend
       capacity building support to retail MFIs and local entrepreneurs for creating demand and installing SDG 6
       compliant WASH facilities (Sub-components 1.4, 2.3, and 2.5). The PMU will comprise a full-time project
       director and personnel with specialization in financial management, procurement, monitoring and
       evaluation, environment and social and others, posted from within the PKSF and recruited from the open
       market.

   12.    At the national level, a Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be established in the Local Government
   Division (LGD) under the Ministry of Local Government, Rural Development and Cooperatives (MoLGRD&C),
   chaired by the Secretary of the LGD, to provide overall guidance and policy direction. The PSC will meet at least
   twice a year, or more frequently if needed, to take stock of project progress and make course corrections. The
   PSC will consist of representatives from the DPHE, PKSF, the Financial Institutions Division and the Economic
   Relations Division under the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW), and the
   Planning Commission.




Apr 22, 2020                                                                                                            Page 10 of 12
            The World Bank
            BD Rural Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for Human Capital Development Project (P169342)




  .

      CONTACT POINT

      World Bank

      Rokeya Ahmed
      Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

      Aneeka Rahman
      Senior Social Protection Economist

      Deo-Marcel Niyungeko
      Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

      Borrower/Client/Recipient
      People's Republic of Bangladesh
      Monowar Ahmed
      Secretary
      secretary@erd.gov.bd
      Implementing Agencies
      Department of Public Health Engineering (DPHE)
      Md. Saifur Rahman
      Chief Engineer
      ce.dphe@gmail.com

      Palli Karma-Sahayak Foundation (PKSF)
      Fazlul Kader
      Deputy Managing Director
      fazlulkader@gmail.com




Apr 22, 2020                                                                                         Page 11 of 12
          The World Bank
          BD Rural Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for Human Capital Development Project (P169342)



   FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT


   The World Bank
   1818 H Street, NW
   Washington, D.C. 20433
   Telephone: (202) 473-1000
   Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects



   APPROVAL


                                        Rokeya Ahmed
   Task Team Leader(s):                 Aneeka Rahman
                                        Deo-Marcel Niyungeko
   Approved By
   Environmental and Social Standards
   Advisor:
   Practice Manager/Manager:

   Country Director:                    Mercy Miyang Tembon                    28-Jun-2020




Apr 22, 2020                                                                                       Page 12 of 12
