Public Disclosure Authorized

                                 ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL
                               MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK (ESMF)




Public Disclosure Authorized
                               BD RURAL WATER SANITATION AND HYGIENE (WASH)
                                  FOR HUMAN CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT PROJECT



                               DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH ENGINEERING (DPHE)




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   PALLI KARMA SAHAYAK FOUNDATION (PKSF)




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                 April 2020
                                     EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Government of Bangladesh (GoB) intends to implement BD Rural Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for
Human Capital Development Project with financial support from the World Bank (WB) and Asian
Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) to reform institutions and improve WASH services that meet
the ‘safely-managed’ services in line with SDG 6.1 and 6.2 in selected rural areas of Bangladesh.
Department of Public Health Engineering (DPHE) and the Palli Karma Shahyak Foundation (PKSF)
jointly are the Implementing Agencies (IA) of this project.

The Agreement between the World Bank and the AIIB in 2016 (as amended in 2018) stipulats that the
World Bank will supervise the project and administer both IDA and the AIIB loans in accordance with
the World Bank’s policies and procedures. World Bank’s Environmental and Social Framework (ESF)
will be applied and AIIB will rely on the ESF and World Bank’s due diligence to assess and manage ES
risks and impacts. All E&S assessments and documents will be prepared as per the ESF and the World
Bank would review the same.

Along with WB ESF requirements, the project also needs to comply with the national environmental
regulations in accordance to the Environmental Conservation Act 1997 (GoB, 1997). As specific
project locations and the specific sub-projects (including sub-project sites and design ) are yet to be
identified, a framework approach has been adopted through the development of this Environmental
and Social Management Framework (ESMF). The ESMF illustrates policies, procedures and directives
on how to assess specific ES risks and provide guidance to mitigate them. The ESMF also provides
guidelines for screening of sub-projects for ES risks and assessment of Borrower’s capacity and
institutional requirements. During implementation, site-specific ES assessments will be carried out
in accordance ESMF, which will be prepared and implemented prior to the commencement of the
specific work.

The project has provision for large scale piped water schemes for around 78 water scarce
communities of 300-700 households in around 78 Upazilas of 18 Districts of 4 divisions
(Mymenshingh, Rangpur, Chattogram and Sylhet) in Bangladesh, whose specific locations are not
known yet. It has also small piped water schemes for 3,000 water scarce communities of 30-40
households. Sanitation facilities with two-pit latrine will also be provided under the project. The
Project has further schemes to enable about 40,000 households to borrow from Micro Finance
Institutions (MFIs) for household water facility improvements. Vulnerable people will be provided
free of cost sanitation facilities.

The project has five major components:
Component 1: for Investments in water supply to support around 78 piped water schemes for water
scarce communities of 300-700 households; 3,000 water scarce communities of 30-40 households;
loans through MFIs for water improvements to about 40,000 households and local water
entrepreneurs; and feasibility studies in high climate risk regions to identify sources for drinking
water and examine technological options and their financial viability in five Districts in Southern
Bangladesh.
Component 2: for Investments in sanitation and hygiene to improve public sanitation and hygiene
facilities in high pedestrian traffic locations, community health clinics, and non-government schools;
two-pit latrines and hand washing stations to households through MFI loans or grants, depending on
their income level; MFI loans to local sanitation and hygiene entrepreneurs to expand their businesses
and offer them training on proper installation and maintenance of SDG-6 compliant WASH facility
products; localize innovation WASH technologies, especially in faecal sludge management; and
                                                                                           2|Page
Behavioral change communication (BCC) campaign to change WASH behaviors and raise WASH
awareness and willingness to pay tariff.
Component 3: Institutional strengthening will support drafting policy documents that would be
critical in implementing the newly drafted National Strategy for Water Supply and Sanitation;
capacity building through multi-year training to targeted central and local government officials
working in the WASH sector.
Component 4: Project implementation and management will support key project management
activities enabling the DPHE and PKSF to coordinate and implement the proposed project.
Component 5: Emergency response COVID-19 emergency response will provide quick, just-in-time
WASH services where needed to cope with the fast changing COVID-19 situation; contingent
emergency response component (CERC) will allow for rapid reallocation of loan proceeds from other
project components during an emergency.

During preparation of this ESMF, potential beneficiaries and local stakeholders including Union
Parishad, Upazila Parishad, MFIs were consulted, and their opinions were sought about the potentials
risks and mitigation measures. Prior to COVID-19 related restrictions on movement were put in place,
four stakeholder consultation meetings were held at Chattogram, Mymensingh and Rangpur
divisions, instead of planned nine meetings. Opinion/concerns of the stakeholders, to the extent
consulted, have been considered in this ESMF. Relevant information on COVID-19 following the
WHO guideline were delivered to the people including guidance on regular hand washing, social
distancing, behavioural change, isolation, etc. The Project has developed a Stakeholder Engagement
Plan (SEP) proportionate to the nature and scale of the project and its potential risks and impacts.
Considering the project nature, location, magnitude of impacts, etc. potential risks and mitigation
measures have been suggested in this ESMF following the Word Bank ESF.

The anticipated environmental risks of the project will emanate from water contamination, discharge
of sludge and untreated sewage. The anticipated major social risks will mostly be associated with
exclusion of certain vulnerable groups and individuals and community health and safety issues. The
proposed sanitation activities reduces open defecation, which is of significant importance. Without
the project, the current practice of unhygienic and random disposal of fecal waste leads to pollution
of natural resources and affects human health. Construction related impacts (noise, air and water
pollution) will also need to be managed with proven best practices. The ESMF addresses these areas
to propose policies and procedures regarding mitigation measures and recommends modalities to
maximize project benefits for the target population by aligning the project design with the socio-
cultural and context specific needs of communities. The expected ES impacts can be mitigated
through implementation of appropriate environmental code of practice and ES management plans.
Given the COVID-19 pandemic IA will need to put adequate measures for workers as well as local
communities where project will be implemented so that spread of the virus does not deter the project
implementation. Considering the ES risks and impacts associated with the proposed project
activities, and the implementing agencies relevant past experience and capacity in managing
identified risks, the overall ES risk of the project is rated Moderate.

Before implementation of Sub-projects, they be screened to get an idea about the degree and extent
of potential risks and impacts, which will subsequently be used to assess the need for further ES
assessment. The screening would involve: (i) reconnaissance of the sub-project area and its
surroundings (ii) identification of the major sub-project risks; and (iii) preliminary assessment of the
impacts of these activities on the ecological, physicochemical and socio-economic environment of
the sub-project surrounding areas.


                                                                                            3|Page
In line with the requirement of ESF, a Stakeholders Engagement plan (SEP), Labor Management
Procedure (LMP), environmental and social commitment plan (ESCP) have been developed. Apart
from these, a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) for the potential affected and beneficiary groups
have been designed. A separate GRM to deal with labor issues has been formulated. A specific section
on COVID19 risks and awareness has also been formulated in the LMP. It is ensured in the ESMF that
the labor and others associated with the WASH project implementation will be trained on COVID-19
protocols.

DPHE and PKSF, the two Implementing Agencies (IAs) of the project will have two separate Project
Management Units (PMU). DPHE will play the main role in the development of public infrastructure
under the project. DPHE will be responsible for supporting piped water schemes, providing public
WASH facilities, including in healthcare centers and community secondary schools, and offering
sanitation grants for the poorest and other associated activities as per terms and condition. The PMU
at DPHE will comprise a full-time project director, a deputy project director, and personnel with
specialization in financial management, procurement, monitoring and evaluation, ES and others,
posted from within the DPHE and recruited from the open market.
PKSF will play the main role in the development of private assets under the project. Under this
project, PKSF will be responsible for offering wholesale capital to retail MFIs, which in turn will give
loans to households to upgrade the WASH facilities at their home in the project areas. In addition,
PKSF will extend capacity building support to retail MFIs and local entrepreneurs for creating demand
and installing SDG-6 compliant WASH facilities. The PMU at PKSF will comprise a full-time project
director and personnel with specialization in financial management, procurement, monitoring and
evaluation, ES and others, posted from within the PKSF or recruited from the open market.
At the national level, a project steering committee (PSC) will be established in the Local Government
Department (LGD) under the Ministry of Local Government, Rural Development and Cooperative
(MoLGRD&C), chaired by the Secretary of the LGD, to provide overall guidance and policy direction.
The PSC will consist of representatives from the DPHE, PKSF, the Financial Institutions Division and
the Economic Relations Division (ERD) under the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare (MoHFW), and the Planning Commission. The Department of Environment (DoE) will
approve subprojects.
Union Parishad (UPs) and Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW) will also be involved in the
project design and implementation process. Enhancing the sense of ownership and capacity of UPs
to plan, deliver, and manage WASH services is a top priority.
Capacity assessment of the IAs have been carried out for implementing ES obligations as well as
capacity development measures like manpower and training also have been recommended in the
ESMF.




                                                                                            4|Page
                                    ABBREVIATIONS
ARIPA   Acquisition and Requisition of       GRM     Grievance Redress Mechanism
        Immovable Property Act
BBS     Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics      HSSP    Health Sector Support Project
BCC     Behavioral Change Communication      IEE     Initial Environmental Examination
BDT     Bangladeshi Taka                     IFC     International Finance Corporation
BOT     Build-Operate-Transfer               IPF     Informed, Prior, Free
CBO     Community Based Organization         KFAED   Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic
                                                     Development
CER     Contingent Emergency Response        LE      Local Enterprise
                                             LGD     Local Government Division
CGR     Central Grievance Redress            LGR     Local Grievance Redress
DBO     Design, Build, Operate               MFI     Micro Finance Institution
DMD     Deputy Managing Director
DoE     Department of Environment            NOC     No Objection Certificate
DPHE    Department of Public Health          O&M     Operation and Maintenance
        Engineering
DPO     Development Policy Operation         OHS     Occupational Health and Safety
ECA     Environmental Conservation Act       PDO     Project Development Objective
ECR     Environment Conservation Rules       PIM     Public Investment Management
EHS     Environment Health Safety            PKSF    Palli Karma-Sahayak Foundation
EHSGs   Environmental, Health, and Safety    PMU     Project Management Unit
        Guidelines
EIA     Environmental Impact Assessment      PO      Partner Organization
ES      Environmental and Social             PPE     Personal Protective Equipment
ESCP    Environmental and Social
        Commitment Plan
ESF     Environmental and Social             SCP     Social Commitment Plan
        Framework
ESMF    Environmental and Social             SDC     Swedish Development Corporation
        Management Framework
ESMP    Environmental and Social             SDG     Sustainable Development Goal
        Management Plan
ESS     Environmental and Social Standards   SEA     Strategic Environmental Assessment
FIs     Financial Intermediaries             SEP     Stakeholder Engagement Plan
GHG     Green House Gas                      TA      Technical Assistance
                                             TPP     Tribal Peoples Plan
GRC     Grievance Redress Committee          UP      Union Parishad
GoB     Government of Bangladesh             WASH    Water, Sanitation and Hygiene
GR      Grievance Register                   WB      World Bank




                                                                                 5|Page
                                 TABLE OF CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                              2
ABBREVIATION                                                                   5
INTRODUCTION AND PROJECT DESCRIPTION                                           8
          Background                                                           8
          Project Description                                                  8
          Purpose of the ESMF                                                  14
          Methodology                                                          15
          Analysis of Alternative                                              15
LEGAL REGULATORY AND ADMINISTRATIVE FRAMEWORK                                  17
          Introduction                                                         17
          Review of National Environmental & Social Acts, Rules, Polices and   17
          Strategies
          World Bank’s Environmental and Social Framework (ESF)                20
          World Bank Groups Environment, Health and Safety Guidelines          21
          (EHSG) AND SOCIAL BASELINE DATA
ENVIRONMENTAL                                                                  23
          Land Environment                                                     23
          Physical Environment                                                 23
          Biological Environment                                               33
          Social Environment                                                   34
          Hazard and Vulnerability Profile                                     36
IDENTIFICATION OF POTENTIAL IMPACTS AND MITIGATION MEASURES                    38
          General                                                              38
          Potential Environmental Impact                                       38
          Typical Environmental Mitigation Measures                            39
          Potential Social Impact                                              41
          Social Mitigation Measures                                           41
STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT AND INFORMATION DISCLOSURE                              43
          Introduction                                                         43
          Stakeholder Identification and Analysis                              43
          Engagement Methods and Tools in Light of Covid-19 Outbreak           44
          Information Disclosure Method                                        44
          World Bank Grievance Redress Service (GRS)                           45
METHODOLOGICAL FRAMEWORK FOR ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL                          47
MANAGEMENT

          Introduction                                                         47
          Overall Procedure                                                    47
          Subproject Screening and Categorization                              48
          Environmental and Social Management Procedure                        49
          Monitoring and Evaluation Measures                                   49
          Environmental and Social Instruments                                 50
          Budget Estimate for ESMP Implementation                              51
INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK AND CAPACITY ASSESSMENT                                52
          Institutional Framework and Roles in Project Implementation          52
          Roles and Responsibilities of Key Organisations                      53
          Assessment of Capacity of Implementing Agencies                      55


                                                                                    6|Page
            Action Plan to Strengthen Staffing, Capacity, Systems and      55
            Implementation

Annex A List of Upazilas for Project Intervention                          58

Annex B Environmental and Social Screening Checklist and Negative List     60

Annex C Initial Environmental Examination (IEE)                            62

Annex D Social Impact Assessment Screening Datasheet                       64

Annex E Sample Environmental And Social Management Plan (ESMP)             65

TABLES

    1. ESF Requirement and Relevance with the Project                      19
    2. Land Areas of Different Flood Phases                                22
    3. Variation on Deep Groundwater Levels in Project Districts in 2018   26
    4. Main Districts with Haor Areas                                      29
    5. Demographic Information of the Project Area                         32
    6. Drinking Water Facilities in the Project Area                       32
    7. Sanitation and Hygiene Facilities in the Project Areas              33
    8. Procedure for Moderate Risk Sub Projects                            49
    9. Tentative Cost Estimates for ESMP                                   51
    10. Roles and Responsibilities of Various Entities                     53
    11. Capacity Development Support (Training)                            56




                                                                                7|Page
                        INTRODUCTION AND PROJECT DESCRIPTION
Background

Bangladesh has seen significant progress on reducing extreme poverty and boosting shared
prosperity, especially through human development. Nevertheless, significant human capital
development challenges remain as the country aspires to meet its target of eliminating poverty by
2030 and attaining upper middle-income status by 2031. With 63 percent of the population living in
rural areas, the population in Bangladesh is predominantly rural, so continued investment in rural
areas is important to realize the country’s human capital potential.

The Bank’s Bangladesh Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) Poverty Diagnostics highlighted the
implications of WASH access and quality on the country’s human capital development and poverty
reduction. It points out with more than one-third of children under five stunted and their ability to
grow and learn subsequently limited, Bangladesh is not achieving its fullest potential. This is because
children’s inability to grow to their full physical and cognitive potential may have long-lasting effects
on their future schooling and earnings, in turn reducing productivity through the associated costs of
healthcare and time loss placed on the individual and their households. The poorest, especially poor
women and girls, feel the greatest burdens of inadequate WASH because of its negative synergies
with other life deprivations such as little income, poor access to health services, food insecurity, and
low levels of education. In particular, menstrual hygiene practices can have impact on girls’ health
and human capital since times of menstruation can prevent some girls from attending school. Over
time, evidence has suggested that successful WASH interventions may improve overall health and
reduce stunting in children under-5 years of age. This occurs through multiple pathways that include:
(i) fewer episodes of diarrheal disease; (ii) improved gut health; (iii) reductions in protozoa and
helminthic infection; and (iv)reductions in anaemia. Furthermore, quality WASH services are an
essential part of preventing disease and protecting human health during infectious disease
outbreaks. Easy access to clean and reliable water supply is needed for hand washing and cleaning
and disinfecting surfaces where germs and viruses settle. Hand washing with soap is one of the most
important things to slow infectious diseases, such as diarrhoea, cholera, typhoid, and COVID-19. The
Project is planned to address the given issues above.

Project Description

The Project aims to enhance living standards, overall environmental and social status of the project
area and its population by strengthening water supply and sanitation system. The Project
Development Objectives are to: (i) improve access and quality of water supply, sanitation, and
hygiene (WASH) services in selected areas of rural Bangladesh; and (ii) strengthen sector policy and
institutional capacity for delivery of Sustainable Development Goal (SDG)-6 on clean water and
sanitation.

The project encompasses five main components:

Component 1: Investments in water supply.

        (i)  1.1: Large piped water schemes will support 78 piped water schemes for water scarce
        communities of 300-700 households.


                                                                                             8|Page
       (ii)  1.2: Small piped water schemes will target 3,000 water scarce communities of 30-40
       households.
       (iii)   1.3: Household loans for water improvements will enable about 40,000 households
       to borrow from MFIs for household water facility improvements.
       (iv)   1.4: Water supply market development will provide MFI loans to local water
       entrepreneurs.
       (v)    1.5: Feasibility studies in high climate risk regions will identify sources for drinking
       water and examine technological options and their financial viability in five Districts in
       Southern Bangladesh.
Component 2: Investments in sanitation and hygiene.

       (i)       2.1: Public sanitation and hygiene facilities will invest in sanitation and hygiene
       facilities in high pedestrian traffic locations, community health clinics, and non-government
       schools.
       (ii)   2.2: Sanitation and hygiene facilities for households will provide two-pit latrines and
       handwashing stations to households through MFI loans or grants, depending on their income
       level.
       (iii)   2.3: Sanitation and hygiene market development will provide MFI loans to local
       sanitation and hygiene entrepreneurs to expand their businesses and offer them training on
       proper installation and maintenance of SDG 6 compliant WASH facility products.
       (iv)   2.4: Innovation will help localize innovation WASH technologies, especially in faecal
       sludge management.
       (v)    2.5: Behavioral change communication (BCC) campaign will carry out activities to
       change WASH behavior and raise WASH awareness and willingness to pay.
Component 3: Institutional strengthening.
       (i)    3.1: Strengthening of policies and regulatory framework will support drafting policy
       documents that would be critical in implementing the newly drafted National Strategy for
       Water Supply and Sanitation.
       (ii)   3.2: Capacity building will design and deliver a series of multi-year training to
       targeted central and local government officials working in the WASH sector.
Component 4: Project implementation and management. This component will support key project
management activities enabling the DPHE and PKSF to coordinate and implement the proposed
project.
Component 5: Emergency response.
       (i)    5.1: COVID-19 emergency response will provide quick, just-in-time WASH services
       where needed to cope with the fast changing COVID-19 situation.
       (ii)     5.2: Contingent emergency response (CERC). A provisional zero amount component
       is included, which will allow for rapid reallocation of loan proceeds from other project
       components during an emergency. To trigger this component, the GoB would need to
       declare an emergency, a state of a disaster or provide a statement of fact justifying the
       request for the activation of the use of emergency funding. Annex B covers list of subproject
       that will not be eligible under CERC.




                                                                                          9|Page
This project will be implemented in around 78 Upazilas in 18 Districts (list at Annex A and map
provided below), where site specific information are not known yet. The Upazilas were chosen based
on levels of water availability and quality, WASH coverage, and quality of MFI services.




                                                                                      10 | P a g e
Through this project, it is estimated that about 3.4 million people living in 78 Upazilas in Mymensingh,
Rangpur, Chittagong, and Sylhet Divisions will have better access to ‘safely-managed’ WASH
facilities in their home, and more people will have access to ‘safely-managed’ WASH facilities in
public spaces and health facilities. Further 2.6 million people are expected to gain access to ‘safely-
managed’ WASH facilities through a revolving fund that would be set up by PKSF using the capital
provided by the project. The enhanced access to ‘safely-managed’ WASH facilities may especially
benefit children, women, the vulnerable groups, since they are most susceptible to health
consequences of non-access and subsequent deprivation of life-long economic and educational
opportunities.

The project will also benefit national and local governments by supporting institutional reforms and
capacity building activities. In addition, the private sector will benefit from the project through
increased capital for WASH loans, and market creating and capacity building activities to deliver
‘safely-managed’ WASH facilities.

The most vulnerable people in project locations will be identified using the convergence approach.
They include households with children under five and the poorest households, the latter of whom are
important to achieve 100 percent sanitation coverage in project locations and, therefore, will receive
the sanitation grants. The Project will also support provision of mini water supply with hand wash
facilities in around 700 locations of 5 Districts of Bangladesh to address COVID-19 issues.

The Project will be funded by IDA ($200 million), Asian Infrastructure Development Bank (AIIB) ($200
million and the Borrowing Agency ($143.40 million). The Agreement between the Bank with the AIIB
in 2016 (as amended in 2018) stipulates that WB will supervise the Project and administer both IDA
and the AIIB loans in accordance with the WB’s policies and procedures. Accordingly, it was agreed
with AIIB that a common approach will be applied to the whole program/corridor regardless of source
of financing. In this case, the WB’s ESF will be applied and AIIB will rely on the ESF and Bank’s due
diligence to assess and manage ES risks and impacts. All preparation assessments and documents
would be prepared as per the ESF and the Bank would review the same. The ESCP will record both
the GoB’s commitment to apply the ESF to the AIIB-financed works and to facilitate and support
supervision which will be carried out by WB and AIIB. There will be a single Grievance Redressal
Mechanism (GRM) covering the project.

In Component 1, the project plans to replace existing hand pumps with electric tube well pumps—
using solar power where feasible—combined with water treatment and nonstop pressurized piped
water supply with fully subsidized household connections. Typical scheme setup is shown in the
figure below. Sub-component 1.1 will target 78 water scarce communities of 300-700 households
(1,350-3,150 people) and provide piped water to rural homes. The unit cost per schemes is estimated
at US$450,000-500,000. There will be two implementation modalities:
(i) For a majority of the schemes, the DPHE will procure consultancies to design and supervise the
    construction of rural water schemes and subsequently engage operators to build-and-operate
    (BO) water schemes for seven years. The asset ownership will lie with the UPs, which will be
    responsible for securing the land for water infrastructure with support from a Technical Assistance
    (TA) firm. Economies of scale especially in the service provision of rural water schemes are
    essential. Such efficiencies and proportionate savings will be gained by clustering up to 20
    schemes into one service contract.
(ii) To pilot design, build, and operate (DBO) contracts, one cluster of water schemes under this sub-
     component will be procured via the DBO delivery model in which a single contractor/operator is

                                                                                           11 | P a g e
    appointed to design-and-build rural water schemes and then operate it for seven years. The DBO
    firm could be a social business enterprise, or a consortium of NGOs and contractors. The DBO firm
    will be responsible for O&M of the cluster of water schemes.




Sub-component 1.2 will target about 1,300-1,700 communities with severe safe water shortages and
water quality problems. Around 3,000 small piped water schemes, 1-3 schemes per community, will
be invested, each serving 30-40 households (135-180 people). The unit cost per small scheme is
estimated at US$12,500-15,000. As per government policy, the community will be responsible for
contributing an upfront payment of BDT7,000 (around US$82) in addition to the monthly water tariffs.
To enhance the financial and operational sustainability, expedite project implementation, and fully
benefit from economies of scale, design-build-operate (DBO) contracting will be used in clusters of 20-
40 schemes per contract.

Sub-component 1.3 will enable a targeted 60,000 households to borrow capital to upgrade their water
facilities on the premises, for example for hand washing and bathing. This may also comprise the
electrification of the existing shallow and deep bores currently fitted with suction or positive
displacement hand pumps. The PKSF will develop certified quality household water and wastewater
plumbing standards (to be approved by the DPHE) and train Local Enterprises (LEs) to install facilities
to this standard. By the end of the project period, at least 80 percent of the MFIs will be required to
issue a water loan policy and allocate some of their own capital to household water loans. Further
60,000 households are expected to borrow US$17.6 million from the revolving fund, which will be
established using the household loan repayments.

Component 2 will focus on providing quality assured, climate resilient latrines and promoting
hygiene, including through provision of hand washing stations. This will be achieved through
interventions both in the public and private sectors. While low cost options have significantly
increased access to ‘improved’ sanitation, in 2017, only 32 percent of the rural population had access
to a ‘safely-managed’ sanitation service, and 35 percent still were using ‘unimproved’ sanitation



                                                                                          12 | P a g e
         facilities.1 Although inequality in access to at least ‘basic’ sanitation services has lessened since 2000,2
         the difference between the poorest and richest wealth quintile of the population was still stark in
         2017, nationally at 23 percent and 75 percent respectively. Access to piped sewerage collection in
         rural areas is less than 1 percent, and there is no available household data on on-site faecal sludge
         management (FSM), such as information on pit or septic tank emptying practices or waste disposal
         and treatment. When offset pit latrines have two alternating pits, the pit that is offline can neutralize
         the pathogens given sufficient time, enabling the safe removal of the faecal sludge following WHO
         guidelines.3 Adherence to the twin alternating offset pit latrine standard, along with the provision of
         training to households and local entrepreneurs on the correct procedures for O&M and safe disposal
         of faecal sludge, is considered to facilitate compliance to the SDG 6.2 ‘safely-managed’ sanitation
         service standard. However, it is believed most of the faecal sludge is not properly disposed in rural
         areas, and consequently, contamination of shallow ground water tables and of surface water bodies
         is a significant policy concern.

         Sub-component 2.1 will target 312 public toilet facilities in high pedestrian traffic locations, such as
         markets and bus station. Also, about 1,280 community clinics will receive support for renovation or
         new construction of their WASH facilities, both for patrons and medical purposes. Works will include
         the delivery of a quality source of piped water for hand washing, sanitation, and hygiene. Sub-
         component will finance ‘safely-managed’ sanitation and hygiene facilities for households. This will
         prioritize twin offset pit latrines which facilitate the safe management of faecal sludge and may also
         include hand washing, bathing, and drainage facilities. The PKSF will develop certified quality latrine
         facility standards (to be approved by the DPHE), train LEs to install facilities to this standard, and
         oversee two-step standards verification. Households will receive two different types of support based
         on their income level. The provision of a US$117.6 million capital loan by the government to the PKSF
         will enable a targeted 500,000 households to install twin offset pit latrines and hygiene facilities.
         Households will receive a rebate for the cost of the second pit as an incentive. By the end of the
         project period, at least 80 percent of MFIs will be required to issue a sanitation and hygiene loan policy
         and allocate capital to household sanitation and hygiene loans. Further 500,000 households are
         expected to borrow US$117.6 million from the revolving fund, which will be established using capital
         from the Bank and PKSF. Also, grants will be provided for fully subsidized toilets to about 304,000
         poorest households (around 10 percent of the total households in the project locations). Sub-
         component 2.3 will facilitate MFI partners to lend an estimated US$7.1 million to 4,000 LEs to expand
         their capacity to respond to the increased household demand for latrine facilities. The PKSF will train
         LEs to install certified sanitation facilities and expand the business models of builders, masons, and
         hardware shops to offer turn-key sanitation facilities at households’ doorstep. The PKSF is also
         targeting the extension of loans to an estimated 150 women entrepreneurs to market and sell
         sanitary napkins for menstrual hygiene management.

         Sub-component 4.1 will include the establishment a WASH PMU within the DPHE including: the
         engagement of seven staff (financial management, engineering, hydrogeologist, environmental,
         social, procurement, M&E specialists) and resources for management of the project; a total of 12
         district coordinators with resources for project monitoring; and resources for improving water quality


1
    UNICEF and WHO.
2
  In 2000, the access rate to at least ‘basic’ sanitation for the poorest wealth quintile was 8 percent, while that for the
richest wealth quintile was 63 percent.
3
  WHO. 2006. Guidelines for the safe use of wastewater excreta and greywater. Volume IV: Excreta and Greywater Use
in Agriculture. Geneva: World Health Organization (WHO).
                                                                                                             13 | P a g e
monitoring by DPHE laboratories in the project areas. Firms and/or individual consultants will be
engaged for assignments that include the development of monitoring software and dashboard
(including the training of PMU, UP staff, TA firms, contractors, and LEs); the design/supervision of
piped water schemes and public toilets; the development of piped water system monitoring
software/dashboard (including water quality) and training PMU, UP staff and LEs; the development
of baseline and end-line monitoring of ‘safely-managed’ WASH status; the development of water
quality laboratory monitoring systems; and an impact evaluation examining correlation between
‘safely-managed’ WASH investments and human capital outcomes.

Sub-component 4.2 will include: the establishment a WASH PMU within the PKSF including the
engagement of estimated eight staff (engineering, environmental, social, procurement, and MIS
specialists) for project implementation; the part-time deployment of a project director and three
deputy project directors of audit, finance, and projects; and five independent verification consultants
with resources for field visits, verification, and mobile monitoring. Firms and/or individual consultants
will be engaged for assignments that include: the development of monitoring software and
dashboard (including the training of PMU, MFIs, and independent verification personnel); the
detailed design of the household water and sanitation facility standards (in compliance with SDG 6.1
and 6.2); the development of behavior change communication materials (including the training of
PMU and MFI staff, LEs, and UPs); the engagement of firms to support the development of mobile
phone monitoring software and dashboard; periodic review meetings and experience the sharing of
good practices; and the undertaking of annual financial audits.

Purpose of the ESMF

As specific project locations and the specific sub-projects (including sub-project sites and design ) are
yet to be identified, a framework approach has been adopted through the development of an
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). The framework for carrying out ES
assessment of sub-projects to be implemented under the project has been prepared based on an
overall ES assessment of the prelimenery selected sub-projects ares. This Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) is an integral part of the project document.

The ESMF illustrates policy, procedure and directives on how to assess specific ES risks and provide
guidance to mitigate them. The ESMF also provides guidelines for screening of sub-projects for ES
risks and assessment of Borrower’s capacity and institutional requirements. During implementation,
site-specific ES assessments will be carried out in accordance ESMF, which will be prepared and
implemented prior to the commencement of the specific work. The site specific assessments will help
adoption of mitigation measures against the ES risk and impacts (through preparation of ESMP) and
to address the issues of inclusion, social vulnerability of certain groups, gender and GBV, consultation
and communication strategy and any other issues identified via the assessment and the stakeholder
consultations.

The main purposes of this ESMF are to:

    •   Provide tools and guidelines for environmental and social (ES) risk categorization of all the
        sub-projects to be implemented under the project for which detail information are not
        available at this stage
    •   Set out the detailed procedures to be followed for various sub-project categories to assess
        and manage ES risks



                                                                                            14 | P a g e
    •   Consider in an integrated manner, the potential ES risks, benefits and impacts of the project
        and help identify measures to avoid, minimize and manage risks and impacts while
        enhancing benefits
    •   Ensure all relevant ES issues are mainstreamed into the design and implementation of the
        sub-projects
    •   Provide guidance for preparation of various Environmental and Social Framework (ESF)
        related instruments
    •   Provide guidance for ensuring stakeholder engagement at various stages of sub-project
        implementation.

Once details of the project sites/ subprojects are available at later stages of the project, the need for
and type of ES assessments and management plans, will be reviewed, according to World Bank (WB)
policies and Government of Bangladesh (GoB) legislation.

Methodology

The methodology followed in preparing the ESMF consists of the following steps:

    •   Review Project documents and meeting/discussions with various stakeholders including IAs
        and the WB
    •   Review policy and regulatory requirements
    •   Initial scoping and screening to determine the key ES parameters and aspects that are likely
        to be impacted by the Project activities
    •   Collection and analysis of baseline ES data, with the help of secondary literature review, and
        field data collection
    •   Consultations with the stakeholders including beneficiary/ affected communities and
        developing the consultation process
    •   Review the potential and likely impacts of the program activities and carrying out the
        screening of the sub-project
    •   Outline the detailed procedures to be followed to comply with the WB and GoB rules and
        regulations including preparation of various ES documents, monitoring mechanism,
        stakeholder engagement, disclosure requirement, grievance redress and institutional
        arrangement.

Analysis of Alternatives

An analysis of alternatives is presented below for the following scenario: with/ without project
alternative.

At present, the water and sanitation services in the project areas are in poor condition and access to
clean water and sewage services and sanitation is limited. This leads to high incidence of intestinal
helminths, diarrhea and other water and sanitation related diseases. In areas without water supply
systems, people use water from a variety of sources such as rivers, irrigation canals, and transported
water by van etc. Especially in summer when the river water sources dry up, people use irrigation
canals which can have contaminated water. The concept of safe sanitation is missing—rural residents
construct pit latrines and manage sanitation issues on their own. In comparison to this situation, it
can be expected that the project would improve the health conditions of the local population in the
target area and also decrease unnecessary hard work (particularly for women and youth) caused by
transporting water, sometimes over long distances. The importance of improved water supply was
also highlighted by the local authorities and other stakeholders participating in various project

                                                                                            15 | P a g e
stakeholder engagement events. Further, construction of twin pit latrines instead of present open
defecation/ rural latrine would also bring about better hygiene and safe disposal of human waste.

However, water usage efficiency and septage transportation etc. should be given focus too to ensure
resource efficiency and community health and safety issues.

In conclusion, it is clear that the project implementation would improve access to safe water to the
population of the selected sites as well as provide better alternatives through use of twin pit latrines
and provision of household loan to setup the same. If potential ES problems can be further reduced
in accordance with the mitigation to be defined in later stages of the project (ES assessments and
management plans), the project would improve the water supply and sanitation and hygiene sector
in the area.




                                                                                           16 | P a g e
               LEGAL, REGULATORY AND ADMINISTRATIVE FRAMEWORK

Introduction


The nation is committed to socio-economic development through sustainable natural resources
management and environmental conservation. GoB has already incorporated environment and
biodiversity conservation in its constitution in the 15th amendment (act no. 14 of 2011). GoB also
revised National Environmental Policy, 1992 and Environmental Conservation Rules (ECR), 1997 and
adopted Environmental Conservation Acts in 1995. The National Environment Policy has integrated
other sector’s policies and those policies also integrated national environment policy as cross-cutting
issue. Social policy regarding Labor Laws/Act, laws regarding women’s rights, laws addressing
contagious diseases etc. also come in to application in this project. Further WB’s Environment and
Social Framework (ESF) and Environment, Health and Safety Guidelines (EHSG) have their
applicability in the project. A review of these policies and legal instruments are presented in this
section.

Review of National Environmental & Social Acts, Rules, Polices and Strategies

        Constitution of Bangladesh (Relevant sections)
        Article 18A of the constitution of Bangladesh recognized the environmental conservation and
        natural resources management for the betterment of its present and future citizen. This
        article stated as “The State shall endeavour to protect and improve the environment and to
        preserve and safeguard the natural resources, bio-diversity, wetlands, forests and wild life for
        the present and future citizens”.

        National Environmental Policy, 2018
        The policy has identified twenty four sectors of different attributes to ensure environmental
        conservation and management. ‘Safe food and water’ and ‘Public Health and Health Services’
        are the two important sectors among them that the policy focuses on. This two sectors are
        closely linked with this project. ‘Safe food and water’ sector puts emphasis on ensuring
        healthy and environment friendly production, processing, storage, transportation, marketing
        etc. of food, water and other dinks. It also prohibits establishment of industries and waste
        discharge point and waste dumping centres, sanitary land fill etc. which are closed to water
        sources. The National Environment Policy recognizes that clean environment is the pre-
        requisite of good health. Hence, it includes environmental conservation issues related to
        plans, policies and other programs for the sake of public health in the country.

        Environmental Conservation Act, 1995 (amended, 2010)
        This umbrella Act includes laws for conservation of the environment, improvement of
        environmental standards, and control and mitigation of environmental pollution. It is
        currently the main legislative framework document relating to environmental protection in
        Bangladesh, which repealed the earlier Environment Pollution Control ordinance of 1977.

        Environmental Conservation Rules (ECR), 1997 (amended, 2020)
        The Environment Conservation Rules (ECR), 1997 and its amendment in 2010 provide a first
        set of rules under the ECA, 1995. These provide standards and guidelines for requirement for

                                                                                           17 | P a g e
undertaking Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) and Environmental Impact Assessment
(EIA), as well as formulating an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) according to
categories of industries/development projects/activities. It is to be noted that the
Department of Environment (DoE) will review/ approve few of each types of subprojects.
Remaining subprojects will follow DoE guidelines accordingly. ESIA and ESMP will be
reviewed by WB ES teams. Rule 7 of ECR has classified projects into Green, Orange A, Orange
B and Red category basing on Environmental risk. Environmental Clearance Certificate is
issued for projects of Green Category by Department of Environment (DoE) without a need
for Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA). For other category projects, location clearance
certificate followed by issuance of Environmental Clearance Certificate upon satisfactory
submission of the required documents is necessary. Figure below shows the process of
application leading to environmental clearance for all four categories of projects. It may be noted
that all subprojects in the project are either Green or Orange Cat A category.




                                                                                     18 | P a g e
National Health Policy (NHP) 2011
National Health Policy (NHP) 2011 views access to health as a part of recognized human
rights. In order to achieve good health for all people, equity, gender parity, disabled and
marginalized population access in health care need to be ascertained.

National Water Policy, 1999
The water policy of the government aims to provide direction to all agencies working with
the water sector, and institutions that relate to the water sector in one form or another, for
achievement of specified objectives.

The policies set forth are considered essential for addressing the objectives of improved
water resources management and protection of the environment. Every public agency, every
community, village and each individual have an important role to play in ensuring that the
water and associated natural resources of Bangladesh are used judiciously so that the future
generations can be assured of at least the same, if not better, availability and quality of those
resources.

Bangladesh Labor Act, 2006
The Bangladesh Labour Act was adopted in 2006. The act consolidated the laws relating to
employment of workers, relations between workers and employers, determination of
minimum rates of wages, payment of wages, compensation for injuries to workers during
working hours, formation of trade unions, raising and settlement of industrial disputes,
health, safety, welfare and working conditions and environment of workers and
apprenticeship and matters ancillary. The act has widened benefits of the workers
particularly women workers

Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) sections 6.1 and 6.2
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are globally accepted development goals that
focuses on 17 goals with 169 targets and 230 indicators. The project will contribute to
achieving SDG6 i.e. ‘Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation
for all.’ In particular, the project will directly contribute to achieve target 6.1: universal and
equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water for all by 2030 and 6.2: access to
adequate and equitable sanitation and hygiene for all and end open defecation, paying
special attention to the need of women and girls and those in vulnerable situations by 2030.

The Acquisition and Requisition of Immovable Property Act (ARIPA), 2017
Land acquisition in Bangladesh is governed by ‘The Acquisition and Requisition of Immovable
property Act, 2017’. No Land Acquisition will be required for this project. It is unlikely (based
on the experience of other similar projects) that physical displacement will occur, but
temporary disturbances and impacts on businesses, access to and from homes (especially
with regards to piped water and individual connections) may occur. After the proposed sites
are identified and based on screening an Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (A-RAP) may
be prepared, if required.

National Women Development Policy 2011
This policy was developed with the objective to establish equal rights of men and women in
areas of state and public life, to ensure security and safety of women, to ensure the socio-

                                                                                     19 | P a g e
        economic, political, administrative and legal empowerment and to establish human rights of
        women.
        Communicable Diseases (Prevention, Control and Eradication) Act 2018.
        The Act was passed in 2018 and it repealed and merged some of the dated laws and
        ordinances regarding infectious disease control, including the Epidemic Diseases Act (1897),
        the Public Health (Emergency Provisions) Ordinance (1944), the Bangladesh Malaria
        Eradication Board Ordinance (1977) and the Prevention of Malaria (Special Provisions)
        Ordinance (1978). The objective is to protect the people from the national and international
        spread of infectious diseases, to prevent, control and eradicate such diseases, to issue global
        alerts and to increase mutual support for the outbreak of the disease, to increase the capacity
        for precise risk management and to spread related education, to review the progress of
        diseases, to protect rights including Systematic loss.


World Bank’s Environmental and Social Framework (ESF)

The Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) has 10 Environmental and Social Standards (ESS) of
them some are relevant to this project.

                    Table 1. ESF Requirement and Relevance with the Project

                                                                            Extent of Relevance to the
       ESSs                           Requirements
                                                                                sub-projects/project
 ESS-1              The types of ES risk and impacts that should be       Relevant and providers basis for
 Assessment and     considered in the ES assessment, provision of         ES risk and impact assessment
 Management of      various ES instruments and use and strengthening      and mitigation measures
 ES Risks and       of the Borrower’s ES framework.
 Impacts
 ESS-2              Provisions on the treatment of Project workers,       Relevant and provides guidance
 Labour and         terms and conditions of work, non-discrimination      for addressing labor related
 Working            and equal opportunity, provisions on child labour     issues. The project will employ
 Conditions         and forced labour management and occupational         Direct and Contracted workers
                    health and safety measures
 ESS-3              Requirements on management of wastes, chemical        Relevant and provides guidance
 Resource           and hazardous materials and contains provisions to    addressing issues of waste
 Efficiency and     address historical pollution and overall use of       pollution management
 Pollution          resource efficiently.
 Prevention and
 Management
 ESS-4              Takes into account community safety, concept of       Relevant and provides guidance
 Community          universal access, traffic and road safety including   on addressing community
 Health and         road safety assessments and monitoring.               health and safety issues as well
 Safety             Requirement of necessary protective measures          addressing the need for COVID-
                    against COVID-19 for the workers and others           19 protocol application
                    associated with the project construction.
 ESS-5              Illustrates land acquisition, requisition and         Project is not expected to
 Land Acquisition   resettlement issues                                   involve land acquisition.
 Restrictions on                                                          However, in case of squatters,
 Land Use and                                                             Abbreviated RAPs will be
 Involuntary                                                              prepared, as needed
 Resettlement


                                                                                              20 | P a g e
 ESS-6               Requirements for conservation of biodiversity and       The project is not likely to affect
 Biodiversity        management of sustainable management of living          biodiversity. Appropriate
 Conservation        natural resources, including primary production and     measures will be taken to avoid
                     harvesting, distinguishing between small-scale and      and minimize the effect of pipe
                     commercial activities.                                  laying and other service
                                                                             provision on bio diversity and
                                                                             habitats
 ESS-7               Applies when the Indigenous Peoples are present or      Stakeholder engagement,
 Indigenous          have a collective attachment to the land, whether       coupled with field level
 Peoples             they are affected positively or negatively and          assessments of identified sites
                     regardless of economic, political or social             will be used to determine
                     vulnerability.                                          impacts on Indigenous Peoples
                                                                             and address the same
 ESS-8               Illustrates the need to preserve and protect various    Every effort will be taken to
 Cultural Heritage   types of cultural heritage in the project areas.        make sure that the physical
                                                                             works are not located near any
                                                                             heritage sites. A chance finds
                                                                             procedure will be included in
                                                                             works contracts and in the
                                                                             bidding document
 ESS-9               Specifies how FIs will assess and manage ES risks       The ESS requires to have MFIs
 Financial           and impacts.                                            of the project to have an ESMS
 Intermediaries
 ESS-10              Requires stakeholder engagement throughout the          The IA has prepared a
 Stakeholder         project life cycle, and preparation and                 Stakeholder Engagement Plan
 Engagement and      implementation of a Stakeholder Engagement Plan         (SEP)     identifying     various
 Information         (SEP). Requires early identification of stakeholders,   stakeholders and assessing their
 Disclosure          both project-affected parties and other interested      needs and impacts of the project
                     parties, and clarification on how effective             including setting up of a GRM
                     engagement takes place.


WBG Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines (EHSG)

The WBG EHSG are technical reference documents that provide information on environmental,
health and safety issues, including acceptable pollution prevention and abatement measures and
emission levels for WB projects. They contain both general guidelines and industry-specific
guidelines in relation to Good International Industry Practice (GIIP).
The general guidelines include the following topics:
        Environmental (Air Emissions and Ambient Air Quality; Energy Conservation; Wastewater
        and Ambient Water Quality; Water Conservation; Hazardous Materials Management; Waste
        Management; Noise; Contaminated Land)

        Occupational Health and Safety (General Facility Design and Operation; Communication
        and Training; Physical Hazards; Chemical Hazards; Biological Hazards; Radiological Hazards;
        Personal Protective Equipment (PPE); Special Hazard Environments; Monitoring)

        Community Health and Safety (Water Quality and Availability; Structural Safety of Project
        Infrastructure; Life and Fire Safety; Traffic Safety; Transport of Hazardous Materials; Disease
        Prevention; Emergency Preparedness and Response)

        Construction and Decommissioning (Environment, Occupational Health & Safety;
        Community Health & Safety)


                                                                                                   21 | P a g e
Environment, Health and Safety (EHS) issues should be incorporated into ES assessment and
management process, which will include:


            Identification of EHS risks early in the project, including the site selection process, design
            and engineering aspects.

            The likelihood and magnitude of EHS risks should be based on nature of the project
            activities. There should be an objective of overall reduction of risk to human health and the
            environment, focusing on the potential impacts and elimination of cause of hazard at the
            source. Where impacts cannot be avoided, engineering and management controls should
            reduce or minimize magnitude of impacts.

            Procedures for accidents should be prepared, including preparation of workers and
            communities.

            EHS performance        improvements,      and   ongoing     monitoring    performance       and
            accountability.


 The industry-specific EHSG for Water and Sanitation are applicable for the operation and
 maintenance of

     (i)        potable water treatment and distribution systems, and
     (ii)       collection of sewage in centralized systems (such as piped sewer collection networks)
                or decentralized systems (such as septic tanks subsequently serviced by pump
                trucks) and treatment of collected sewage at centralized facilities.

The guidelines cover management of specific impacts (environmental, Occupational Health and
Safety, Community Health and Safety) from activities related to sectors listed above, e.g. Water
withdrawal, water treatment, water distribution. Performance Indicators, Industry Benchmarks and
Monitoring are also covered by the guidelines.




                                                                                              22 | P a g e
                      ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL BASELINE DATA
Land Environment

As tentatively selected, the project activities will cover
around 78 Upazilas across 18 Districts in 4 Divisions:
Mymensingh, Rangpur, Chattogram, and Sylhet. This
covers the northern and eastern parts of the country.

The land area of the country may be divided broadly into
three categories i.e. floodplain (80 %), Pleistocene
terrace (8%), and tertiary hills (12 %) based on its
geological formation. The floodplain comprises of a
succession of ridges (abandoned levees) and
depressions (back swamps or old channels). Differences
in the elevation between adjoining ridge tops and
depressions range from less than 1 meter on tidal
floodplains, 1 meter to 3 meters on the main rivers and
estuarine floodplains, and up to 5 to 6 meters in the
Sylhet Basin in the north-east4. Only in the extreme
northwest do land elevations exceed 30 meters above
mean sea level. The tertiary hill soil occupy the
Chattogram hills in the south-east, and the low hills and
hillocks of Sylhet in the north-east. The two major
uplifted blocks (Pleistocene terrace) are known as
Madhupur (in the central Bangladesh) and Barind tracts
in the north-west.

The land type of the country has been classified according to depth of inundation with seasonality.
All land types except highlands are exposed to monsoon flooding for part or whole of the year. Land
area with different flood depths as well as seasonality is given in Table 1.
                           Table 2. Land Areas of Different Flood Phases
    Land type                   Maximum depth of         Seasonally flooded         Permanently
                                    flooding                                          flooded

 Medium Highland 1 (F0)                     0.3m                     16%                      0%
 Medium Highland 2 (F1)                     0.9m                     44%                      1%
 Medium Lowland (F2)                        1.8m                     23%                      1%
 Lowland (F3)                               3.0m                     11%                      3%
 Very lowland (F4)                         >3.0m                      1%                      1%
 Total                                                               95%                      6%
Source: WARPO (2001)

Physical Environment

Due to outbreak of COVID-19 and sudden restriction of movement and maintaining social distance,
the extensive field assessment and consultation meetings were not possible. Some of the sites

4
 Huq S., Karim Z., Asaduzzaman M. and Mahtab F., (2013) Vulnerability and Adaptation to Climate Change
for Bangladesh, Springer-Science and Business Media, BV
                                                                                            23 | P a g e
tentatively selected for the project were visited in order to obtain first-hand information and insight
on the subproject baseline scenarios from secondary information. Primary data was not possible to
collect due to outbreak of COVID-19 and sudden restriction. However, the ESMF will be updated
again within 30 days of project effective date.

Bangladesh, except for the hilly regions in the northeast and southeast as well as terrace land in
northwest and central zones, is one of the largest deltas in the world, formed by the dense network
of the tributaries and distributaries of the mighty rivers namely the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the
Meghna. The total land area is 147,570 km2 and the Project intervention would cover an area of 15%
of total land scattered all over Northern, Central and Northeastern Bangladesh.

Climate
The overall temperature and rainfall patterns in Bangladesh are shown in the figures below. The
different climatic sub-regions are also shown. In this project, the main regions of interest are: North-
eastern zone (Sylhet), northern part of Central zone (Mymensingh), North-western zone (Rangpur),
Western Zone (Rajshahi), South-eastern Zone (Chattogram).




                                                                                  Source: Khan et al (2018)5

The basic climate parameters for the four Divisions (Sylhet, Mymensingh, Chattogram and Rangpur)
under this project are shown in the figures below.




5
    https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2405844018348928
                                                                                             24 | P a g e
   Sylhet Division




Mymensingh Division




                      25 | P a g e
                                                            Chattogram Division




                                                             Rangpur Division




                                                                      Source: www.en.climate-data.org

Groundwater
The figure below shows the groundwater depth in 2010 in different parts of Bangladesh. It can be
seen that around Dhaka the water levels were particularly deep (>20m). Also in the Mymensingh and
Rajshahi Divisions the groundwater was around 10-20m deep.




                                                                                       26 | P a g e
                                                                             Source: Sarkar and Ghosh (2017)6


The table below shows the range of groundwater depth in deep aquifers for the year 2018 based on
DPHE monitoring data. It can be seen that there is a large variation within Districts and also between
Districts.

           Table 3: Variation on Deep Groundwater Levels in Project Districts in 2018
      SN    Project Districts      No. of Data      Min. GW Depth (ft)     Max. GW Depth (ft)
       1    Jamalpur                   19                 16.6                    23.7
       2    Mymensingh                 147                14.0                    78.0
       3    Sherpur                    52                  13.1                  144.3
       4    Gaibandha                   0                  n/a                     n/a
       5    Kurigram                    0                  n/a                     n/a
       6    Lalmonirhat                 0                  n/a                     n/a

6
 https://www.researchgate.net/publication/313807249_Techno-
economic_analysis_and_challenges_of_solar_powered_pumps_dissemination_in_Bangladesh/figures?lo=1&u
tm_source=google&utm_medium=organic
                                                                                            27 | P a g e
         SN    Project Districts      No. of Data   Min. GW Depth (ft)     Max. GW Depth (ft)
          7    Nilphamari                   0              n/a                    n/a
          8    Brahmanbaria                79              9.0                   36.0
          9    Chandpur                    77             10.0                   33.1
         10    Chattogram                   0              n/a                    n/a
         11    Cumilla                    163             14.0                   43.0
         12    Feni                        32             11.0                   26.0
         13    Laksmipur                    0              n/a                    n/a
         14    Noakhali                     0              n/a                    n/a
         15    Sylhet                     105              4.5                   45.3
         16    Habiganj                    76              2.4                   32.5
         17    Sunamganj                   83             10.0                   34.0
         18    Moulvibazar                62               3.5                   59.8
Source: DPHE (2020)

The figure below shows the concentration of arsenic in groundwater in different parts of Bangladesh.
The main project Districts affected by arsenic contamination include: Noakhali, Cumilla, Feni, Sylhet,
Chandpur, and Brahmanbaria.




                                                                            Source: BGs and DPHE (2001)7




7
    https://www.bgs.ac.uk/arsenic/bangladesh/
                                                                                          28 | P a g e
The presence of fluoride in groundwater across Bangladesh is shown in the figure below. Although
there is limited data and studies on the issues, it is not considered a major problem in Bangladesh8.




                                                                                        Source: UNICEF (2011)9
Surface Water


8
  Hoque et al (2003) Fluoride Levels in Different Drinking Water Sources of Bangladesh, Fluoride Vol. 36 No. 1
38-44
Rahman et al (2020) Spatiotemporal distribution of fluoride in drinking water and associated probabilistic
human health risk appraisal in the coastal region, Bangladesh, Science of The Total Environment
Volume 724, 1 July 2020, 138316
9
  UNICEF (2011) Bangladesh National Drinking Water Quality Survey 2009, Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics,
MICS and UNICEF.
                                                                                                  29 | P a g e
As shown in the figure below, Bangladesh has been divided into seven hydrological regions:
Northeastern (mainly Sylhet Division); North Central (mainly Mymensigh and Dhaka Divisions);
Northwestern (mainly Rangpur and Rajshahi Divisions); Southwestern (mainly Khulna Division);
South Central (mainly Barishal Division); Southeastern (mainly Brahmanbaria, Cumilla, Noakhali and
Chandpur Districts) and Eastern Hills (remaining part of Chattogram Division). The major rivers
(Ganges, Brahmaputra/Jamuna and Meghna along with the estuary) is also considered another
hydrologic region.




                                                                                      30 | P a g e
                                                          Source: Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 (GED 2019)

The project activities will mainly fall under Northeastern, Northwestern, part of North Central,
Southeastern and Eastern Hills regions.

                                                                                         31 | P a g e
The surface water resources of the Northeastern region are characterized by flashy rivers from hilly
areas along the northern and northeastern border of Bangladesh as well as flat floodplains which have
important wetlands. Surma and Kushiyara rivers are the main rivers in this region. The following
figure shows the major wetlands of Bangladesh. The main wetlands near the project sites are in the
Sylhet area.




                                                                           Source: Haroon and Kbria (2017)10

The Districts with major wetlands (hoar) areas are listed in the table below. Several project Districts
are included in the list: Sunamganj, Habiganj, Sylhet, Maulvibazar and Brahmanbaria.

                                 Table 4: Main Districts with Haor Areas




Source: Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 (GED 2019)

The surface water resources of the Northwestern region are characterized by season rivers that tend
to flow in the pre-monsoon, monsoon and post-monsoon season, i.e. from April to November.
Teesta, Mohananda, Baral and Atrai rivers are the main rivers in this region.

10
     https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-81-322-3715-0_17
                                                                                             32 | P a g e
The surface water resources of the North Central region depend on the monsoon spills from the
Jamuna/Brahmaputra river right bank and also from the spills of the Old Brahmaputra River right
bank. Many of the rivers in this region are silting up over time due to lack of flow after the monsoon
season. The main rivers in this region are: Bangsi, Jhenai, Dhaleshwari and Sitalakhya.

The surface water resources in the Southeastern region are characterized by tidal flows due to the
close vicinity of the estuary and Bay of Bengal. Some of the rivers receive flood flows from the
Meghna river. The main rivers in this region are Titas and Feni rivers.

The surface water resources in the Eastern Hilly region consist of steep sloped streams. In the coastal
area, the rivers suffer from salinity intrusion as well as storm surges during the cyclone seasons. The
main rivers in this region include: Karnaphuli, Halda, Sangu and Naf.

Biological Environment

The Project area of 18 Districts                       Bio-ecological Zones of Bangladesh
supports diverse plant and
animal as with the rest of the
country. Birds, medicinal trees
and wild animals are mostly
seen in the hills of Chottogram.
Migratory birds also flock in the
haors     of       Sylhet     and
Mymensingh. The proposed
project activities should avoid
ecologically critical or sensitive
areas, like forests and
wetlands. In such context, the
delineation of the bio-
ecological zone is necessary to
understand the biological and
physical characteristics of the
project areas and to identify
the bio-ecological critical
areas.

The figure shows the main
forest zones of Bangladesh. Of
the project areas, the areas
with forest coverage include
Sunamganj, Habiganj and
Maulivibazar Districts in the
Sylhet Division; Mymensingh
District in Mymensigh Division
and Noakhali, Feni and                                                                Source: IUCN
Chattogram       Districts   in
Chattogram Division.




                                                                                          33 | P a g e
                                                                            S OURCE : B ANGLAPEIDA , 2015

                               Figure: Forest Zones of Bangladesh


Social Environment
Bangladesh’s economy has grown well above the average for developing countries, averaging 6.5
percent since 2010, with an officially estimated growth of 7.9 percent in FY18, driven by
manufacturing and construction. Per capita income is now US$1,670 (WB Atlas method, 2018), which
is well above the lower middle-income country category threshold which it crossed in FY14. The
country has seen significant progress on reducing extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity,
especially through human development. The poverty incidence based on the international $1.90 per
capita per day poverty line (measured on the basis of the Purchasing Power Parity exchange rate) has
declined from 44.2 percent in 1991 to a 14.8 percent in 2016 (latest available poverty data).

The current population of Bangladesh is 164,000,000 as of April, 2020, based on the latest United
Nations data. Among them 60.60% population is living in the rural area. According to the population
census report of Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics (BBS) 2011 the total enumerated population is
                                                                                          34 | P a g e
142,319,000, comprises of 71,255,000 males and 71,064,000 females, which yields a sex ratio of 100.3
indicating almost equal numbers of men and women in the country. In the project Divisions total
estimated population (BBS 2011) is 65,111,909 (Male 32,204,070 and female 32,907,839) which is
45.75% of the total population. Sex ration in the project divisions varies from 96 to 104 and household
size is also differed from one division to another (Table underneath) It is revealed that more than 60%
of the population is within the age group 15-60 years (working force) in the project area.

                      Table 5: Demographic Information of the Project Area

    Division       Population         Male          Female        Sex      HH Size      Population age
                                                                 Ratio                  group 15 to 60
 Mymenshigh        10,990,913       5,455,542       5,535,371     99         4.27            60.65
 Rangpur             15,787,758       7,881,824     7,905,934     100        4.11            65.20
 Chattogram         28,423,019       13,933,314    14,489,705     96         5.01            61.40
 Sylhet              9,910,219        4,933,390     4,976,829     99         5.52            60.10
 Total              65,111,909       32,204,070    32,907,839     98         4.75            61.80

With more than 60 percent of the population living in rural areas, the population in Bangladesh is
predominantly rural, so continued investment in rural areas is important to realize the country’s
human capital potential. For instance, an estimated 35 percent of the population in rural areas lives
below the poverty line, while nationally it is 24 percent. At the same time, the rural population suffers
insufficient access to quality basic services, such as education, health clinics, and adequate roads, and
is most vulnerable to ever-increasing climate change threats, such as sea level rise, floods, droughts
and extreme temperature, in one of the most vulnerable countries to climate change. As a result,
about 38 percent of rural children under five are stunted or are too short for their age compared to 31
percent in urban areas; urban mothers and spouses are more educated than their rural counterparts.

Water Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) condition in the project divisions represent the total scenario
of the country. It is revealed that significant number of people use tube well water for drinking while
maximum 6.5% in Chattogram division use pipe water supply followed by 5.02% in Sylhet division,
1.20% in Mymensingh division and 0.98% in Rangpur division. It is to be noted that such pipe water
supply facility is existed in the urban area. In some cases, people use others sources such as bottled
water and pond or river (after purification), for drinking. Therefore, supply water facility to the rural
residents through the WASH project will eliminate water scarcity and promote health and hygiene
condition.

                        Table 6: Drinking Water Facility in the Project Area

         Division                        Tap                     Tube well                Other
       Mymenshigh                         1.2                       93.1                   5.7
        Rangpur                          0.98                      96.17                  2.85
       Chattogram                        6.54                      77.10                  16.36
         Sylhet                          5.02                      78.65                  16.33

The project is providing sanitation and hygiene facilities in high pedestrian traffic locations,
community health clinics, and non-government schools to promote health and hygiene condition of
the rural people and behavioral change including hand wash practice and other necessary precautions
                                                                                            35 | P a g e
due to outbreak of COVID-19. Existing sanitation facility in the project divisions show that around
15-21% people use sanitary latrine, while in the Rangpur division around 19% people have no latrine
or share others latrine. About 32 to 42% people use non-sanitary latrine in the project area which. It
is to be noted that the rural people usually use sanitary (without sealed) or non-sanitary latrines and
some of them have no latrine in their house. Implementation of the WASH project with proper
sanitation facility will promote health and hygiene condition of the rural people.

                   Table 7: Sanitation and Hygiene Condition in the Project Area

        Division           Sanitary (Water      Sanitary (without       Non-Sanitary         None
                               Sealed)           Water Sealed)
     Mymenshigh                 21.15                 28.3                 32.95              17.6
      Rangpur                   19.71                 26.53                  34.6            19.16
     Chattogram                 15.51                 44.75                 31.86             7.87
       Sylhet                   15.54                32.725                42.975             8.76


Hazard and Vulnerability Profile

Climatic Conditions

Bangladesh is situated in the sub-tropical regions but displays a tropical monsoon climate
characterized by heavy summer rainfall and high summer temperatures. The reason for these
climatic conditions is Bangladesh’s geographic location; the Himalayan mountain range acts as a
barrier to moisture-laden monsoon winds in the summer season which cause intense rainfall, and
helps protect the country from extreme cold wind blowing towards it from the north. There are four
distinct seasons: the cool dry winter from December to February; the hot pre-monsoon summer from
March to May; the hot and humid rainy monsoon season from June to September; and the hot and
humid but drier autumn from October to November, when the south-west wind retreats. The mean
annual temperature in the country is about 25°C. The mean monthly temperature ranges between
18°C in January and 30°C from April to May. The highest temperatures throughout the year range
between 38°C and 41°C. The average annual rainfall in the country is about 2,200 mm. About 80% of
the total rainfall occurs from May to September.

Natural Disasters

Flood
Flooding is a common yearly phenomenon in Bangladesh that happens in the rainy season as a result
of overtopping of the runoff from the rivers and canals and spreads over vast areas of floodplains. A
normal flood that covers 22- 30% of the country serves a useful purpose as it carries useful soil
nutrients which contribute to good crop yields.

Catastrophic floods destroy or damage houses, infrastructure and livelihoods. The major forces
causing floods in Bangladesh are: pre-monsoon intense storms causing flash floods (particularly in
northern and eastern hilly areas); monsoon rainfall patterns; simultaneously peaking water levels in
the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, and the Meghna rivers; tidal conditions (including wind) in the Bay of
Bengal; and human interventions in floodplain areas. Climate change influences all of these forces




                                                                                          36 | P a g e
and major floods are occurring with increasing frequency
and with increasingly devastating consequences11.


Cyclonic disturbances
Depressions, storm surges and tropical cyclones are natural
hazards that occur in the Bay of Bengal as a result of
temperature increase causing a drop in wind pressure.
Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics (BBS) in its Statistical
Yearbook of Bangladesh 2014 reports that altogether 21
tropical cyclones (wind speed >117 km/hr) and severe
cyclones (wind speed between 87 to 117 km/hr) struck the
Bangladesh coast between 1960 and 2010. Of these cyclonic
disturbances, 33.33% happened in pre-monsoon seasons,
while the remaining 66.66% occurred in post-monsoon
seasons.

Sea level rise and associated risks
The coastal areas of Bangladesh have witnessed changing
sea levels for at least the last 11,000 years. A third of
sediments carried by the three major rivers is deposited in
floodplains and in the channels of the delta, and waves and
tides deliver a small portion of sediment to the inactive, tidal portion of the delta at a rate about of
10mm (highest) per year. This active delta coupled with the coastal zone’s low elevation (one to three
metres in the south-western and central part of the country and four to seven metres in the south-
eastern part) make the coastal zone vulnerable to storm surges and submergence of land by sea
water.

Salinity intrusion
One of the most immediate and long-term threats of climate change, especially in Chittagong region
of the project area, is the salinity intrusion which occurs as a result of sea level rise and affects surface
(i.e. river) as well as ground water systems and the soil. The nature of salinity intrusion in the coastal
areas depends on a number of factors such as a reduction of fresh water flows from upstream and
excessive groundwater extraction in coastal areas.




11
  Dewan TH (2015) Societal impacts and vulnerability to floods in Bangladesh and Nepal, Weather and Climate
Extremes, Volume 7, March 2015, Pages 36-42.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2212094714000930
                                                                                               37 | P a g e
   IDENTIFICATION OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL IMPACTS AND
                          MITIGATION MEASURES


General

The Project will provide water supply and sanitation services to rural public areas and households.
The major environmental risk will emanate from water contamination, discharge of sludge and
untreated sewage. The major social risk will originate from exclusion of the disadvantaged and the
vulnerable, and community health and safety issues. Given the labors will mostly be from the local
area and level of supervision and training provision, the GBV risk is likely to be low. Construction
related impacts (noise, air and water pollution) will also occur which needs to be managed with
proven best practices. The ESMF addresses these areas to propose policies and procedures regarding
mitigation measures and recommend modalities to maximize project benefits for the target
population by aligning the project design with the socio-cultural and context specific needs of
communities. The expected ES impacts can be mitigated through implementation of appropriate
environmental code of practice and ES management plans. The consequence of COVID-19 may have
adverse impact on social issues, including mass isolation and quarantine, lack of labor availability,
transmission of disease, lack of social distancing measures etc. IA will need to put adequate measures
for workers as well as local communities where project will be implemented so that spread of the
virus does not deter the project implementation. Considering the overall risk and impacts related to
the proposed project activities, the long-term experience and capabilities of the implementing
agencies and subsequent measures, the ES risk is rated Moderate.


Potential Environmental Impacts

Potential environmental impact in the Project may include the following

    •   Noise and Air pollution and disturbance from operation of vehicles, machineries and
        equipment can cause disturbance to people and the fauna near the project interventions. For
        example, piling or drilling can generate excessive noise. Migratory birds coming in the project
        site may decrease due to noise. Air Pollution by dust or gaseous emissions from vehicles and
        land clearing can impact nearby people, fauna and flora. Odours and pollution caused by
        leaking latrines and faecal sludge impacting surrounding water bodies, flora and fauna.
    •   Soils impact by erosion or pollution from chemical spills or improper disposal of waste
        materials. The waste materials can be from latrines (faecal sludge); construction materials;
        etc.
    •   Vibration impacts can occur during piling, drilling and heavy vehicle movement. Vibration
        near steep slopes can also increase risk of landslides (during monsoon season, even several
        months after construction has finished). Excessive vibration can disturb the local sensitive
        fauna living near the construction sites or nearby forest areas.
    •   Surface water impacts can occur due to alteration of quantity or quality. For example,
        unintentional runoff from site can cause pollution to water bodies etc. Also abstractions of
        surface water for water supply purposes can alter the flow pattern in the source water body.
        Runoff from sites where waste materials have been disposed improperly can cause water
        pollution.

                                                                                          38 | P a g e
    •   Groundwater impacts can occur due to various project activities. For example, there can be
        draw down of the groundwater table due to excessive water withdrawals for pipe supply
        schemes. Also, percolation from leaking latrines can cause pollution of aquifers.
    •   Septage transportation impacts can occur when septage will be transported from the twin
        pit latrines.


Typical Environmental Mitigation Measures

In this project, a Mitigation Hierarchy needs to be followed, as outlined in the following figure:




                                    Figure: Mitigation Hierarchy


Avoidance is the first step in the Mitigation Hierarchy and this can be achieved through careful siting
of the sub-project or design in such a way so that the impacts can be avoided. In this regard, analyses
of alternatives are important and these include:
         • Analyses of different locations/sites for the proposed sub-project/activity
         • Evaluation of different design options that do not have significant social and
             environmental risks/impacts

However, in some situations, it is not possible to completely avoid risks and impacts. Therefore, the
second step in the hierarchy is to reduce the potential risks and impacts of the proposed sub-project
activity to acceptable levels through design considerations. When there are no further design
solutions and the potential risks or impacts remain significant, then the third step in the hierarchy is
to develop feasible mitigation measures.

The ESMF suggests a broad range of mitigation and enhancement measures to reduce negative
impacts and enhance benefits of sub-project interventions. Suggested mitigation measures have
been provided in the guideline ESMPs (Annex E). The final step in the Mitigation Hierarchy, is to offset
                                                                                           39 | P a g e
any remaining significant residual impacts by technically and financially feasible means. This can be
in the form of compensation or enhancement of similar ES component in another location. As with
mitigation measures, the expected costs of the enhancement measures need to be included in the
project costs. Furthermore, monitoring is required to not only ensure that the enhancement
measures are being properly implemented but also to determine whether the benefits of these
measures are being realized over time. Again, the costs of monitoring needs to be included in the
project budget.

Some common mitigation measures (applicable for all sub-projects) are as follows:
  •   Use of Offset twin pit latrines to reduce the risk of broken ‘p’ traps of existing toilets, increase
      the convenience (e.g. enabling the commode to be situated within the house), and facilitate
      easier emptying. When offset pit latrines have two alternating pits, the pit that is offline can
      neutralize the pathogens given sufficient time, enabling the safe removal of the fecal sludge.
      Adherence to the twin alternating offset pit latrine standard, along with the provision of
      training to households and local entrepreneurs on the correct procedures for O&M and safe
      disposal of fecal sludge, is considered to facilitate compliance to the SDG 6.2 ‘safely-managed’
      sanitation service standard.
  •   Any organic wastes from construction site or any source at construction site should be properly
      collected and composted
  •   Emission of dust can be mitigated by a number of measures together or separately.
         o Ensure that all trucks and vehicles used in the project area will comply with technical
               and environmental safety regulations
           o   Install dust cover on vehicles at the construction sites and during transportation. Dust
               control (watering dusty areas) on non-paved access roads
           o   Use of adapted Protective Personal Equipment (ear plugs, goggles, helmets, gloves,
               masks) where necessary
           o   Schedule the operation times for vehicles, machines working in the construction area
               to reduce air emissions
  •   Noise pollution may be mitigated to certain degrees following the measures:
          o Perform the pre-construction activities within the day time and minimize work done
               during the night.
           o   Regulate the speed of traffic inside the site and in the surrounding areas in
               construction sites.
           o   Construct sound walls as feasible in selected areas.
           o   Regularly carry out maintenance and routine inspections on vehicles to ensure that
               they are meeting the technical standards. Old vehicles and construction machinery
               with poor quality shall be prohibited for being used within the project‘s activities.
          o Noise volume should not exceed 55 dBA at the nearest off-site reception location.
  •   Septage will be transported by septage hauler and no discharge or leakage will be allowed
      during transportation. Further, after proper treatment of septage to remove hazardous
      pathogens/ destruction of infectious organisms they will also be disposed in suitable
      agricultural field since it contains nutrients that can reduce reliance on chemical fertilizer for
      agriculture. (Reference FAO, http://www.fao.org/3/T0551E/t0551e08.htm). Treated sewage
                                                                                           40 | P a g e
      sludge can provide some part of the nitrogen and phosphorus requirements of many crops.
      However, the numbers of pathogenic and parasitic organisms in sludge need to be treated
      before application to the land by appropriate sludge treatment.

Potential Social Impacts

A number of moderate potential social impacts can arise from the Project interventions:

Potential social risks and impacts will revolve around gender (design, safety, impact on women’s
health); exclusion from benefits and consultation (especially women, elderly, persons with
disabilities, indigenous, marginalized and vulnerable communities), land use (common/private
property, optimizing access through strategic location, resettlement impacts if any, community
health and safety and the type of labor used and associated impacts.

The Project will entail use of labor for small scale civil construction in remote areas. Although labor
will be mostly local incidence of GBV/SEA cannot be ruled out. Thus, there is a need for training and
sensitization of workers on GBV issues, Contractor’s Code of Conduct during bidding and monitoring
in the field.

Community health and safety risks are also anticipated due to the removal and transportation of fecal
sludge, and other minor construction related impacts if not properly managed. However, the Project
is designed to reduce open defecation and improve the sludge management and transportation
issues.

The outbreak of COVID-19 may also amplify community health and safety issues, especially related
to interfacing labor. The consequence of COVID-19 may have adverse impact on social issues,
including mass isolation and quarantine, lack of labor availability, transmission of disease, lack of
social distancing measures etc. IA will to put in place adequate measures for workers as well as local
communities where the project will be implemented to deter the spread of the virus.


Social Mitigation Measures

Following steps can be taken to reduce the risks and impacts from social point of view:

  •   From the outset ensure participation of the vulnerable, disadvantage and women in project
      planning, decision making as well as access to loans and finance. Loan/ access to finance for
      women and the vulnerable should have differentiated approach so that the terms and
      conditions for securing loan for women and the vulnerable are cognizant to their social
      standing and financial background.
  •   Design measures should take in to account universal access philosophy, safety and security of
      women (ability to lock doors from inside, strong door frames, well lit areas etc)
  •   To address the issue of GBV the PMUs and the Contractors will need to put mechanisms in
      place (C-ESMP, written and signed Code of Conduct, worker training and sensitivity) as well
      as a GRM to address this issue of potential GBV.
  •   Community health and safety must be ensured through proper design of toilets, haulage of
      septage, discharge of waste water etc.
  •   Workers must be provided with training and PPEs as well as they should require to follow
      COVID-19 protocol and keep social distancing from local communities. Provision of

                                                                                          41 | P a g e
symptom reporting and medical evacuation also must be in place in case symptoms are seen
in any workers.




                                                                              42 | P a g e
           STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT AND INFORMATION DISCLOSURE
Introduction

Stakeholder refers to individuals or groups who are affected/ likely to be affected by the project and
have interest in the project and the term “stakeholder engagement” refers to a way to describe the
process of engagement between a project developer and those potentially affected by the
subprojects or way of supporting the implementation. Stakeholder engagement can cover a range of
activities and approaches and those are; consultation, engagement, external relations, information
disclosure and dissemination, community participation etc. For this Project, the PMUs have already
designed a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) for engagement and meaningful consultation with
all the stakeholders. The SEP has details about identification and meaningful consultation with
various stakeholders as well as an outline of GRM for the project. Due to outbreak of COVID-19 and
sudden restriction of movement and maintaining social distance, the extensive field assessment and
consultation meetings required for stakeholder engagement were not possible. During limited field
visits, discussions were held with the public representatives and other stakehoders on different issues
including major WASH challenges faced by the Unions, difficulties in project formulation,
implementation and management. Discussions were also held with the relevant officials on recently
completed/ ongoing projects, proposed subprojects to be implemented under BD Municipal Water
Supply and Sanitation Project (BMWSSP), and capacity and institutional arrangement for ES
management of the proposed subprojects. The sites tentatively selected for the project were visited
in order to obtain first-hand information and insight on the subproject baseline scenarios from
secondary information. Primary data was not possible to collect due to outbreak of COVID-19 and
sudden restriction.

Stakeholder Identification and Analysis

The Project stakeholders have been primarily grouped into following three categories:

    •   Project Affected Parties: those who are or likely to be affected by the project, and
    •   Other Interested Parties: who may have an interest in the project and who could Influence
        the opinions of affected parties either positively or negatively, or affect the implementation
        process or the sustainability of the project’s outcomes
    •   Vulnerable Group: Those, who for the specific conditions of vulnerability (women, person
        with disability, children, female-headed household) are likely share major impact of the
        project and will have less access to project benefit as well as will be less likely to participate
        in the engagement process.

    Project Affected Parties

    The Project Affected Parties include communities where the project activities will take place,
    households under the water supply and sanitation schemes, members of the public who use the
    public facilities that will come under project intervention, household who would take loan from
    MFIs, land donors, sweepers and septage haulers etc.




                                                                                             43 | P a g e
    Other Interested Parties

    The Project’s Other Interested Parties include Government officials, members of PMUs, Micro
    Finance Institute (MFIs), mass media, various NGOs, researchers, local entrepreneurs and
    suppliers, sanitary napkin manufacturers etc.

    Vulnerable Group
    Vulnerable Groups include children in the community, women, female-led households, persons
    with disability etc.

Engagement Methods and Tools in Light of COVID-19 Outbreak
With the outbreak and spread of COVID-19, people have been mandated by national or local law, to
exercise social distancing, and specifically to avoid public gatherings to prevent and reduce the risk
of the virus transmission. Various restrictive measures, some imposing strict restrictions on public
gatherings, meetings and people’s movement, and others advising against public group events have
been adopted.
At the same time, the general public has become increasingly aware and concerned about the risks
of transmission, particularly through social interactions at large gatherings. Based on the above,
specific channels of use for communication need consideration. The following are some
considerations while selecting channels of communication, in light of the current COVID-19 situation:
    •   Avoid public gatherings (taking into account national restrictions), including public hearings,
        workshops and community meetings;
    •   If smaller meetings are permitted, conduct consultations in small-group sessions, such as
        focus group meetings. If not permitted, make all reasonable efforts to conduct meetings
        through online channels, including WebEx, Zoom and Skype;
    •   Diversify means of communication and rely more on social media and online channels.
        Where possible and appropriate, create dedicated online platforms and chatgroups
        appropriate for the purpose, based on the type and category of stakeholders;
    •   Employ traditional channels of communications (TV, newspaper, radio, dedicated phone-
        lines, and mail) when stakeholders to do not have access to online channels or do not use
        them frequently. Traditional channels can also be highly effective in conveying relevant
        information to stakeholders, and allow them to provide their feedback and suggestions;
    •   Where direct engagement with project affected people or beneficiaries is necessary, identify
        channels for direct communication with each affected household via a context specific
        combination of email messages, mail, online platforms, dedicated phone lines with
        knowledgeable operators;
Information Disclosure Method

The ESMF and other disclosed instruments in Bangla and English languages will be made available
for public review in accordance with the World Bank and standard international requirements.
Distribution of the disclosure materials will be through making them available online for the moment
given COVID-19 situation. This will allow stakeholders with access to Internet to view information
about the planned development and to initiate their involvement in the public consultation process.
The website will be equipped with an on-line feedback feature that will enable readers to leave their
comments in relation to the disclosed materials. Basing on the improvement of situation, free copies
may be available at PMUs office locations. The SEP will remain in the public domain for the entire
                                                                                          44 | P a g e
period of project development. The methods of engagement will also be revised periodically to
maintain their effectiveness and relevance to the project’s evolving environment. The SEP contains
a table outlining Stakeholder Engagement and disclosure methods which may be referred. The table
illustrated the specificity of disclosure methods keeping in view the COVID-19 outbreak situation.
Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM)

The purpose of the GRM is to record and address any complaint that may arise during the life cycle
of the project period effectively and efficiently. The GRM is designed to address concerns and
complaints promptly and transparently with no impacts (cost, discrimination) for any reports made
by project affected people (PAPs) and the other complainants. The overriding principle of any GRM
is that it must be non-threatening, easily accessible, quick and impartial; delivering decisions to the
complainant in an unbiased a-political manner. Considering the overall need for the total project
period, the PMUs will establish GRM to address complaints and grievances. Based on consensus, the
procedure will help to resolve issues/conflicts amicably and quickly, saving the aggrieved persons
resorting to expensive, time-consuming legal actions. The mechanism will, however, not bar an
aggrieved person to go to the courts of law. It is essential that an effective and transparent
mechanism is designed and established at the earliest opportunity for all members of the community
to be able to lodge complaints and grievances. Necessary sign posting/bill board would be placed at
the central places/places where people gather for sharing detailed information of the GRCs at every
level. The GRM will also be available online so that grievances can be submitted without th need for
physical interaction, especially during the time of COVID-19 crisis.

Grievance Redress Committees (GRCs) will be formed in each District where project will be
implemented. Prior to the start of project activities, IA officials will confirm establishment of such
committees, with the understanding that they will have to meet when complaints are received. As a
minimum the composition of the GRC in each District will be as follows:
    •   DPHE Regional Representative - GRC Chair and Convener
    •   DPHE Facilities Department Representative - GRC Committee Secretary
    •   District Civil Surgeon - GRC Committee member
    •   NGO representative (female) working for Gender and GBV issues - GRC Committee member
    •   Representative of Affected People (AP) from each UZ (preferably women) as nominated by
        UZ Chairman - GRC Committee member

For steps for dealing with GRM and provision of solution, refer to SEP.

World Bank Grievance Redress Service (GRS)

Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a World Bank (WB)
supported project may submit complaints to the project-level GRM or the WB’s Grievance
Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in
order to address project-related concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may
submit their complaint to the WB’s independent Inspection Panel which determines whether
harm occurred, or could occur, as a result of WB non-compliance with its policies and procedures.
Complaints may be submitted at any time after concerns have been brought directly to the World
Bank’s attention, and Bank Management has been given an opportunity to respond. Information
on how to submit complaints to the World Bank’s corporate Grievance Redress Service (GRS)
can     be     found     at      http://www.worldbank.org/en/projects-operations/products-and-

                                                                                          45 | P a g e
services/grievance-redress-service. Information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank
Inspection Panel, visit www.inspectionpanel.org.




                                                                                     46 | P a g e
        METHODOLOGICAL FRAMEWORK FOR ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL
                            MANAGEMENT
Introduction

This chapter outlines the framework for assessing and managing environmental and social issues in
different sub-projects. It also provides necessary procedures and tools for screening and assessing ES
impacts. The ES assessment of the sub-projects need to be carried out based on the provisions of the
Environment Conservation Acts and Rules of GoB and the relevant WB’s Environmental and Social
Standards (ESSs).

Environmental and Social Management Procedure

Overall Procedure

The overall ES management procedure is shown in the figure below. After a sub-project’s location
and design is known, screening of ES risks can be done. The purpose of screening is to get a
preliminary idea about the degree and extent potential risks and impacts of a particular sub-project,
which would subsequently be used to assess the need for further ES assessment. The screening would
involve: (i) reconnaissance of the sub-project area and its surroundings (ii) identification of the major
sub-project activities; and (iii) preliminary assessment of the impacts of these activities on the
ecological, physicochemical and socio-economic environment of the sub-project surrounding areas.

It is expected that most of the sub-projects will require some form of feasibility study. This will help
in the preparation of ES instruments. The recommendations from these ES instruments will need to
be incorporated by the design team and also incorporated into the tender (bidding) documents.
DPHE & PKSF would then need to implement the proposed mitigation measures, monitor and report
compliance.

The framework for assessing and managing ES issues in different sub-projects involves following
necessary procedures and tools for screening and assessing ES impacts. These ES assessments of
sub-projects need to comply with the Environment Conservation Rules 1997 and the World Bank’s
Environmental and Social Framework, including the 10 Standards (ESSs). The flow chart below
outlines the necessary assessment procedures for construction related activities.




                                                                                            47 | P a g e
                                                       Evaluation of
                                                   Contractor’s ES Record
                                                       and Capacity



            ES             IEE and/or       Incorporation              ESMP                     ESMP
         Screening        Site-specific        of ESMP            Implementation            Implementation
         Checklist          ESMP (if           items in                Start                     End
          and WB         required) and         Bidding             WB supervision
          review           WB review         Documents



                                                                                                       Time

   Sub-project         Outline        Detailed        Tendering      Construction        O&M
  Identification       Design          Design
                     Preparation     Preparation

                                                              Tender                        Decommissioning
                                                              Award


           Figure. Overall ES Management Procedure for Construction Related Activities

Sub-project Screening and Categorization

The formal ES assessment will be done after identification of the sub-project’ design and location.
Sample ES checklists are provided in the Annexes. The purpose of the checklists is to identify
potential risks and concerns to be addressed in the design phase of the sub-projects. ES Screening
will determine whether sub- project interventions will require an IEE or a site-specific ES
management plan will suffice.

The outcome of the screening process is determination of the category of the sub-project in terms
of its ES risks. Considering potential environmental and social impacts and their significance,
proposed sub-project interventions identified in the initial stage of implementation can be
categorized into four levels:
    1)    High Risk
    2)    Substantial Risk
    3)    Moderate Risk
    4)    Low Risk
The figure below describes the different risk levels. In this project, it is expected that most sub-
projects will be of low or moderate risks.




                                                                                             48 | P a g e
                           Figure: Environmental and Social Risk Classifications

The Project is categorized as Moderate from ES point of view.

Environment and Social Management Procedures for Moderate Risk Sub-Projects

As per the procedures provided in the table below, Moderate Risk Category sub-projects will require
an IEE with a site-based management plan. The IEE is a review of the reasonably foreseeable effects
of a proposed development intervention/activity on the environment. Participation and consultation
with local communities are important in identifying the potential impacts and suitable mitigation
measures. The major activities involved in carrying out an IEE include the following:
          •    Preparation of baseline within the sub-project influence area, against which impacts of
               the proposed sub-project would be evaluated;
          •    Assessment and evaluation of impacts of major project activities on the baseline during
               construction phase and operational phase;
          •    Identification of mitigation and enhancement measures
          •    Development of site-specific ES plans and monitoring measures.

                           Table 8: Procedures for Moderate Risk Sub-Projects

 Sub-Project Phase                                     Procedure                       Responsibility

 Project                 ES Screening of sub-project                                  DPHE & PKSF
 Identification / Pre-
 Feasibility                                                                          Review by WB

 Feasibility Study /     Conduct IEE/ESA and prepare ESMP                             DPHE & PKSF
 Design
                                                                                      Review by DoE
                                                                                      and WB


                                                                                          49 | P a g e
     Sub-Project Phase                                   Procedure                         Responsibility

                         Submission and clearance of the Sub-Projects by the Bangladesh
                         Department of Environment (DOE). Comments received from the DOE
                         should be incorporated in the Sub-Projects.

                         Public consultations (as per SEP)                                 DPHE & PKSF

 Detailed Design &       Ensure Mitigation measures included in Design                     DPHE & PKSF
 Tendering
                         Ensure ES aspects are included in Bidding Documents               DPHE & PKSF

 Construction Works      Implement and monitor of management plans                         DPHE & PKSF

                         Update IEE and other ES instruments as required                   DPHE & PKSF

 Post-Construction       ES Audit                                                          DPHE & PKSF



Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Measures

M&E will be an integral part of the project under the responsibility of the PMUs. DPHE will be
responsible for managing a common web-based platform, which will be developed to track the
project’s progress based on the results framework.12 The platform will support a participatory M&E,
which will allow project stakeholders—such as the MFIs, UPs, the local DPHE and PKSF officials, and
consultants—to collect data on project progress. Collected data will include geospatial data with
photographs of the outputs, along with the information on beneficiary households, to further analyze
and verify the project outputs. PKSF will deploy a number of Independent Verification Consultants
(IVCs) to continuously monitor and verify the project outputs during the entire project timeline. The
DPHE and PKSF will also report quarterly on updated implementation schedules by component;
commitment and disbursement by component and findings, recommendations, agreements reached
on key implementation issues.

The quarterly progress report will be submitted by DPHE to the Bank and relevant line Ministries. In
addition, the Bank, DPHE, PKSF, and other stakeholders will carry out annual progress reviews and a
mid-term review (MTR) of project performance about three years after project effectiveness. In
preparation for the MTR, the DPHE and PKSF will carry out their own review of the project progress
and implementation performance and draft proposals for immediate and/or longer-term remedies of
issues, if needed. An independent impact assessment will be conducted to examine the correlation
between project activities and human capital outcomes.

Environmental and Social Instruments

Various ES instruments have been prepared in line with ESF requirements as under:

           Stakeholders Engagement Plan (SEP)

           Stakeholders Engagement (SEP) has been prepared to define a program for stakeholder
           engagement, including public information disclosure and consultation, throughout project
           lifecycle. The SEP outlines the ways in which various stakeholders will be identified and
           includes a mechanism by which they can raise concerns, provide feedback, or make positive

12
  The adoption of the Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Information System (SIASAR), developed by the
Bank, is being considered.
                                                                                              50 | P a g e
        and negative complaints about the project activities. This will begin very early in the project
        cycle and will be based on the prior disclosure and dissemination of relevant, transparent,
        objective, meaningful and easily accessible information in a timeframe that enables
        meaningful consultation with stakeholders in a culturally appropriate format, in relevant local
        languages and is understandable to stakeholders.

        Labor management Procedure (LMP)

        A Labour Management Procedure (LMP) for the Project has been prepared to meet the
        objectives and requirements of ESS 2 and ESS 4 as well as the national Labor Law. The LMP
        assesses the potential risks and impacts of assignment of labor for the implementation of the
        Project activities by the IAs and addresses them through mitigation measures in light of ESS
        and Labor policies and provisions.

        Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)

        The IAs have developed the ESCP, which sets out measures and actions required for the
        project to achieve compliance with the ESSs over a specified timeframe and is a commitment
        measure from the Borrower’s side. The ESCP takes into account the findings of the ES
        assessment and the results of engagement with stakeholders. It is an accurate summary of
        the material measures and actions required to avoid, minimize, reduce or otherwise mitigate
        the potential ES risks and impacts of the project.
Budget Estimates for ESMP Implementation

Cost of implementing ES management plan (ESMP) including monitoring activities needs to be
estimated as a part of the preparation of ESMP. Many of the activities to be carried out as a part of
ESMP would not involve any additional direct cost e.g., employing local work force, where
appropriate; keeping sub-project vehicles in good operating condition; scheduling deliveries of
materials/ goods in off-peak hours; good housekeeping, avoiding spills; prohibiting use of fuel wood
for heating bitumen; etc. On the other hand, a number of activities would require additional cost like
training, monitoring, budget for Consultants, etc. Cost estimates are prepared for all the mitigation
and monitoring measures proposed in the ESMF. The cost estimates for some of the mitigation
measures will be identified in the ESMP that are part of civil works contract. The table below provides
an estimate which is not exhaustive. Final budget will be prepared when specific design and sites will
be available.

                            Table 9: Tentative Cost Estimates for ESMP

                             Activities                                  Amount (USD) Estimate
 Budget for ES Consultants (Environmental, Social and Health                     216,000
 Specialist) @$2000/month for three years
 Implementation of SEP                                                             180,000

 Monitoring and Evaluation of ESMP                                                 100,000

 Training Requirements                                                            300,000

 EMP during construction                                               Will be included in Civil Works

The Development Project Proposal (DPP) of the Project should reflect the above activities with
budget for successful ES management of the project.



                                                                                             51 | P a g e
              INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK AND CAPACITY ASSESSMENT
Institutional Framework and Roles in Project Implementation

DPHE and Palli Karma-Sahayak Foundation (PKSF) will be the implementing agencies of the project.
The project will be managed by two PMUs collaborating closely. The Chart below illustrates the
responsibilities of the DPHE and PKSF:




   DPHE will play the main role in the development of public infrastructure under the project. It has
   considerable experience in executing Bank projects, with capacity for design and procurement,
   construction, and commissioning of WASH facilities. The DPHE will be responsible for supporting
   piped water schemes, providing public WASH facilities, including in healthcare centers and
   community secondary schools and offering sanitation grants for the poorest. The DPHE will also
   carry out water supply feasibility studies in high climate risk areas, pilot innovations, implement
   most of WASH behavioral change communications (BCC) campaign and carry out institutional
   reforms and capacity building activities. The PMU will comprise a full-time project director, a
   deputy project director, and personnel with specialization in financial management, procurement,
   monitoring and evaluation, environment and social and other support staff, posted from within
   the DPHE or recruited from the open market. The DPHE will be the nodal agency responsible for
   project reporting.

   PKSF will play the main role in the development of private assets under the project. It is a ‘not-for-
   profit’ financing institution owned by the Ministry of Finance and works with MFIs that offer
   microcredits to poor and non-poor borrowers. The PKSF has considerable experience in managing
   Bank projects in various sectors and recently managed the OBA Sanitation Program. Under this
   project, PKSF will be responsible for offering wholesale capital to retail MFIs, which in turn will

                                                                                            52 | P a g e
      give loans to households to upgrade the WASH facilities at their home in the project areas. In
      addition, PKSF will extend capacity building support to retail MFIs and local entrepreneurs for
      creating demand and installing SDG 6 compliant WASH facilities. The PMU will comprise a full-
      time project director and personnel with specialization in financial management, procurement,
      monitoring and evaluation, environment and social specialists and other support staff, posted
      from within the PKSF or recruited from the open market. A schematic illustration of the
      institutional arrangements for implementing the key project components and their relationship
      with converging Bank projects are shown in Chart 2 below.

      Project Steering Committee (PSC). At the national level, a Project Steering Committee (PSC) will
      be established in the Local Government Department (LGD) under the Ministry of Local
      Government, Rural Development and Cooperative (MoLGRD&C), chaired by the Secretary of the
      LGD, to provide overall guidance and policy direction. The PSC will meet at least twice a year, or
      more frequently if needed, to take stock of project progress and make course corrections. The PSC
      will consist of representatives from the DPHE, PKSF, the Financial Institutions Division and the
      Economic Relations Division under the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Health and Family
      Welfare (MoHFW), the Planning Commission, Ministry of Environment Forests and Climate
      change and Ministry of Water Resources.

      Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and Union Parishad (UP). Engaging the Union Parishad
      (UP) and Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW) is central to the project’s success.
      Enhancing the sense of ownership and capacity of UPs to plan, deliver, and manage WASH
      services is a top priority. The project intends to achieve this through clarifying the roles of UPs in
      WASH service delivery in policy documents and training responsible UP officials. The MoHFW will
      be leveraged through its health workers, who will be trained to deliver messages on WASH
      behavioral change through household visits, target group sessions, and community health clinics.

      Coordination Committee. A WASH Coordination Committee will be formed at each UP with
      representatives from the DPHE, PKSF’s MFI partners, and health workers. The committees will be
      led by the UPs to facilitate local level coordination needed for project implementation, especially
      of the behavior change communications (BCC) campaign. The committee members will meet
      every three months to plan and coordinate BCC activities within their UP and review quarterly
      progress.


Roles and Responsibilities of Key Entities

Roles and responsibilities of key organizations are listed in the following Table.

                         Table 10: Roles and Responsibilities of Various Entities

 SN              Organization                                       Responsibility

 1.       DPHE and PKSF               Would ensure ES compliance of the project as per the ESCP and ES
          (Implementing Agencies)     assessments

                                      Would review and clear all ES documents prepared by consultants

                                      Provide guidance to PMU for successful implementation of ESMP

                                      Review progress of ESMP implementation




                                                                                                        53 | P a g e
SN          Organization                                           Responsibility

                                Co-ordinate with other agencies as and when required.

2.   Ministry of Health and     Assess needs for training for WASH related behavioural change and
     Family Welfare (MoHFW)     communication

                                Train and assign health workers in project areas to provide behavioural change
                                and communication training related to WASH through household visits, target
                                0roup sessions, and community health clinics

3.   Construction Contractor    The contractor shall develop site specific ESMP before construction, as part of
                                their method statement and submit to PMU for reviewing and approval

                                The contractor has to submit a monthly report on ES issues, mitigation, and
                                results throughout the construction period. In case of unexpected problem, the
                                contractor will consult PMU and PMC

                                Ensure that the construction work complies with the approved ES Instruments
                                and the site EMP

                                Control and minimize environmental impacts

                                Ensure COVID-19 protocol is maintained

                                Ensure no social risks/impacts emanate from their workers

                                Ensure that all staff and workers understand the procedure and their tasks in
                                the ES management program;

                                Ensure safe working condition.
4.   Project management Unit    In order to effectively manage ES issues, the PMU will assign social and
     (PMU)                      environmental specialists to oversee ESCP commitment as well as monitoring
                                project progress in line with ES instruments. PMU will be overall responsible for
                                monitoring, assessment and management of ES issues of the Project

5.   Project ES Consultants     Be responsible to PD for respective ES issues including preparation of required
                                ES instruments, monitoring and implementation of the same
     (Environment Specialist,
     Social Development         Review Contractor’s ES instruments and should check adequacy as per the ESMP
     Specialists and Health     of the project
     Specialist)
                                Responsible for monitoring the contractor’s activities and to ensure adequate
                                implementation of the ESMP by contractor.

                                Providing guidance to the PMU regarding any ES issues which may arise during
                                Project implementation

                                Keep track of contractor’s day to day activities, their commitment for
                                implementation of ESMP, quality of work, adherence to safety guidelines and
                                method statements.

                                Closely monitor the sanitation and hygiene at the construction sites, first aid
                                facilities at sites, accident monitoring at the site, safety aspects, PPE usage, first
                                aid box etc.

                                Ensure that all construction and site vehicles should abide by the latest emission
                                norms of the country.

                                Monitor that all workers & labour of contractor should have valid ID cards to
                                assess the site.


                                                                                                       54 | P a g e
 SN           Organization                                          Responsibility

                                   Monitor that adequate safety trainings are being given to the workers, adequate
                                   mock drills are conducted at site by contractor, availability of emergency
                                   evacuation plan, emergency assembly area, availability of certified first aid
                                   trainer at all the construction site

                                   Monitor COVID-19 outbreak in the area and ensure implementation of COVID-
                                   19 protocol. Ensure anyone with symptoms is reported and oversee evacuation

                                   Recommend to the PMU to take punitive action in non-compliance of ESMP

                                   Submit monthly performance report on the level of compliance & non-
                                   compliance by the contractor.
 8.    Coordination Committee at   Facilitate local level coordination needed for project implementation, especially
       each Union Parishad         of the behavior change communications (BCC) campaign.

                                   Meet every three months to plan and coordinate BCC activities within their UP
                                   and review quarterly progress.
 9.    Dept. of Environment        Review of IEE and ESMP as well as annual Environmental Clearance Certificates.

 10.   World Bank                  Review of screening forms, IEE, ESMP and implementation monitoring.

 11    Third Part Audit Firm       Independent, semi-annual audits of environmental and social documents of the
                                   project.


Assessment of Capacity of Implementing Agencies

Both the agencies have dealt with safeguards issues adequately in the past in WB financed projects
and are currently implementing similar nature of Bangladesh Municipal Water Supply and Sanitation
Project (BMWSSP) and Sustainable Enterprises Project respectively. However, the ESF will be new
for both of them. There will be a need for training, deployment of adequate staffing and resources
from the client side, and sustained assistance from the Bank side. To mitigate the risks, the DPHE
and PKSF will be adequately resourced with personnel and expertise on clearly-defined TORs and
with considerable autonomy. Three specialists are proposed to be recruited (Environmental, Social
and health) for this project, who will assist the development of a long-term ES capacity building
program for both agencies to be supported under the project as well as to ensure the overall ES risk
management at the implementation stage. The Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)
records agreed actions that the IAs will adopt including capacity building activities and preparation
of management plans and guidelines.


Action Plan to Strengthen Staffing, Capacity, Systems and Implementation

The proposed WASH PMU within the DPHE (under Sub-component 4.1) will include: engagement of
seven staff (financial management, engineering, hydrogeologist, environmental, social,
procurement, M&E specialists) and resources for management of the project; a total of 12 district
coordinators with resources for project monitoring; and resources for improving water quality
monitoring by DPHE laboratories in the project areas. Firms and/or individual consultants will be
engaged for assignments that include the development of monitoring software and dashboard
(including the training of PMU, UP staff, TA firms, contractors, and LEs); the design/supervision of
piped water schemes and public toilets; the development of piped water system monitoring
software/dashboard (including water quality) and training PMU, UP staff and LEs; the development
                                                                                                      55 | P a g e
of baseline and end-line monitoring of ‘safely-managed’ WASH status; the development of water
quality laboratory monitoring systems; and an impact evaluation examining correlation between
‘safely-managed’ WASH investments and human capital outcomes.

The proposed WASH PMU within the PKSF (Sub-component 4.2) will include the engagement of
estimated eight staff (engineering, environmental, social, procurement, and MIS specialists) for
project implementation; the part-time deployment of a project director and three deputy project
directors of audit, finance, and projects; and five independent verification consultants with resources
for field visits, verification, and mobile monitoring. Firms and/or individual consultants will be
engaged for assignments that include: the development of monitoring software and dashboard
(including the training of PMU, MFIs, and independent verification personnel); the detailed design of
the household water and sanitation facility standards (in compliance with SDG 6.1 and 6.2); the
development of behavior change communication materials (including the training of PMU and MFI
staff, LEs, and UPs); the engagement of firms to support the development of mobile phone
monitoring software and dashboard; periodic review meetings and experience the sharing of good
practices; and the undertaking of annual financial audits.

During the project period, the ES Consultants will have to be deployed in PMU. Training shall be
imparted, on a regular interval, to the IA/PMU officials and Staff on ES Issues. The ES Specialists will
act as facilitators for the capacity building sessions. On-the-job training is essential for the capacity
building of Contractors’ people (Supervisors and Labour Supervisors of Contractor). PMUs, with
support of third-party resources as needed (independent experts, NGOs, etc.), will design and
implement training for targeted groups involved in the Project to improve their awareness of risks
and mitigate the impacts of the project.

                        Table 11: Capacity Development Support (Training)

         Specify Training to be provided                 Targeted Groups and         Training Completed
                                                              Timeframe
 The IA, with support of third-party resources as needed (independent experts, NGOs, etc.) will design and
 implement training for targeted groups involved in the Project to improve their awareness of risks and
 mitigate the impacts.
 ESF. Training on ESF and the 10 ESSs—including       Personnel directly related   Prior to Project
 preparation of ESMP                                  with project at the IA       effectiveness
 Issues Related to COVID-19:                          Officials of IA, Locally     Prior to the Project
 Use and disposal of PPE (for all)                    active NGOs, Civil Work      effectiveness
 Working in COVID-19 environment (construction        Contractors, Workers
 workers)
 COVID-19 Infection Prevention and Control
 mechanism
 Standard precautions for COVID-19 (social
 distancing etc)
 Risk communication, prevention and community
 engagement (Administrative and operational
 personnel)
 WHO and CDC guidelines on quarantine
 Occupational Health and Safety Module:               Officials of IA, Locally     Prior to the Project
 ESMP implementation                                  active NGOs, Civil Work      effectiveness and
 Workplace risk management                            Contractors, Workers         continue half yearly
 Prevention of accidents at work sites                                             throughout the project
 Health and safety rules

                                                                                               56 | P a g e
Solid and liquid waste management
Preparedness and response to emergency
situations
Labor and Working Conditions:                    IA Local officials,         Prior to the Project
Terms and conditions of employment according     Contractors Health Safety   effectiveness
to national working laws and regulations         Officer, Labor Sardars
Contractor and sub-contractor Codes of Conduct   (Leaders)
Worker’s organizations
Child labor and minimum age employment rules
Grievance Redress Mechanism Module:              ES, SDS, HS, Local          Prior to Project
Registration and processing procedure            Governments, Civil          effectiveness and
Grievance redress procedure                      Society, Local NGOs,        thereafter once every
Documenting and processing grievances            Contractors,                six months
Use of the procedure by different stakeholders
GBV Risk Module                                  IA Local officials,         Prior to Project
Raising awareness and measures to prevent and    Contractors Health Safety   effectiveness and
mitigate GBV risks.                              Officer, Labor Sardars      thereafter yearly
The topics and activities will be developed      (Leaders), Local NGOs,
included in the Project GRM                      OCC Staffs




                                                                                          57 | P a g e
                                                                       ANNEX A


      LIST OF UPAZILAS FOR PROJECT INTERVENTION

       (Project Intervention specific location not available yet)

Ser    Division                  District                 Upazila
 1                                            JamalpurSadar
 2                                            Madarganj
                       Jamalpur
 3                                            Melanda
 4                                            Sarishabari
 5                                            Bhaluka


          Mymensing
 6                                            Fulpur
 7                                            Haluaghat
                       Mymensing
 8                                            Gouripur
 9                                            Muktagacha
10                                            Trishal
11                                            Nalitabari
12                     Sherpur                SherpurSadar
13                                            Sreebardi
14                                            GaibandhaSadar
15                                            Gobindaganj
16                                            Palash bari
                       Gaibandha
17                                            Sagatha
18                                            Sadullapur
19                                            Fulchari
20                                            KurigramSadar


          Rangpur
21                                            Chilmari
22                                            Roumari
23                                            Char Rajibpur
24                     Kurigram               Fulbari
25                                            Ulipur
26                                            Bhurangamari
27                                            Nageshwari
28                                            Rajarhat
29                     Lalmonirhat            Hatibandha
30                     Nilphamari             Jaldhaka
31                                            Akhaura
32                                            Bancharampur
                       Brahmanbaria
33                                            Nabinagar
34                                            Sadar
35                                            ChandpurSadar



          Chottogram
36                                            Haimchar
37                                            MatlabDakshin
38                                            Matlab Uttar
                       Chandpur
39                                            Faridgonj
40                                            Kachua
41                                            Hajigonj
42                                            Shahrasti
43                                            Boalkhali
                       Chottogram
44                                            Mirersarai

                                                                    58 | P a g e
45                          Patiya
46                          Sandwip
47                          Chandanaish
48                          Sitakunda
49                          Bashkhali
50                          CumillaSadar south
51                          Daudkandi
52                          Titas
53                          Homna
              Cumilla
54                          Laksam
55                          Monoharganj
56                          Lalmai
57                          Nagolkot
58                          Feni Sadar
59            Feni          Chagalnaiga
60                          Dagonbhuya
61                          Ramganj
62            Laksmipur     LaksmipurSadar
63                          Raipur
64                          Companyganj
65            Noakhali      Subarnachar
66                          Kabirhat
67                          Golapganj
68            Sylhet        Zakiganj
69                          Kanaighat
70                          Madhabpur
71            Habiganj      Chunarughat

     Sylhet
72                          Baniachog
73                          DaksinSunamganj
74                          Dharmapasha
              Sunamganj
75                          Tahirpur
76                          Jagannathpur
77                          Moulavibazar Sadar
              Moulvibazar
78                          Rajnagar




                                                 59 | P a g e
                                                                                                         ANNEX B

           ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SCREENING CHECKLIST AND NEGATIVE LIST


     Date of Screening                                          Union
     Upazila                                                    District


   A: IDENTIFY INTERVENTIONS

 Category of Intervention                   Name of the Interventions                      Number of Beneficiaries




   B: CHECKLIST FOR ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SCREENING

Criteria                                                                             YES        NO        Remark

Will the activities involve associated facilities and require further due            ☐           ☐
diligence of such associated facilities?
Will the activities adversely affect working conditions and health and safety        ☐           ☐
of workers or potentially employ vulnerable categories of workers including
women, child labour?
Will activities and deployment of labor cause potential GBV cases?                   ☐           ☐

Will the activities potentially generate hazardous waste and pollutants              ☐           ☐
including pesticides and contaminate lands that would require further
studies on management, minimization and control and compliance to the
country and applicable international environmental quality standards?
Will the activities cause interaction between labors and communities in view         ☐           ☐
of COVID-19 situation?
Will the proposed activities potentially involve resettlement and                    ☐           ☐
dispossession, land acquisition, and economic displacement of persons and
communities?
Will the activities be located in protected areas and areas of ecological            ☐           ☐
significance including critical habitats, key biodiversity areas and
internationally recognized conservation sites?
Will the activities affect indigenous peoples that would require further due         ☐           ☐
diligence, free, prior and informed consent (FPIC) and documentation of
development plans?
Will the activities be located in areas that are considered to have                  ☐           ☐
archaeological (prehistoric), paleontological, historical, cultural, artistic, and
religious values or contains features considered as critical cultural heritage?




                                                                                                      60 | P a g e
     NEGATIVE LIST OF SUBPROJECT THAT WILL NOT BE FINANCED UNDER CERC

Attributes of Ineligible Subprojects

GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS

Concerning significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats. Including, but not limited to,
any activity within wildlife and forest reserves, national parks, conservation forests and sanctuaries.

Damages cultural property, including but not limited to, any activities that affect the properties inscribed in the
World Heritage List and :

    •    Other archaeological and historical sites; and
    •    Religious monuments, structures and cemeteries.

Requires involuntary acquisition of land, or the resettlement or compensation of more than 200 people

Requiring pesticides that fall in WHO classes IA, IB, or II.

Affecting waters of riparian neighbors.

Roads
New primary roads and highways.
Irrigation
New irrigation and drainage schemes.
Dams
Construction of any dams.
Power
New power generating capacity of more than 10 MW.
Oil and Gas
New exploration, production or distribution. Rehabilitation of
production or distribution systems.
Income Generating Activities
Activities involving the use of wood for fuel or as raw material from natural habitats. Activities
involving the use of hazardous substances.




                                                                                            61 | P a g e
                                                                                                         ANNEX C

                         INITIAL ENVIRONMENTAL EXAMINATION (IEE)

 Date                                                      Union
 Upazila                                                   District


SECTION I: GENERAL INFORMATION

       Category of            Name of the                Number of              Brief description of the design
      Intervention            Intervention              Beneficiaries




Description of existing Environment: Describe the physical, biological and socio-economic conditions
of the catchment area. (Use extra page detail description)

………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
……………….

SECTION II: ENVIRONMENTAL EXAMINATION

                                                          Impact Assessment
                               Baseline/ Impacts? Magnitude Measure/Quantify           Describe      Suggested
           Environmental
 Sl                             Current N/A,        Low,    impacts (if possible) possible impacts Mitigation
         Issues/Parameters
                               Situation Yes, No Moderate,                        (if quantification Measures
                                                    High                           is not possible)
Issues related to homestead and plinth raise/land filling/school/community ground raise/ construction/renovation of
                                                  connecting road
  1 Damage                    of                                  Quantity of
      cultivable/Agriculture                                      damaged land area
      land                                                        (Decimal)
  2 Loss of fertile top soil                                      Quantity of land
                                                                  from where top soil
                                                                  collected(Decimal)
  3 Water            stagnation/                                  # of probable
      drainage      congestion/                                   affected point
      water logging situation/
      affect storm run-off
  4 Destruction of trees and                                      # of loss trees
      vegetation or orchard or
      plant garden



                                                                                                     62 | P a g e
5    Negative effect on locally                                   # of affected
     important or valued                                          ecosystem
     ecosystem
6    Increased noise due to                                       # of noise pollution
     construction activities                                      sources
7    Obstruction of natural                                       # of obstacle
     connection between river
     and wetlands.

                         Issues related to community latrine in village market or gathering place
1    Damage                    of                                    Quantity of
     cultivable/Agriculture                                          damaged land area
     land                                                            (Decimal
2    Loss of fertile top soil                                        Quantity of land
                                                                     from where top soil
                                                                     collected(Decimal)
3    Destruction of trees and                                        # of loss trees
     vegetation or orchard or
     plant garden
4    Increased noise due to                                           # of noise pollution
     construction activities                                                 sources
5    Run-off/ waste water flow                                         # of affected point
     to/from water sources/
     water body
6    Affect quality of surface                                       # of affected surface
     water                                                                 water point
7    Affect quality of ground                                        # of affected ground
     water                                                                 water point
8    Possibility               of                                        # of suspected
     contamination of surface                                                source
     water source from waste
     or latrine pit
9    Possibility of damages of                                           # of suspected
     latrine pit from flood                                                  source
10   Possibility of water-borne                                          # of suspected
     disease                                                                 source
11   Improper disposal of                                                # of suspected
     excreta                                                                 source
12   Odor                                                                 # of source
13   Tested       positive    for                                     # of affected source
     Salinity




                                                                                                    63 | P a g e
                                                                                                 ANNEX D

                    SOCIAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT SCREENING DATA SHEET


1.      Location:

     Village                                            Union
     Upazila                                            District

2.      Activities. Description of the physical/construction activities that will be implemented under the
        project.
3.      Demography. Status of female headed household, people living below poverty, illiterate people,
        people with disability. Male/female ration, occupation. Public safety and security concern, if any.
        People at the community leadership.
4.      Land. Description and amount of lands used for the project: (Public/Private) and method of
        obtaining land.
5.      Labor. Type and number of labor employed. Location of labor residence. Male and female labor
        ratio.
6.      Water/ Sanitation/Health/Safety. Status of water supply and sanitation in the localities. Type
        and number of toilets. Source of water for drinking and other uses. Status of water-borne and
        vector-borne diseases. Method of faecal waste management, if any.
7.      Status of COVID-19 pandemic in the area. Usage of PPE, social distancing, training/ knowledge.
        Infected cases. Recent visitors from abroad. Availability of medical assistance. Provision of
        information dissemination (TV, Radio, Internet, newspaper etc)
8.      Presence and number of indigenous peoples.
9.      Known location of cultural heritage.
10. Stakeholder Engagement. Any communication and engagement carried out or not? Do people
    know the existence of GRM? Are they aware of any risk, impacts on them due to project
    intervention? Are they aware of the project components, provision of loan, provision of improved
    sanitary and water supply schemes?




                                                                                              64 | P a g e
                                                                                                                                                                   ANNEX E
                                           SAMPLE ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT PLAN (ESMP)

    Project Stage        Potential Environmental & Social                     Proposed Mitigation Measures                          Institutional        Supervision
                                  Impacts/Issues                                                                                   Responsibilities     Responsibility

Pre-Construction Stage   Loss of land / and other physical   •   No land acquisition is allowed in this project                         PMU           Social Development
                         assets                              •   Carrying out screening of squatters, if any                                           Specialist of PMU,
                                                             •   Consultation required with all potentially affected households                               PSC
                                                             •   Separate consultation with disadvantaged/ vulnerable people
Pre-Construction Stage   Stakeholders Engagement             •   All the project stakeholders will be consulted                    PMU & Contractor   Social Development
                                                             •   Separate community level consultation meeting with the                                Specialist of PMU,
                                                                 potential affected HHs                                                                       PSC
                                                             •   All the ES documents will be disclosed to all the relevant
                                                                 stakeholders
                                                             •   All the stakeholders will be informed about the GRM
Pre-Construction Stage   Loss of temporary access            •   Project to ensure temporary alternative access tgo be given            PMU           Social Development
                                                                                                                                                       Specialist of PMU

Pre-Construction Stage   Site Selection & implementing       •   Selection of sub-project sites and all implementing                    PMU             Environmental
                         interventions:  environmentally         interventions must take place outside of environmentally                             Consultant of PMU,
                         sensitive areas                         sensitive areas.                                                                            PSC
                                                             •   Forest department to be consulted during site selection if
                                                                 required
Pre-Construction Stage   Site Preparation: Soil Erosion;     •   Construction facilities to be placed away from water bodies,      PMU & Contractor     Environmental
                         Alteration of natural drainage          natural flow paths;                                                                  Consultant of PMU,
                                                             •   For tube-well sinking a minimum distance from latrines' soak                                PSC
                                                                 well to be maintained
                                                             •   A minimum distance to be maintained among tube-wells for
                                                                 cone depression and optimizing the production of wells etc.
                                                             •   Minimize cut & fill operations, the site clearing and grubbing
                                                                 operations should be limited to specific locations only.
                                                             •   Any disruption of socially sensitive areas with regard to human
                                                                 habitation and areas of cultural significance will be avoided.
                                                             •   The existing slope and natural drainage pattern on the site
                                                                 should not be significantly altered.
                                                             •   The contractor shall ensure that site preparation activities do
                                                                 not lead to disruption of activities of the local residents.

                                                                                                                                                                65 | P a g e
Construction Activity   Noise from construction works   •   Construction activity shall be restricted to daytime as far as      Contractor     Environmental
                                                            possible to avoid disturbance to surrounding areas.                              Consultant of PMU,
                                                        •   Wherever required, personal protective equipment (PPE) such                             PSC
                                                            as ear plugs, earmuffs, helmets, etc. should be provided to the
                                                            persons working in high-risk areas.
Construction Activity   Dust                            •   Construction machinery shall be properly maintained to              Contractor     Environmental
                                                            minimize exhaust emissions                                                       Consultant of PMU,
                                                        •   Dust generated as a result of clearing, leveling and site grading                       PSC
                                                            operations shall be suppressed using water sprinklers.
                                                        •   Dust generation due to vehicle movement on haul roads/access
                                                            roads shall be controlled through regular water sprinkling.
Construction Activity   Safety Issues                   •   Prevent entry of unauthorized personnel and proper storage          Contractor     Environmental
                                                            and control of hazardous materials on site                                       Consultant of PMU,
                                                        •   Health and safety training to the labors                                                PSC
                                                        •   All the labors to wear ID cards
                                                        •   Child and forced labors are not allowed for any form of
                                                            activities
                                                        •   Site(s) shall be secured by fencing and manned at entry points
Construction Activity   Traffic Management              •   Adequate alternative arrangements to be made to minimize            Contractor     Environmental
                                                            impact on motorist and pedestrians.                                              Consultant of PMU,
                                                        •   Adequate road signs to be planted on access roads to limit                              PSC
                                                            vehicular speeds
                                                        •   Traffic signs should be in Bangla language
Construction Activity   Increase in road accidents      •   The movement of heavy machinery and equipment shall be              Contractor     Environmental
                                                            restricted to defined routes.                                                    Consultant of PMU,
                                                        •   Proper signage to be displayed at major junctions.                                      PSC
                                                        •   Road diversions and closures to be informed well in advance to
                                                            the local community.
                                                        •   The vehicular movement to be controlled near sensitive
                                                            locations viz. schools, colleges, hospitals, identified along
                                                            designated vehicular transportation routes.
                                                        •   Local community will be trained on traffic management and
                                                            awareness
Construction Activity   Labour Issues                   •   Awareness building about prevention of child abuse, child           Contractor   Social Development
                                                            marriage, GBV, sexual harassment, trafficking of women and                       and Health Specialist
                                                            children as well as illegal drug trade                                               of PMU, PSC
                                                        •   Work force should be prohibited from disturbing the flora,
                                                            fauna including hunting of animals, wildlife hunting, poaching
                                                            and tree felling.

                                                                                                                                                        66 | P a g e
                                                                •   Adequate facilities ensuring COVID-19 protocols (PPE etc)
                                                                •   Treated water will be made available at site for labor drinking
                                                                    purpose.
                                                                •   Adequate training on COVID-19 issues
                                                                •   Evacuation facilities for symptomatic labors
Construction Activity   Waste Management: Improper              Waste management issues covering the following aspects:                 Contractor     Environmental
                        management and handling of              •   Residual waste from work site                                                    Consultant of PMU,
                        hazardous and non-hazardous             •   Waste from equipment maintenance/vehicles on-site.                                      PSC
                        waste during construction.              •   The scrap material generated from the erection of structures
                                                                    and related construction activities will be collected and stored
                                                                    separately in a stock yard and sold to local recyclers.
                                                                •   Hazardous waste viz. waste oil etc. will be collected and stored
                                                                    in the paved and bounded area and subsequently sold to
                                                                    authorized recyclers.
                                                                •   Waste from civil works
                                                                •   Wastes from disposal of PPE
Construction Activity   Health & Safety Risks:                  •   All construction equipment used for the execution of the            Contractor      Environmental
                        The potential for exposure to               project works shall be fit for purpose and carry valid inspection                Consultant as well as
                        safety events such as tripping,             certificates and insurance requirements.                                         Social Development
                        working at height activities, fire      •   The risk assessment shall be prepared and communicated prior                      Specialists of PMU,
                        from hot works, smoking, failure in         to the commencement of work for all types of work activities
                                                                                                                                                              PSC
                        electrical installation, mobile plant       on site.
                        and vehicles, and electrical shocks.    •   Signpost any slippery areas, ensure proper footwear with a
                        Exposure to health events during            good grip is worn for personnel working within slippery areas.
                        construction activities such as         •   Day and night time safety protocol in construction areas where
                        manual handling and                         there are open trenches / ditches for pipe laying or drainage,
                        musculoskeletal disorders, hand-            open pits for construction of septic tanks or latrines, or open
                        arm vibration, temporary or                 pits resulting from emptying / removal of old pit latrines, etc.
                        permanent hearing loss, heat                The design and implementation of the safety measures should
                        stress, and dermatitis.                     take into consideration the presence of children, old people
                                                                    and women.
                                                                •   Set up a system to alert workers on site. This may be
                                                                    temporary or permanent mains operated fire alarm.
                                                                •   Fire extinguishers should be located at identified fire points
                                                                    around the site. The extinguishers shall be appropriate to the
                                                                    nature of the potential fire.
                                                                •   Communicate emergency response procedures considering
                                                                    such things as specific foreseeable emergency situations,
                                                                    organizational roles and authorities, responsibilities and

                                                                                                                                                                67 | P a g e
    expertise, emergency response and evacuation procedure, in
    addition to training for personnel and drills to test the plan
•   Electrical equipment must be safe and properly maintained;
    works shall not be carried out on live systems.
•   Only competent authorized persons shall carry out
    maintenance on electrical equipment, adequate Personal
    Protective Equipment (PPE) for electrical works must be
    provided to all personnel involved in the tasks.
•   An adequate number of staff and first aiders shall be on site in
    accordance with Bangladesh Labor Law requirements.
•   First aid kit with adhesive bandages, antibiotic ointment,
    antiseptic wipes, aspirin, non-latex gloves, scissors,
    thermometer, etc. shall be made available by the contractor on
    site.
•   Emergency evacuation response shall be prepared by the
    contractor and relevant staff shall be trained through mock-up
    drills.
•   Ensure all equipment is suitable for jobs (safety, size, power,
    efficiency, ergonomics, cost, user acceptability etc.), provide
    the lowest vibration tools that are suitable and can do the
    works.
•   Ensure all tools and other work equipment are serviced and
    maintained in accordance with maintenance schedules and
    manufacturer's instructions.
•   Regular noise exposure assessments and noise level surveys of
    noisy areas, processes and equipment shall be carried out in
    order to form the basis for remedial actions when necessary
•   Awareness training sessions should be established and
    provided to all personnel involved during the construction
    phase in order to highlight the heat related illnesses of working
    in hot conditions such as heat cramps, heat exhaustion, heat
    stroke, dehydration.
•   Ensure adequate quantities of drinking water are available at
    different locations within the site,
•   Eliminate the risk of exposure whenever possible, provide
    proper PPE wherever necessary and to ensure that there are
    satisfactory washing and changing facilities.
•   Ensure that all workers exposed to a risk are aware of the
    possible dangers. They should be given thorough training in
    how to protect themselves and there should be effective

                                                                        68 | P a g e
                                                               supervision to ensure that the correct methods are being used
Operation         &   Noise disturbances to fauna          •   Ensure operation & maintenance machinery and equipment                 PMU             Environmental
Maintenance                                                    has noise dampeners                                                                  Consultant of PMU,
                                                           •   Avoid night time activities as much as possible                                             PSC
                                                           •   Regular third-party monitoring of noise levels
Operation         &   Odours and pollution caused by       •   Ensure preventative maintenance schedule is followed                   PMU             Environmental
Maintenance           leaking latrines and faecal sludge   •   Regular inspections of potential leaking points                                      Consultant of PMU,
                      impacting      surrounding   water                                                                                                   PSC
                      bodies, flora and fauna

Operation         &   Withdrawal of groundwater            •   Monitoring of extraction rates                                         PMU             Environmental
Maintenance                                                •   Coordination with other development agencies                                         Consultant of PMU,
                                                                                                                                                           PSC

Decommissioning       The impacts are similar to those     •   The main mitigation and monitoring measures to minimize or        PMU / Contractor          PSC
                      listed in construction stage:            reduce the environmental and social impacts during
                                                               decommissioning are anticipated to be similar to those
                      • Pollution from waste materials         identified for the construction phase.
                      • Health & Safety risks to workers   •   Regular third-party monitoring of air as well as receiving land
                          and local community/DRPs             and water bodies




                                                                                                                                                             69 | P a g e
