Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       BD Rural Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for Human Capital Development Project (P169342)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                           Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                    (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                       Date Prepared/Updated: 05/15/2020 | Report No: ESRSA00648




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               May 15, 2020                                                                                     Page 1 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               BD Rural Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for Human Capital Development Project (P169342)



                     BASIC INFORMATION

                     A. Basic Project Data

                     Country                        Region                          Project ID                     Parent Project ID (if any)

                     Bangladesh                     SOUTH ASIA                      P169342

                     Project Name                   BD Rural Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for Human Capital Development Project

                     Practice Area (Lead)           Financing Instrument            Estimated Appraisal Date       Estimated Board Date

                     Water                          Investment Project              6/1/2020                       8/20/2020
                                                    Financing

                     Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency(ies)

                     People's Republic of           Department of Public Health
                     Bangladesh                     Engineering (DPHE), Palli
                                                    Karma-Sahayak Foundation
                                                    (PKSF)




Public Disclosure
                     Proposed Development Objective(s)
                     To (i) improve access to ‘safely-managed’ water supply and sanitation in selected areas of rural Bangladesh; and (ii)
                     strengthen sector institutional capacity for water and sanitation.


                     Financing (in USD Million)                                                                                         Amount

                      Total Project Cost                                                                                                     543.40



                     B. Is the project being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project [including overview of Country, Sectoral & Institutional Contexts and
                     Relationship to CPF]
                     A. Project Development Objective

                     1.      PDO statement. To (i) improve access to ‘safely-managed’ water supply and sanitation in selected areas of
                     rural Bangladesh; and (ii) strengthen sector institutional capacity for water and sanitation.

                     2.        PDO level indicators. The PDO will be evaluated against the following PDO-level indicators:

                    May 15, 2020                                                                                                        Page 2 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              BD Rural Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for Human Capital Development Project (P169342)



                     (a)      The number of people provided with access to ‘safely-managed’ water services
                     (b)      The number of people provided with access to ‘safely-managed’ sanitation services; and
                     (d)      Monitoring system established and in use in project Upazilas (Yes/No).

                     B. Project Components

                     3.       The project components have been developed using the convergence approach, central to project design. The
                     project will converge with two on-going Bank projects: (i) the Bangladesh Health Sector Support Project (P160846,
                     US$500 million, July 2017 - Dec 2022), which seeks to strengthen the health, nutrition and population (HNP) sector's
                     core management systems and delivery of essential HNP services; and (ii) the Bangladesh Income Support Program
                     for the Poorest Project (P146520, US$250 million, March 2015 - June 2022), which seeks to provide income support to
                     the poorest mothers in selected Upazilas while increasing the mothers’ use of child nutrition and cognitive
                     development services and enhancing local level government capacity to deliver safety nets. The convergence
                     approach among the three projects involves a geographical overlap of project locations, the use of common delivery
                     platforms including beneficiary targeting, coordinated communication strategy, and leveraging each other’s results
                     indicators (see Annex 1). With at least two projects implemented in project locations, the convergence approach is
                     expected to leverage the multi-sectoral interventions and resources to address human development challenges faced
                     by vulnerable households in some of the poorest regions of the country.

                     4.       To achieve its objectives, the project will support five components, financed by the Government of
                     Bangladesh (GoB), AIIB, and Bank. A breakdown of costs and sources of funds by components are presented in Chart




Public Disclosure
                     1. Annex 2 provides more details on each sub-component. Pursuant to a Project Co-Lenders’ Agreement with the AIIB,
                     the Bank will supervise the project and administer both IDA and the AIIB loans in accordance with the Bank’s policies
                     and procedures. The co-lender agreement will be signed by the Bank and the AIIB in accordance with the 2016 Co-
                     Financing Framework Agreement between the AIIB and Bank (as amended in 2018). The AIIB and Bank will jointly
                     finance the project in equal shares, with all components financed jointly. The GoB is expected to provide US$143
                     million in counterpart funding.
                     Chart 1. Project costs by component and financier (in US$ million)

                     (a)     Component 1: Investments in water supply.
                     (i)     1.1: Large piped water schemes will support piped water schemes for water scarce communities of 300-700
                     households.
                     (ii)    1.2: Small piped water schemes target water scarce communities of a smaller size, investing in schemes that
                     each serves 30-40 households.
                     (iii)   1.3: Household loans for water improvements will enable about 60,000 households to borrow from MFIs for
                     household water facility improvements.
                     (iv)    1.4: Water supply market development will provide MFI loans to local water entrepreneurs.
                     (v)     1.5: Feasibility studies in high climate risk regions will identify sources for drinking water and examine
                     technological options and their financial viability in five Districts in Southern Bangladesh.

                     (b)       Component 2: Investments in sanitation and hygiene.
                     (i)       2.1: Public sanitation and hygiene facilities will invest in sanitation and hygiene facilities in high pedestrian
                     traffic locations, community health clinics, and non-government schools.


                    May 15, 2020                                                                                                            Page 3 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              BD Rural Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for Human Capital Development Project (P169342)



                     (ii)   2.2: Sanitation and hygiene facilities for households will provide two-pit latrines and handwashing stations to
                     households through MFI loans or grants, depending on their income level.
                     (iii)  2.3: Sanitation and hygiene market development will provide MFI loans to local sanitation and hygiene
                     entrepreneurs to expand their businesses and offer them training on proper installation and maintenance of SDG 6
                     compliant WASH facility products.
                     (iv)   2.4: Innovation will help localize innovation WASH technologies, especially in fecal sludge management.
                     (v)    2.5: Behavioral change communication (BCC) campaign will carry out activities to change WASH behaviors and
                     raise WASH awareness and willingness to pay.

                     (c)       Component 3: Institutional strengthening.
                     (i)       3.1: Strengthening of policies and regulatory framework will support drafting policy documents that would be
                     critical in implementing the newly drafted National Strategy for Water Supply and Sanitation.
                     (ii)      3.2: Capacity building will design and deliver a series of multi-year training to targeted central and local
                     government officials working in the WASH and converging sectors.

                     (d)   Component 4: Project implementation and management. This component will support key project
                     management activities enabling the DPHE and PKSF to coordinate and implement the proposed project.

                     (e)    Component 5: COVID-19 emergency response. This component will provide quick, just-in-time WASH services
                     where needed, both in and outside the convergence areas, to cope with the fast-changing COVID-19 situation.




Public Disclosure
                     (f) Component 6: Contingent emergency response (CERC). A provisional zero amount component is included, which
                     will allow for rapid reallocation of loan proceeds from other project components during an emergency.



                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1. Project location(s) and salient characteristics relevant to the ES assessment [geographic, environmental, social]
                     This project will be implemented in 78 Upazilas in 18 Districts, which are chosen from four Divisions (Chottogram,
                     Sylhet, Mymensingh and Rangpur). These were selected based on levels of water availability and quality, WASH
                     coverage, and quality of MFI services. Many of the areas are remote with limited accessibility. Specific locations of the
                     interventions have not been identified yet. The large piped water schemes will support 78 piped water schemes for
                     water scarce communities of 300-700 households. And the small piped water schemes will target 3,000 water scarce
                     communities of 30-40 households. The Project will also enable about 40,000 households to borrow from Micro
                     Finance Institutes (MFIs) for household water facility improvements. Under emergency support for COVID-19, the
                     Project will also provide mini water supply with hand wash facilities in around 700 locations in about 5 Districts across
                     Bangladesh, the selection of these districts is yet to be determined. The rural water supply is likely to use
                     groundwater sources. Shallow aquifers will be avoided in order to reduce the risk of coliform. Absence of proper
                     sanitation services cause environmental pollution, affecting both public health and the local economies. The Project
                     will also invest in sanitation and hygiene facilities in pedestrian traffic locations, community health clinics, and non-
                     government schools and provide two-pit latrines and hand washing stations to households through MFI loans or
                     grants, depending on their income level.




                    May 15, 2020                                                                                                      Page 4 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              BD Rural Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for Human Capital Development Project (P169342)



                     Given the prevailing state of water supply and sanitation standards the project will provide further access to WASH
                     facilities, training and financial support to achieve higher standards of WASH discipline. It will also have important
                     implications for women’s safety and security. Households will be motivated to construct toilets adjacent to their
                     houses / bedrooms, rather than the legacy of ‘out house’ latrine construction. Lack of sanitation facilities in schools
                     results in low levels of attendance among girls, perpetuating cycles of gender inequality and poverty. Girls who have
                     reached puberty and female school staff who are menstruating need gender-specific sanitation facilities. The project
                     will introduce low cost sanitary napkin in rural areas through private sector involvement. For environmental and social
                     due diligence, both DPHE and PKSF adopted a framework approach, since the exact locations and various physical
                     activities related to water supply, sanitation are yet to be determined.

                     D. 2. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity
                     Department of Public Health Engineering (DPHE) and Palli Karma-Sahayak Foundation (PKSF) will be the Implementing
                     Agencies (IA) of the project. The project will be managed by two PMUs collaborating closely. DPHE will play the main
                     role in the development of public infrastructure under the project. It has considerable experience in executing Bank
                     projects, with capacity for design and procurement, construction, and commissioning of WASH facilities. It will be
                     responsible for supporting piped water schemes (Components 1.1 and 1.2), providing public WASH facilities, including
                     in healthcare centers and community secondary schools (Component 2.1), and offering sanitation grants for the
                     poorest (Component 2.2.b). DPHE will also carry out water supply feasibility studies in climate risk areas (Component
                     1.5), pilot innovations (Component 2.4), implement most of WASH behavioral change communications (BCC)
                     campaign (Component 2.5) and carry out institutional reforms and capacity building activities (Component 3). PKSF
                     will play the main role in the development of private assets under the project. It is a ‘not-for-profit’ financing




Public Disclosure
                     institution and works with Micro Finance Institutions (MFIs) that offer microcredits to poor and non-poor borrowers.
                     PKSF has considerable experience in managing Bank projects in various sectors and recently managed the OBA
                     Sanitation Program. Under this project, PKSF will be responsible for offering wholesale capital to retail MFIs, which in
                     turn will give loans to households to upgrade the WASH facilities at their home in the project areas (Components 1.3
                     and 2.2.a). In addition, PKSF will extend capacity building support to retail MFIs and local entrepreneurs for creating
                     demand and installing SDG-6 compliant WASH facilities (Components 1.4, 2.3, and 2.5).

                     Both the agencies have dealt with safeguards issues adequately in the past in World Bank financed projects and are
                     currently implementing the Bangladesh Municipal Water Supply and Sanitation Project (BMWSSP) and Sustainable
                     Enterprises Project which are similar to this project. However, the ESF will be new for both. There will be a need for
                     training, deployment of adequate staffing and resources from the client side, and sustained assistance from the Bank
                     side. To mitigate the risks, the DPHE and PKSF will be adequately resourced with personnel and expertise with clearly-
                     defined TORs. The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) proposes the recruitment of required
                     staff for this proposed project, who will assist the development of a long-term E&S capacity building program for both
                     agencies to be supported under the project as well as to ensure the overall environmental and social risk
                     management at the implementation stage. The Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) records agreed
                     actions that the IAs will adopt including capacity building activities and preparation of management plans and
                     guidelines.


                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS



                    May 15, 2020                                                                                                     Page 5 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              BD Rural Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for Human Capital Development Project (P169342)



                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                        Moderate


                     Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                     Moderate
                     The major environmental risk will emanate from water contamination, discharge of sludge and untreated sewage.
                     There will be construction related impacts such as air, noise, dust and water management when water pipes and twin
                     pit latrines are built/setup. Removal/transportation of septage may also cause worker and community health and
                     safety concerns if not properly managed.

                     Training of local sweepers for safe management of fecal sludge and above all a community outreach/ training/
                     awareness building effort will significantly improve the present status of fecal waste hazards. Without the project, the
                     current practice is unhygienic and random disposal of fecal waste lead will lead to pollution of natural resources and
                     affects human health. Construction related impacts (noise, air and water pollution) will also need to be managed with
                     proven best practices.

                     In case of water supply component of the Project there might be risks of lowering the groundwater table due to
                     operation of project constructed deep tube wells. However, DPHE has already prepared a groundwater mapping, and
                     the location of the deep tube-wells will be identified accordingly to ensure low risk of subsidence. Poorly maintained
                     water sources could be breeding grounds for mosquitoes or poor disposal of sludge could result in contamination of
                     water sources. The water quality for all water facilities need to be monitored at regular intervals. Caretakers will be
                     appointed for each water point and will be trained for operation and maintenance, with a special focus on safe
                     disposal of waste water. The project will keep provision for the necessary training and awareness on sanitation



Public Disclosure
                     technology and management.

                     Both PKSF and DPHE are capable organizations and have proven experience in managing rural sanitation and water
                     supply programs and are currently implementing two other similar WB funded projects.


                     Considering the overall risk and impacts related to the proposed project activities, the proposed mitigation measures
                     and the long-term experience and capabilities of the implementing agencies, the Environmental risk is rated
                     Moderate. However, this risk classification will be reviewed on a regular basis and be changed (if necessary). Any
                     change to the classification will be disclosed on the Bank’s website.

                     Social Risk Rating                                                                                            Moderate
                     The key, mostly positive, social impacts of the project are associated with: (i) gender (design, safety, impact on
                     women’s health); (ii) inclusion (addressing the needs of women, elderly, persons with disabilities, indigenous,
                     marginalized and vulnerable communities, culturally sensitized design, easing access to information and finance,
                     assistance with repair and maintenance); (iii) land use (common/private property, optimizing access through strategic
                     location, resettlement impacts if any); (iv) community health and safety; and (v) the type of labor used and associated
                     impacts. If these impacts are well managed, the project is expected to result in better E&S outcomes through
                     improved access to ‘safely-managed’ sanitation facilities, leading to better health. Especially for women, menstrual
                     hygiene, privacy, security, access and comfort will be greatly improved.



                    May 15, 2020                                                                                                     Page 6 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              BD Rural Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for Human Capital Development Project (P169342)



                     The Project will entail use of labor for small scale civil construction in remote areas. Although labor will be mostly
                     local incidence of GBV/SEA cannot be ruled out. The Implementing Agency (IA) and the Contractor will put adequate
                     mechanisms in place (C-ESMP, written and signed Codes of Conduct, worker training and sensitization on GBV/SEA,
                     spread of communicable disease, including COVID-19) to address these issues.

                     Community health and safety risks are also anticipated due to the removal and transportation of fecal sludge, if not
                     properly managed. However, the Project is designed to reduce open defecation and improve the sludge management
                     and transportation issues. The project will introduce better social outcomes through improved access to basic
                     sanitation facilities, leading to better health and hygiene in the long run. Especially for women and the vulnerable, the
                     Project is also expected to improve menstrual hygiene and related health issues, privacy, security, access and comfort
                     for women. Component 2.5, Behavioral Change and Communication will also address the critical need for hand
                     washing and maintaining proper hygiene to deter COVID-19 outbreak in the communities. Field level activities will be
                     monitored and evaluated against set guidelines by the IAs.

                     Project ESMF addresses these areas and proposes policies and procedures for mitigation and recommends modalities
                     to maximize project benefits for the target populations by aligning the project design with the socio-cultural and
                     context specific needs of communities. The outbreak of COVID-19 may amplify community health and safety issues,
                     especially related to labor influx. IA will put in place adequate measures for workers as well as local communities
                     where the project will be implemented to deter the spread of the virus.

                     Considering the overall risks and impacts related to the proposed project activities, that are predictable, site specific,




Public Disclosure
                     and have minimal adverse impacts that can be adequately mitigated and the long-term experience and capabilities of
                     the implementing agencies, the Social risk is rated Moderate. However, this risk classification will be reviewed on a
                     regular basis and be changed (if necessary). Any change to the classification will be disclosed on the Bank’s website.




                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESSs) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1. General Assessment

                     ESS1 Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     Overview of the relevance of the Standard for the Project:
                     This ESS is relevant to the Project and clarifies the client’s responsibilities in identifying and managing the
                     environmental and social risks of the project. The Project will provide piped water supply as well as sanitation
                     facilities for rural household of 78 Upazilas of 18 Districts. Specific sites are yet to be determined, thus an
                     Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared. The ESMF illustrates policy, procedure
                     and directives on how to assess specific environmental and social risks and provide guidance to mitigate them. The
                     ESMF also provides guidelines for screening of sub-projects for environmental and social risks and assessment of
                     Borrower’s capacity and institutional requirements. During implementation, site-specific environmental and social
                     assessments will be conducted as necessary. These assessments will help adoption of mitigation measures against
                     the environmental and social risks and impacts (through preparation of ESMPs) and address the issues of inclusion,
                     social vulnerability of certain groups, gender and GBV, consultation and communication strategy and any other issues
                     identified via the assessment and the stakeholder consultations. As part of the assessment, consultations with key

                    May 15, 2020                                                                                                       Page 7 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              BD Rural Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for Human Capital Development Project (P169342)



                     stakeholders, including vulnerable and disadvantaged communities, will be carried to identify their concerns and
                     requirements, which will be included in the design of the facilities to strengthen greater support to these population
                     sections. This will also help address potential issues related to Universal Access to project facilities. The ESMF will be
                     updated within 30 days after the Effectiveness Date, since it was not possible to carry out detailed consultation and
                     field assessments during the preparation of the ESMF due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and associated
                     restrictions on movement.

                     The Project also include a Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) which will allow for rapid reallocation
                     of loan proceeds from other project components during an emergency. In case the CERC is activated, the ESMF will
                     be updated to cover any new activities that are not included under existing ESMF. A negative list of activities that are
                     ineligible for financing under the CERC component is included in the ESMF as an annex.



                     ESS10 Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure
                     From the outset of the Project, the Implementing Agency (IA) carried out stakeholder identification and engagement,
                     consultation and communication, including provision of grievance redress and disclosure of information. The IA has
                     prepared a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) which will be disclosed prior to appraisal but will remain a living
                     document. The beneficiaries identified are both at community level (users of water points) and at the individual level
                     (those receiving private toilets, piped water supply and door to door connections). Project interested parties like
                     Local Government Division, local Partner Organizations of PKSF as well as the contractors were also consulted since




Public Disclosure
                     they will fall under project interested parties of the stakeholder category. A Grievance Redress Mechanisms (GRM)
                     will be set up before implementation to address grievances and receive feedback from all stakeholders in a timely
                     manner and following due process which will include channels where physical presence is not required to lodge a
                     complaint, given the COVID-19 situation in the country. The GRM will be cognizant of and follow required levels of
                     discretion, and cultural appropriateness, especially when dealing with cases of sexual harassment and GBV. The SEP
                     will also be used to provide and share information regarding the status of COVID-19, various health protocols and
                     practice, deter rumors and the alert public of any emergency event since the emergency situation may adversely
                     affect project implementation. Further additional stakeholder consultations will be cognizant of the virus spread and
                     will avoid public gatherings (taking into account national restrictions), including public hearings, workshops and
                     community meetings. If smaller meetings are not permitted, IA will make all reasonable efforts to conduct meetings
                     through online channels, including WebEx, Zoom and Skype. Communications means will be diversified and social
                     media and online channels, chat groups will be used based on the type and category of stakeholders. Traditional
                     channels of communications (TV, newspaper, radio, dedicated phone-lines, and mail) will also be adopted when
                     stakeholders to do not have access to online channels or do not use them frequently. Where direct engagement with
                     project affected people or beneficiaries is necessary IA will identify channels for direct communication with each
                     affected household via a context specific combination of email messages, mail, online platforms, dedicated phone
                     lines with knowledgeable operators. Each of the proposed channels of engagement will clearly specify how feedback
                     and suggestions can be provided by stakeholders.


                     B.2. Specific Risks and Impacts

                     A brief description of the potential environmental and social risks and impacts relevant to the Project.

                    May 15, 2020                                                                                                        Page 8 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              BD Rural Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for Human Capital Development Project (P169342)



                     ESS2 Labor and Working Conditions
                     ESS2     Labor and Working Conditions

                     Relevant. Civil works such as construction of water pipeline and setup of toilet and hygiene facilities in rural areas will
                     involve employment of Project workers (direct workers, and contracted workers). As with any assignment of labor,
                     there is likelihood of labor related risks like GBV, change of power dynamics in the rural areas because of labor
                     income, demand of limited local resources changing price/cost pattern, etc. Further issues such as child labor in the
                     supply chain, forced labor and trafficked personnel will also have to be taken into consideration in the E&S screening.

                     The civil works of the project will mostly involve localized labor. The prospective bidders will receive training covering
                     all above topics prior to starting the civil works. Given the activities of sanitation and water schemes under the
                     project, the number of workers is expected to be low in size mostly supplied by local labor from the community who
                     will be Contracted Workers (as per ESS2 definition). In case Primary Supply Workers are needed, no child and/or
                     forced labor will be allowed and the Borrower will require the primary suppliers to take appropriate remedies in case
                     child and/or forced labor use is detected. The primary suppliers will also take actions to remedy any OHS issues
                     should the need arise. Required construction materials for very limited civil works will be sourced from legal business
                     entities with permits.

                     Labor Management Procedures (LMP) have been prepared as per the directives of ESS2 which includes types and
                     number of workers, legal frameworks, nature of work assignments, OHS issues, Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM)
                     etc. Further, a Labor Management Plan (including Codes of Conduct) proportionate to potential risks and impacts will



Public Disclosure
                     be prepared by the Contractors prior to the beginning of civil works. This plan will also include the assessment of risks
                     and impacts and required mitigation measure to ensure health and safety of the contractor’s workers that may be
                     exposed to health risks (especially COVID-19). Issues such as child labor, forced labor, gender and GBV issues,
                     occupational health and safety will be addressed in the bidding and contract documents as well. A basic Grievance
                     Redress Mechanism (GRM) has been outlined for the workers to report any issues related to workplace safety and
                     other concerns. Adequate OHS protections in accordance with EHSGs and GIIP in relation to protection from COVID-
                     19 will also be implemented.




                     ESS3 Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management
                     The project will support construction of water supply and sanitation facilities which will be more energy and water
                     efficient. As mentioned above, the location of deep tube-wells will follow the groundwater mapping done by DPHE
                     (this covers groundwater status as well as water scarce areas where demand for safe water is high). In order to
                     ensure efficient designs of the water supply schemes, water demand studies will be undertaken. Potential impacts on
                     groundwater resources will be monitored, and mitigation measures implemented if required. After site specific
                     assessment the IAs will ensure the execution of the ESMPs so that water supply network is not contaminated,
                     untreated sewage is not discharged and sludge is managed.




                    May 15, 2020                                                                                                        Page 9 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              BD Rural Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for Human Capital Development Project (P169342)



                     The ESMF identifies and proposes measures to mitigate the relevant risks & impacts (especially sludge management).
                     Poor O&M could pose community and public health risks. Therefore, sub-projects will be screened to identify
                     potential risks of creating stagnant water from poor O&M that could serve as breeding ground for mosquitoes and
                     spread of vector borne diseases. Based on the screening results, subsequent mitigation measures will be suggested in
                     the ESMP and implemented. The site-specific groundwater should also be screened against presence of Arsenic and
                     similar contaminant affecting water quality and mitigation measures will be adopted. The water quality assessment
                     should be included in the site-specific environmental assessments.



                     ESS4 Community Health and Safety
                     Activities under this project may give rise to a number of risks to community health and safety. The project supports
                     the provision of water supply pipelines and sanitation and hygiene facilities setup in communities many of which are
                     in hard to reach areas of the country. Most of the labor will be from local areas thus labor influx impact will not be
                     very significant. However, the project will generate construction related waste during construction and operation
                     phases. The provision of new design of twin pit toilets is likely to address the issue of sludge disposal and
                     management. COVID-19 spread in the rural areas and among construction and project workers will also need to be
                     taken into consideration during implementation, given the nature of how the disease spreads from human to human.
                     A public interaction protocol, good practices, good hygiene protocol will be posted in various locations and
                     communities and workers will be made aware of how to contain transmission. This community engagement on how
                     to avoid the risk of COVID- 19 is part of the project design.




Public Disclosure
                     ESS5 Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement
                     Land Acquisition is not expected related to the proposed project activities at this stage. The mini piped-water
                     schemes and the community water points and toilets will all be established on land that either belongs to the local
                     governments or is volunteered by the community themselves for which verification as per ESS5 will be carried out. All
                     previous projects working on similar rural water schemes have successfully used this model. The project will work on
                     provision of common water points at the community level. Assessment of land ownership type, community
                     engagement to disseminate information, establish a feedback loop, assess community willingness, participatory site
                     selection and design will be conducted. Detailed assessment will also be done on the existence of squatters,
                     livelihood and grazing activities, and issues related to hindering access to neighboring villages and settlements. It is
                     unlikely (based on the experience of previous projects) that physical displacement will occur, but temporary
                     disturbances and impacts on businesses, access to and from homes (especially with regards to piped water and
                     individual connections) may occur. After the proposed sites are identified and based on screening, if squatters are
                     found to be present in the project sites, Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans (A-RAP) will be prepared, if
                     necessary.


                     ESS6 Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources
                     It is very unlikely that the infrastructure works related to water supply and sanitation in rural areas can impact native
                     flora and fauna, especially during the laying of rural water pipelines. The screening process will identify any potential



                    May 15, 2020                                                                                                     Page 10 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              BD Rural Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for Human Capital Development Project (P169342)



                     sensitive sites of biodiversity value in or near proposed intervention sites. In such situations, appropriate mitigation
                     measures will be carried out.


                     ESS7 Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional Local Communities
                     Since site specific information is yet to be known, the presence and effects on IPs and small ethnic communities
                     exhibiting characteristics as defined in ESS7 through Project activities cannot be determined at this stage. However,
                     the project will not implement any activities in Chittagong Hill Tracts and Cox’s Bazar, where most of the IPs/small
                     ethnic communities with ESS7 characteristics are concentrated. If the ES screening reveal that IPs/small ethnic
                     minorities exhibiting ESS7 characteristics are present in the project interventions areas an Indigenous Peoples Plans
                     (IPP) will be developed, with the provision of free, prior and informed consent, as appropriate.


                     ESS8 Cultural Heritage
                     Every effort will be made to ensure that the physical works are not located near any heritage sites. A chance finds
                     procedure are included in the ESMF and will be part of works contracts and in the bidding document requiring
                     contractors to stop construction if cultural heritage is encountered during any work and to notify and closely
                     coordinate with relevant mandated country authority for the salvaging and restoration of such cultural heritage.


                     ESS9 Financial Intermediaries




Public Disclosure
                     Under this project, PKSF will be responsible for offering wholesale capital to retail MFIs, which in turn will provide
                     loans to households to upgrade the WASH facilities at their homes in the project areas (Components 1.3 and 2.2.a).
                     MFIs and private sector financiers will develop their own Environmental and Social Management Systems (ESMSs), (in
                     case they do not have ESMS yet) and PKSF will check compliance of sub-borrowers as per ESF requirements. Further
                     WB will also review the ESMS of both wholesale and retail MFIs. PKSF will be responsible for oversight of participating
                     MFIs and private sector parties and ensure that they identify, assess, manage and monitor any environmental and
                     social risks emanating from their activities. A Financial Intermediary Study on PKSF has already been conducted by FCI
                     team at the Bank. Requisite training will be provided by PKSF to orient them towards the preparation and use of the
                     ESMS.


                     B.3 Other Relevant Project Risks
                     Given the existing state of COVID-19 in the country, lack of accessible and relevant health facilities, the project will be
                     implemented under specific protocols. Self-isolation has become a common phenomenon. These already have given
                     rise to the price hike of essentials, travel restriction, social tension and rumors. People living in close proximities of
                     the intervention will have to be separated from workers and worker case diagnosis and referral will be essential.

                     C. Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                     OP 7.50 Projects on International Waterways                                                                             Yes
                     The exception to the riparian notification requirement is being sought.
                     OP 7.60 Projects in Disputed Areas                                                                                      No

                    May 15, 2020                                                                                                       Page 11 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              BD Rural Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for Human Capital Development Project (P169342)




                     III. BORROWER’S ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL COMMITMENT PLAN (ESCP)

                                          DELIVERABLES against MEASURES AND ACTIONs IDENTIFIED                              TIMELINE
                     ESS 1 Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     Prepare and disclose ESMF (already prepared, will be updated after effectiveness)
                     Prepare and disclose ESIAs for sub-projects
                                                                                                                            02/2021
                     Prepare, disclose, update and implement the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) for
                     each sub-project

                     ESS 10 Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure
                     SEP has been prepared but will be updated after effectiveness. GRM will be in place before any works
                                                                                                                            02/2021
                     begin.

                     ESS 2 Labor and Working Conditions
                     Prepare, update, adapt, and implement the Labor Management Procedures (LMP) - LMP is prepared
                     but will be updated after project effectiveness and once subprojects are identified.                   02/2021
                     Establish, maintain, and operate a GRM for the Project




Public Disclosure
                     ESS 3 Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management
                     Develop and implement site specific ESMPs on the basis of RECP, and in accordance with the updated
                                                                                                                            02/2021
                     ESMF

                     ESS 4 Community Health and Safety
                     Put measures in place to prevent or minimize the spread of the infectious diseases/COVID-19 to the
                     community and among workers/labor camps by following national and WHO guidelines, ESMF and
                                                                                                                            02/2021
                     SEP.


                     ESS 5 Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement
                     Prepare abbreviated RAPs if the site screenings indicated the existence of squatters and adverse
                                                                                                                            02/2021
                     impacts on livelihoods.

                     ESS 6 Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources
                     Carryout screening                                                                                     02/2021

                     ESS 7 Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional Local Communities




                    May 15, 2020                                                                                            Page 12 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              BD Rural Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for Human Capital Development Project (P169342)



                     Develop an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) if such communities exhibiting characteristics mentioned in
                                                                                                                                  02/2021
                     ESS7 are found in the project intervention areas per assessments

                     ESS 8 Cultural Heritage
                     Include chance finds procedures in works contracts                                                           04/2021

                     ESS 9 Financial Intermediaries
                     Ensure that both wholesale and retail MFIs prepare, adopt, and maintain their Environmental and
                     Social Management System (ESMS).                                                                             03/2021




                    B.3. Reliance on Borrower’s policy, legal and institutional framework, relevant to the Project risks and impacts

                     Is this project being prepared for use of Borrower Framework?                                                     In Part


                     Areas where “Use of Borrower Framework” is being considered:
                     The use of Borrower Framework will not be considered for this project. The project will meet both the requirements
                     of the Government of Bangladesh and the relevant World Bank ESSs.




Public Disclosure
                     IV. CONTACT POINTS

                     World Bank
                     Contact:            Rokeya Ahmed                          Title:            Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

                     Telephone No:       5764+4150                             Email:            rahmed3@worldbank.org

                     Contact:            Aneeka Rahman                         Title:            Senior Social Protection Economist

                     Telephone No:       5764+4338 / 880-2-815-9015            Email:            arahman1@worldbank.org

                     Contact:            Deo-Marcel Niyungeko                  Title:            Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                 Specialist

                     Telephone No:       5764+5764+4054 / 1-202-3942380        Email:            dniyungeko@worldbank.org

                     Borrower/Client/Recipient
                     Borrower:             People's Republic of Bangladesh

                     Implementing Agency(ies)
                     Implementing Agency: Department of Public Health Engineering (DPHE)


                    May 15, 2020                                                                                                  Page 13 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              BD Rural Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for Human Capital Development Project (P169342)



                     Implementing Agency: Palli Karma-Sahayak Foundation (PKSF)



                     V. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     VI. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                 Aneeka Rahman, Deo-Marcel Niyungeko, Rokeya Ahmed

                     Practice Manager (ENR/Social)        Christophe Crepin Cleared on 04-May-2020 at 10:45:55 EDT

                     Safeguards Advisor ESSA              Agnes I. Kiss (SAESSA) Concurred on 15-May-2020 at 17:02:18 EDT




Public Disclosure




                    May 15, 2020                                                                                            Page 14 of 14
