Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Nigeria Sustainable Urban and Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Program (P170734)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                           Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                     (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                       Date Prepared/Updated: 03/22/2021 | Report No: ESRSA01356




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Mar 22, 2021                                                                                         Page 1 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Nigeria Sustainable Urban and Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Program (P170734)



                     BASIC INFORMATION

                     A. Basic Project Data

                     Country                       Region                           Project ID                     Parent Project ID (if any)

                     Nigeria                       AFRICA WEST                      P170734

                     Project Name                  Nigeria Sustainable Urban and Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Program

                     Practice Area (Lead)          Financing Instrument             Estimated Appraisal Date       Estimated Board Date

                     Water                         Program-for-Results              3/1/2021                       5/25/2021
                                                   Financing

                     Borrower(s)                   Implementing Agency(ies)

                     Federal Republic of           Federal Ministry of Water
                     Nigeria                       Resources


                     Proposed Development Objective
                     The Project Development Objectives (PDO) are to increase access to water, sanitation, and hygiene services and to



Public Disclosure
                     strengthen sector institutions in participating states of Nigeria.


                     Financing (in USD Million)                                                                                          Amount

                      IPF Component                                                                                                           60.00

                      Total Project Cost                                                                                                     875.00



                     B. Is the project being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project [including overview of Country, Sectoral & Institutional Contexts and
                     Relationship to CPF]
                     The IPF component supports TA activities within sector institutions at both the Federal and state level. US$25 million
                     will be implemented by the FMWR to support TA activities critical to Program activity at the Federal level, as well as
                     those supporting additional states in preparing for future investment. The additional US$35 million will be on-lent to
                     Program states to address identified institutional and capacity gaps. Specific support activities, managed by the
                     responsible implementation agency, are listed below, with additional detail provided in Annex 8:



                    Mar 22, 2021                                                                                                        Page 2 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Nigeria Sustainable Urban and Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Program (P170734)



                     •         Sector Policy and Strategy Support to the FMWR. To improve the efficiency of program activities and promote
                     the sustainability and resilience of built infrastructure, this technical support package will assist the FMWR in
                     developing policies, guidelines, and strategies that can be easily implemented and adapted in the differing contexts
                     across Nigeria. It will also develop their capacity for overall program coordination and results-verification. This
                     support will assist inter alia in the development of: (a) advisory services for the performance improvement of urban
                     utilities, including through different types of PPP arrangements; (b) advisory services for the improvement of the
                     sector’s intergovernmental systems, thereby optimizing the use of resources and focusing on performance; (c) a
                     menu of technology options and standard guidelines for the construction and rehabilitation of WASH facilities, with
                     special consideration given to water source and environmental protection, water quality standards, gender and
                     disability inclusion, climate adaptation strategies, and the promotion of renewable energy sources, including non-
                     carbon-based solutions; (d) a menu of innovative WASH facility management models aside from standard community-
                     based management; and (e) program coordination capacities, including credible verification agency (CVA)
                     management.

                     •       Strengthening national WASH structures critical to Program delivery. This component will additionally support
                     national institutions critical to the strategic direction and oversight of the national program, including the national
                     secretariats of the NAP, PEWASH, and Clean Nigeria: Use the Toilet campaign.

                     •       Development of National WASH Management Information System (MIS). This component will support the
                     design, development, and implementation of a national harmonized information system at all levels of government
                     that supports the integrated monitoring, reporting, and evaluation of WASH systems and infrastructure, management




Public Disclosure
                     models, and programs. Moreover, the MIS would create a benchmarking system of WASH service providers aimed at
                     increasing transparency and establishing the foundations for comparison and competition among water utilities in
                     Nigeria and across the region. This system will be tailored explicitly to inform decision-making in policy formulation,
                     planning, and resource allocation in the WASH sector, and will build upon existing systems where feasible.

                     •         Technical, Environmental, Social, and Fiduciary Systems Capacity Building within Sector Institutions. The
                     Technical Assessment, the ESSA, and the Integrated Fiduciary Systems Assessment (IFSA) carried out by the World
                     Bank have identified a number of institutional and capacity gaps in federal, state, and local-level sector institutions
                     that will be addressed through the Program’s IPF financing window. While Program states will be supported to
                     address immediate institutional and capacity gaps required for Program implementation, support to additional states
                     that meet the eligibility criteria (see Annex 9) will focus on preparing them for future investment.
                      - Technical Capacity Building. Activities will build capacities to monitor, ensure quality, improve and sustain WASH
                     service delivery, and develop master plans and feasibility studies of pipeline projects resilient to the risks of climate
                     risks, namely water scarcity, droughts, and floods.
                            - E&S Capacity Building of implementing agencies across all tiers of Government: State-level E&S capacity will be
                     strengthened through this component, including with respect to the policy enabling environment, risk management,
                     funding, and staffing. Capacities of the WASH agencies at all levels will be enhanced to conduct E&S due diligence in a
                     sound manner and undertake sustainable planning and design using E&S instruments. In addition, monitoring
                     capacities will be developed to ensure that the operation of WASH facilities, regardless of type and scale, are
                     managed in accordance with best practice environmental, community and occupational health and safety standards,
                     including especially the management of pollution incidents. E&S risk management supervision strengthening will be
                     conducted in partnership with the SPESSE project.


                    Mar 22, 2021                                                                                                      Page 3 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Nigeria Sustainable Urban and Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Program (P170734)



                           - Fiduciary Systems Capacity Building. To address the varying capacity and staffing levels of State PIUs and
                     implementation agencies, this component will support training and capacity building of existing staff and the hiring of
                     qualified and experienced fiduciary staff as required.

                     •       Capacity building of National Water Resources Institute (NWRI) and academic institutions. A parastatal of the
                     FMWR, the NWRI delivers trainings and capacity building within the WASH sector through ongoing education and
                     post-graduate opportunities. Given its critical role, the IPF component will support NWRI and other universities in
                     addressing capacity constraints within Nigeria’s WASH sector. Support will address insufficient facilities and
                     equipment, as well as academic and administrative staffing shortages.

                     •       Engagement of a credible verification agent (CVA). The IPF will finance the engagement of a CVA throughout
                     the Program period to undertake verification of the achievement of DLIs across the RAs in all Program states. The
                     FMWR is preparing a detailed verification protocol and TOR to engage the CVA using the agreed procurement process
                     and supervise and manage them in line with the POM. The results of the verification exercise as submitted by the CVA
                     and validated by the FMWR will serve as a basis of annual disbursement after the World Bank task team has provided
                     necessary concurrence. The verification procedure for achievement of DLI 1 by the FMWR will be decided upon prior
                     to DM.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1. Detailed project location(s) and salient physical characteristics relevant to the E&S assessment [geographic,
                     environmental, social]



Public Disclosure
                     The project is a PFoR with an IPF component. The Program supports the implementation of the National Action Plan
                     (NAP). Launched in 2018, the NAP for the Revitalization of Nigeria’s Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene Sector, serves as
                     the Government’s overall strategy and vehicle for investment and sector reform to attain the SDGs for WASH. As the
                     responsibility for WASH service provision rests with state governments, participating states are required to develop
                     their own 5-year state action plans for the sector that better detail the state-level actions to be implemented, which
                     are then translated into state-level annual investment plans. Thus far, 26 states across all 6 geopolitical zones have
                     declared a state of emergency in the sector and are now engaged in the planning phase.
                     This proposed US$700 million lending operation will be implemented by participating states and the FMWR to deliver
                     an integrated package of WASH interventions in select urban and rural areas and small towns of Nigeria. The Program
                     will pursue an LGA-wide approach, whereby all communities will be targeted within each Program LGA. LGAs will be
                     prioritized by states through a transparent selection process using established criteria. These states may then be
                     considered for inclusion in the Program upon meeting the requirements in the previous paragraph. Additional states
                     may be incorporated through Program restructuring or additional financing.
                     Seven Program states were selected for inclusion based upon their expression of interest and the results of an
                     evaluation against eligibility and readiness criteria conducted by the FMWR. Additional interested states may access
                     TA under the IPF component upon meeting the Program’s eligibility criteria. The proposed Program will address all
                     four pillars of the FY21 to FY25 CPF. In particular, the Program is identified as the principle large scale financing and
                     support towards core objective 4 “Increase Access to Basic Water and Sanitation Services,” housed under the
                     “Investing in Human Capital” pillar. Improved access to WASH services would significantly reduce critical human
                     capital deficits by: (i) improving health and nutrition outcomes through reduced prevalence of water- and excreta-
                     related diseases, (ii) improving educational outcomes through reduced absenteeism and drop-out rates, and (iii)


                    Mar 22, 2021                                                                                                      Page 4 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Nigeria Sustainable Urban and Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Program (P170734)



                     reducing the risk of health care-associated infections. The Program will also contribute to the other three pillars of the
                     CPF.

                     This ESRS assesses the risks associated with the IPF component of the project.

                     IPF Component Technical Assistance Activities (US$60 million IDA).-The IPF component supports technical assistance
                     activities within sector agencies at both the Federal and state level. Specific support activities, managed by the
                     responsible implementation agency, include:

                     Sector Policy and Strategy Support to the FMWR-to improve the efficiency of program activities and promote
                     sustainability and resilience of built infrastructure, this technical support package will assist the FMWR in developing
                     policies, guidelines, and strategies that can be easily implemented and adapted in the differing contexts across
                     Nigeria. It will also develop their capacity for overall program coordination and results-verification. This support will
                     assist inter alia in the development of: (a) advisory services for performance improvement of urban utilities, including
                     through different types of PPP arrangements; (b) advisory services for the improvement of the sector’s
                     intergovernmental systems, thereby optimizing the use of resources and focusing on performance; (c) a menu of
                     technology options and standard guidelines for the construction and rehabilitation of WASH facilities, with special
                     consideration given to water source and environmental protection, water quality standards, gender and disability
                     inclusion, climate adaptation strategies, and the promotion of renewable energy sources, including non-carbon-based
                     solutions; (d) a menu of innovative WASH facility management modalities aside from standard community-based
                     management; and (e) program coordination capacities, including credible verification agency (CVA) management.




Public Disclosure
                     Strengthening national WASH structures critical to Program delivery- this component will additionally support key
                     national institutions critical to the strategic direction and oversight of the national program, including the national
                     secretariats of the NAP, PEWASH, and Clean Nigeria: Use the Toilet campaign.

                     Development of National WASH Management Information System (MIS)- this component will support the design,
                     development, and implementation of a national harmonized information system at all levels of government that
                     supports integrated monitoring, reporting, and evaluation of WASH infrastructure, management modalities, and
                     programs. This system will be tailored explicitly to inform decision-making in policy formulation, planning, and
                     resource allocation in the WASH sector, and will build upon existing systems where feasible.

                     Technical, Environmental, Social, and Fiduciary Systems Capacity Building within Sector Agencies- the Technical
                     Assessment, the ESSA, and the Fiduciary Systems Assessment (FSA) carried out by the World Bank have identified a
                     number of institutional and capacity gaps in federal, state, and local-level sector institutions that will be addressed
                     through the Program’s IPF financing window. While Program states will be supported to address immediate
                     institutional and capacity gaps required for Program implementation, support to additional states that meet the
                     eligibility criteria (see Annex 9) will focus on preparing them for future investment

                     Technical Capacity Building-the focus is on building capacities to monitor, ensure quality, and improve and sustain
                     WASH service delivery, and develop master plans and feasibility studies of pipeline projects climate risks, namely
                     water scarcity, droughts, and floods.



                    Mar 22, 2021                                                                                                        Page 5 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Nigeria Sustainable Urban and Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Program (P170734)



                     E&S Capacity Building of implementing agencies across all tiers of Government- state-level E&S capacity will be
                     strengthened through this component, including with respect to the policy enabling environment, risk management,
                     funding, and staffing. Capacities of the WASH agencies at all levels will be enhanced to conduct E&S due diligence in a
                     sound manner and undertake sustainable planning and design using E&S instruments. In addition, monitoring
                     capacities will be developed to ensure that the operation of WASH facilities, regardless of type and scale, are
                     managed in accordance with best practice environmental, community and occupational health and safety standards,
                     including especially the management of pollution incidents. E&S risk management supervision strengthening will be
                     conducted in partnership with the SPESSE project.

                     Fiduciary Systems Capacity Building-to address the varying capacity and staffing levels at State PIUs and local
                     implementation agencies, this component will support training and capacity building of existing staff and the hiring of
                     qualified and experienced fiduciary staff as required.

                     Capacity building of National Water Resources Institute (NWRI) and academic institutions- a parastatal of the FMWR,
                     the NWRI delivers trainings and capacity building within the WASH sector through ongoing education and post-
                     graduate opportunities. Given its critical role, the IPF component will support NWRI and affiliated universities in
                     addressing capacity constraints within Nigeria’s WASH sector. Support will address insufficient facilities and
                     equipment, as well as academic and administrative staffing shortages.

                     Engagement of a credible verification agent (CVA)- the IPF will finance the engagement of a CVA throughout the
                     Program period to undertake verification of the achievement of DLIs across the results areas in all Program states. The




Public Disclosure
                     FMWR is preparing a detailed verification protocol and TOR to engage the CVA using the agreed procurement process
                     and supervise and manage them in line with the POM. The results of the verification exercise as submitted by the CVA
                     and validated by the FMWR will serve as a basis of annual disbursement after the World Bank task team has provided
                     necessary concurrence. The verification procedure for achievement of DLI 1 by the FMWR will be decided upon prior
                     to DM.


                     D. 2. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity
                     The proposed PforR will be implemented in the seven Program states, with technical assistance under the IPF
                     component also being provided to additional states under the direction of the FPIU at the Federal level. At the State
                     level, the State Ministry of Water Resources (SMWR), or equivalent state-level agency responsible for WASH, will lead
                     state-level policy reform, service delivery improvement, and sector coordination. The SPIU, meanwhile, will be
                     responsible for management and implementation of state-level Program components, as well as for supervision and
                     M&E of LGA-level activities. It will also implement TA to state and local MDAs under the IPF component.

                     The PforR operation necessitated the task team to conduct an Environmental and Social System Assessment (ESSA), to
                     evaluate the acceptability of the borrower’s systems against the core principles for managing the identified E&S
                     effects, and identify potential necessary measures for institutional capacity improvement.

                     Gaps in the borrower’s systems to screen, address and manage E&S risks, elaborated further in the ESSA, indicate that
                     the processes for risk screening to guide environmental and social management of proposed interventions need to be
                     augmented in order for the Program to achieve its E&S objectives. These gaps include, especially, poor capacity within
                     the WASH agencies to effectively manage E&S risks, especially at the LGA level. Proposed ESSA recommendations
                    Mar 22, 2021                                                                                                    Page 6 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Nigeria Sustainable Urban and Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Program (P170734)



                     need to be implemented and institutionalized by the Borrower, and this will require considerable capacity building to
                     help reduce the risks during the course of the Program.

                     The Program’s IPF component seeks to specifically address policy, strategy, and capacity gaps and institutional
                     deficiencies required to support Program implementation. E&S and procurement capacity building will be conducted
                     in coordination with the SPESSE Project. The focus is to build the capacities of relevant agencies over the course of the
                     Program as opposed to developing parallel Program management structures. The NWRI will specifically be engaged by
                     the FPIU to support the implementation of specific capacity building and learning activities due to its unique
                     capabilities and experience in organizing and delivery capacity building and learning activities to states

                     Specific training to be provided include: Stakeholder mapping and engagement, Specific aspects of environmental and
                     social monitoring, ESF, Labor management including issues on child labor, Occupational health and safety including on
                     emergency prevention and preparedness and response arrangements to emergency situations, Grievance
                     Management Systems, Environmental and Social Risk Management etc.

                     It is anticipated that, both at the Federal and state level, there is the need to hire environmental and social
                     specialists, maintained throughout Program implementation, and who will have to be trained on the requirements of
                     the ESSA to effectively manage environmental and social risks. These specialists will manage risks during
                     implementation, including using environmental and social screening criteria, ensuring the development of relevant
                     environmental and social assessment by external consultants/firms, overseeing stakeholder consultation, and
                     managing contractor performance and conducting implementation monitoring and reporting. TA will need to be




Public Disclosure
                     cascaded down to LGA-level WASH agencies as well.


                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                          Moderate


                     Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                       Moderate
                     The risk is rated Moderate. Technical Assistance activities are anticipated to have a net positive impact on the
                     environment. Capacity-building activities will address weaknesses, identified capacity gaps and institutional
                     deficiencies within States and the FMWR. Capacities of the WASH agencies at all levels will be enhanced to conduct
                     E&S due diligence in a sound manner and undertake sustainable planning and design using E&S instruments. In
                     addition, monitoring capacities will be developed to ensure that the operation of WASH facilities, regardless of type
                     and scale, are managed in accordance with best practice environmental, community and occupational health and
                     safety standards, including especially the management of pollution incidents. There are no civil works under the TA,
                     and the environmental risks are negligible.

                     Other risks include the COVID-19 pandemic restrictions as participants would either learn remotely or in a location
                     applying social distancing and other safety protocols. This level of restrictions could reduce the effectiveness of the
                     trainee – trainer relationship ultimately affecting the quality of learning attained during the training and capacity
                     support provided during the program.


                    Mar 22, 2021                                                                                                       Page 7 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Nigeria Sustainable Urban and Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Program (P170734)



                     Social Risk Rating                                                                                             Moderate
                     Technical Assistance activities are anticipated to have a net positive impact on the population by supporting the
                     efficiency and delivery of water services. The social issues/risks associated with the IPF TA component, include
                     impacts due to poor stakeholder mapping and inefficient engagement, weak grievance management systems,
                     exclusion of beneficiary from the capacity building programs based on gender (which constitutes gender
                     discrimination), inadequate knowledge of the ESF by the service provider, discrimination based on sexual orientation
                     and or other forms of vulnerabilities.

                     Security has become a major source of concern in Nigeria with several incidences of kidnapping occurring in some of
                     the participating states. In view of these incidences, a comprehensive review of security situation and security needs
                     on all sites are expected to be prepared in collaboration with the participating State Governments to prepare security
                     management plans. These plans are to be constantly updated to respond to changes in security issues in the
                     respective states.

                     The TA will assist the client in preparing a Security Management Plan (SMP) and will support security interventions,
                     including security personnel and law enforcement to improve its capacity to react to incidents and enforce the law;
                     and reduce criminal and violent activities to the PAPs and beneficiaries. Prior to deploying security personnel, the
                     program shall take measures to ensure that security personnel are: (i) screened to confirm that they have not
                     engaged in past unlawful or abusive behavior, including excessive use of force; and (ii) adequately instructed and
                     trained, on a regular basis, on the use of force and appropriate behavior and conduct.
                     Also, the incidence of COVID-19 global pandemic may constitute a social risk. This will mean that all participants



Public Disclosure
                     would either have to learn remotely or in a location applying social distancing and other safety protocol. This level of
                     restrictions could reduce the effectiveness of the trainee – trainer relationship ultimately affecting the quality of
                     learning attained during the training and capacity support provided during the program.

                     Moreover, the proposed project implementing units do not have experience of ESF requirements particularly new
                     aspects like labor, ecosystems services, stakeholder engagement and community health. Given the historical lack of
                     priority to the water and sanitation institutions and comparatively poor performance of these institutions, the
                     implementation of the ESF will be critical factor for success and significant expertise/capacity building is required


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESSs) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1. General Assessment

                     ESS1 Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     Overview of the relevance of the Standard for the Project:
                     The expected environmental and social impacts of the project will be generally positive. The IPF component supports
                     technical assistance activities within sector agencies at both the Federal and state level. Specific support activities,
                     managed by the responsible implementation agency, include E&S capacity building of implementing agencies across
                     all tiers of Government, and will not generate any adverse direct or indirect environmental risks and impacts. Some
                     of the positive environmental impacts envisaged through the IPF TA activities are (i) E&S capacity will be
                     strengthened with respect to the policy enabling environment, risk management, funding, and staffing (ii) Capacities
                     of the WASH agencies at all levels will be enhanced to conduct E&S due diligence in a sound manner and undertake

                    Mar 22, 2021                                                                                                      Page 8 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Nigeria Sustainable Urban and Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Program (P170734)



                     sustainable planning and design using E&S instruments (iii) monitoring capacities will be developed to ensure that the
                     operation of WASH facilities (iv) E&S risk management supervision strengthening will be conducted in partnership
                     with the SPESSE project.

                     There are no civil works under the IPF TA component, and will be supporting studies, consultancies and capacity
                     building activities. However, some of the environmental risks include waste management from the offices and
                     capacity building activities, poor working conditions in offices, OHS and travel-related risks. There are potential
                     impacts that the policy guidance may not be properly implemented by the borrower leading to environmental
                     impacts.

                     The probable social risks are based on the list of the activities that the IPF component of the project entails. These
                     risk areas include: poor stakeholder mapping, inefficient stakeholder engagement, weak grievance management
                     systems, gender discrimination, discriminations based on sexual orientation, inadequate knowledge of the ESF by the
                     Service Providers, inadequate knowledge of the Bank Procedure by the FPIU and SPIUs and restricted social
                     interaction due to compliance with COVID-19 Protocols trainings and capacity support programs.

                     Poor stakeholders mapping could lead to inefficient stakeholder engagement. A poorly planned or executed
                     stakeholder engagement may weaken the grievance management process. Discriminations based on gender and
                     sexual orientation could limit participation which may ultimately affect the quality of the project delivery. Due to the
                     measurable capacity gap in-country, the inadequate knowledge of the service provider on the ESF is also a social risk.
                     This knowledge gap may weaken the quality of the project output in terms of the knowledge transfer to the team.




Public Disclosure
                     Finally, the incidence of COVID-19 global pandemic has limited social interaction significantly. This limitations may
                     affect the extent of service delivery in training and essentially in technical assistance process.

                     Under the TA component, in line with the World Bank’s Environmental and Social Framework (ESF), an Environmental
                     and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) and Labor Management Procedures (LMP)
                     have been prepared by the GoN and will be publicly disclosed by Program appraisal. The Security Management Plan
                     and Waste Management Plan will be prepared by the client during the project implementation.



                     ESS10 Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure
                     The identified stakeholders for this Project include the beneficiary communities in rural, small towns and urban areas,
                     SPIUs, SMWR, State Governments, the Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Agency (RUWASSA) for rural WASH, the
                     Small Town Water Supply and Sanitation Agency (STWSSA) for small town WASH, the State Water Authority (SWA)
                     for urban water supply, the state urban sanitation authority, the state WASH regulatory agency, State Ministries of
                     Environment, Health, Education, and Social Development and Women Affairs, as well as any other MDAs with
                     responsibility for relevant subsectors, Federal Project Implementation Unit (FPIU), Federal Ministry of Water
                     Resources (FMWR), PEWASH Coordination Office, National Governors Forum (NGF), Federal Ministry of Finance
                     (FMoF), Federal Ministry of Environment (FMEnv), Federal Ministry of Education (FME), Federal Ministry of
                     Humanitarian Services and Development , donor agencies, the service providers and contractors including the
                     immediate WASH sector industry regulators country-wide.



                    Mar 22, 2021                                                                                                      Page 9 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Nigeria Sustainable Urban and Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Program (P170734)



                     One of the objectives of this IPF TA Project is to develop implementing entity’s capacity for stakeholder engagement
                     and information disclosure, particularly in the area of increasing the awareness of the public on water access,
                     sanitation, hygiene, ODF, ODF++, etc. A Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) has been prepared by the Federal
                     Republic of Nigeria and consulted upon in country and will be publicly disclosed on prior to project appraisal by the
                     Bank and the GoN. The plan addresses specific risks identified by stakeholders, including the exclusion of certain
                     beneficiaries, vulnerable/disadvantaged groups etc. and it will be updated as and when necessary.

                     The Grievance Redress Mechanism for the IPF Project will provide the opportunity for continued feedback including
                     grievances/complaints related to the use security personnel (See ESS4) on the Project’s interventions during
                     implementation.



                     B.2. Specific Risks and Impacts

                     A brief description of the potential environmental and social risks and impacts relevant to the Project.
                     ESS2 Labor and Working Conditions
                     While the IPF TA component will mostly be implemented by government workers, it is anticipated that the Project
                     will have direct workers who will be consultants hired to support certain TA objectives. These hired consultants
                     would help the government project implementation unit deliver on the requisite technical inputs that the
                     government may be lacking in skill or capacity to deliver on, essentially on the environmental and social component
                     of the project screening, impact assessment, impact management, and monitoring and evaluation in line with



Public Disclosure
                     international good practices.

                     The IPF component supports technical assistance activities includes building monitoring capacities to ensure that the
                     operation of WASH facilities, regardless of type and scale, are managed in accordance with best practice
                     environmental, community and occupational health and safety standards. This component would also require the
                     inputs of service providers who would responsible for components such as training and capacity building, facilitation
                     tours and overall project performance reviews.

                     To address ESS2 requirements, a Labor Management Procedures (LMP) will be prepared and implemented by the
                     GoN and will be publicly disclosed by Program appraisal.



                     ESS3 Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management
                     ESS 3 is considered relevant due to solid wastes that may be generated from office management and capacity
                     building activities. The IPF TA component will not finance activities that may generate pollution. No rehabilitation or
                     construction of new infrastructure or other actions having an impact on the environment will be financed through
                     this IPF. It is expected that benefits in implementing improved operating policies related to water management
                     (resulting among others from TA activities) will lead to better energy efficiency, reduced water losses in the water
                     supply systems, and optimization of use of energy and chemicals in water operations. Therefore, the project will
                     prepare and adopt and implement a Waste Management Plan to manage the risks that will be generated from office


                    Mar 22, 2021                                                                                                    Page 10 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Nigeria Sustainable Urban and Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Program (P170734)



                     management. In addition, the project will promote energy efficiency by using energy saving and efficient bulbs
                     including biodegradable materials where applicable.
                     The IPF component supports technical assistance activities within sector agencies at both the Federal and state level,
                     and includes capacity building of the WASH agencies to manage pollution incidents.



                     ESS4 Community Health and Safety
                     ESS4 is considered relevant because of security risks of criminal and violent activities, including kidnaping that might
                     happen around or within the sites/communities which could impact the TA activities. Therefore, project will conduct
                     security risk assessment that will inform preparing a Security Management Plan, and will support deploring security
                     personnel and law enforcement to react to incidents and enforce the law; and prevent/reduce criminal and violent
                     activities to the PAPs and beneficiaries. Further, this Security intervention measures will also ensure that security
                     personnel are: (i) screened to confirm that they have not engaged in past unlawful or abusive behavior, including
                     excessive use of force; and (ii) adequately instructed and trained, on a regular basis, on the use of force and
                     appropriate behavior and conduct.



                     ESS5 Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement
                     The outcome of E&S screening did not identify any potential risks and/or impacts relevant to ESS5. The Technical




Public Disclosure
                     Assistance will not require land acquisition that would result in the impacts covered under this Standard.


                     ESS6 Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources
                     The outcome of E&S screening did not identify any potential risks and/or impacts relevant to ESS6. The IPF
                     component supports technical assistance activities within sector agencies at both the Federal and state level, and
                     includes capacity building of the WASH agencies to conduct E&S due diligence in a sound manner and undertake
                     sustainable planning and design using E&S instruments. In this context is not expected to generate any negative
                     impact on the Biodiversity Conservation and Living Natural Resources


                     ESS7 Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional Local Communities
                     This standard is not relevant. There are no identified Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically
                     Underserved Traditional Local Communities in the project area.


                     ESS8 Cultural Heritage
                     The outcome of E&S screening did not identify any potential risks and/or impacts relevant to ESS8. The IPF
                     component supports technical assistance activities within sector agencies at both the Federal and state level, and
                     includes capacity building of the WASH agencies to conduct E&S due diligence in a sound manner and undertake
                     sustainable planning and design using E&S instruments. In this context it is not expected that there will be any direct
                     or indirect impacts on tangible or intangible cultural heritage.


                    Mar 22, 2021                                                                                                     Page 11 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Nigeria Sustainable Urban and Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Program (P170734)




                     ESS9 Financial Intermediaries
                     This standard does not apply.


                     B.3 Other Relevant Project Risks
                     NA

                     C. Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                     OP 7.50 Projects on International Waterways                                                                            Yes
                     Seven states have been selected for inclusion under the Program: Delta, Ekiti, Gombe, Imo, Kaduna, Katsina, and
                     Plateau states. Since almost all states are located in international drainage basins, five of these states fall within the
                     Niger River Basin (Delta, Gombe, Kaduna, Katsina and Plateau) and parts of three states (Kaduna, Katsina and
                     Plateau) fall under the Lake Chad Basin, it seems likely that use of international waterways would be involved and the
                     World Bank Operational Policy OP 7.50 International Waterways is therefore triggered under the Program. While high
                     risk activities are excluded and no adverse impacts on basins and neighboring countries are anticipated as Nigeria is
                     located at the downstream end of the basin, the Federal Ministry of Water Resources (FMWR) has notified the Niger
                     River Basin Authority and the Lake Chad Basin Commission about the proposed Program, as required by the OP 7.50.
                     OP 7.60 Projects in Disputed Areas                                                                                     No



Public Disclosure
                    B.3. Reliance on Borrower’s policy, legal and institutional framework, relevant to the Project risks and impacts

                     Is this project being prepared for use of Borrower Framework?                                                          No


                     Areas where “Use of Borrower Framework” is being considered:
                     The borrower has certain relevant regulations for environmental and social assessments that can be applied to the
                     project such as EIA Act, national labour law, National gender policy and anti-human trafficking and sexual
                     exploitation. For the proposed TA , these regulations and other relevant regulations and systems would be further
                     assessed during project preparation , especially as it relates to social risk, to ensure it complies with the requirements
                     of the ESF. The capacity assessment to be carried out by Bank specialists will further determine where the Borrower’s
                     existing frameworks could be used.

                     The operation will not use the Borrower’s E&S Framework in the assessment, development and implementation of
                     sub projects. The project will comply with relevant national legal requirements.




                     IV. CONTACT POINTS


                    Mar 22, 2021                                                                                                      Page 12 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Nigeria Sustainable Urban and Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Program (P170734)



                     World Bank
                     Contact:            Antonio Manuel Rodriguez Serrano Title:             Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                             Specialist

                     Telephone No:       +1-202-473-2928                    Email:           amrodriguez@worldbank.org

                     Contact:            Gerhardus Nicolaas Albertus Soppe Title:            Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                             Specialist

                     Telephone No:       202-535-9298                       Email:           gsoppe@worldbank.org

                     Borrower/Client/Recipient
                     Borrower:              Federal Republic of Nigeria

                     Implementing Agency(ies)
                     Implementing Agency: Federal Ministry of Water Resources



                     V. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW



Public Disclosure
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     VI. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):             Antonio Manuel Rodriguez Serrano, Gerhardus Nicolaas Albertus Soppe

                     Practice Manager (ENR/Social)    Sanjay Srivastava Cleared on 16-Mar-2021 at 08:05:49 GMT-04:00

                     Safeguards Advisor ESSA          Nathalie S. Munzberg (SAESSA) Concurred on 22-Mar-2021 at 15:02:56 GMT-04:00




                    Mar 22, 2021                                                                                             Page 13 of 13
