Public Disclosure Authorized
                                         The World Bank
                                         Nigeria Sustainable Urban and Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Program (P170734)




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                       Program Information Documents (PID)



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                    Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 18-Mar-2021 | Report No: PIDA240431




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Feb 06, 2021                                                                                           Page 1 of 13
          The World Bank
          Nigeria Sustainable Urban and Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Program (P170734)



   BASIC INFORMATION

 OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA
  A. Basic Program Data

   Country                            Project ID                   Program Name              Parent Project ID (if any)
   Nigeria                            P170734                      Nigeria Sustainable Urban
                                                                   and Rural Water Supply,
                                                                   Sanitation and Hygiene
                                                                   Program
   Region                             Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date      Practice Area (Lead)
   AFRICA WEST                        01-Mar-2021                  25-May-2021               Water

   Financing Instrument               Borrower(s)                 Implementing Agency
   Program-for-Results Financing      Federal Republic of Nigeria Federal Ministry of Water Resources


   Proposed Program Development Objective(s)

   The Project Development Objectives (PDO) are to increase access to water, sanitation, and hygiene services and to
   strengthen sector institutions in participating states of Nigeria.

  COST & FINANCING

   SUMMARY (USD Millions)

   Government program Cost                                                                                     2,600.00
   Total Operation Cost                                                                                          875.00
       Total Program Cost                                                                                        815.00
       IPF Component                                                                                              60.00
   Total Financing                                                                                               875.00
   Financing Gap                                                                                                   0.00


  FINANCING (USD Millions)


 Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                                700.00

     World Bank Lending                                                                                          700.00


 Total Government Contribution                                                                                   175.00



Feb 06, 2021                                                                                                   Page 2 of 13
          The World Bank
          Nigeria Sustainable Urban and Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Program (P170734)




  Decision
  The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate




   B. Introduction and Context

    1. The appraisal document outlines a proposed Program in the amount of US$700 million to support the
    Government of Nigeria (GoN) in the implementation of the National Action Plan for the Revitalization of Nigeria’s
    Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene (WASH) Sector (the ‘National Action Plan’ or NAP). As described by the NAP,
    Nigeria’s WASH sector requires a paradigm shift to move beyond the low access rates and poor service quality that
    continue to plague its people. While previous projects have financed infrastructure and supported policy and
    institutional development, much of the sector’s infrastructure are poorly utilized, its policies are seldom
    operationalized, and its institutions remain weak. This Program, consisting of a US$640 million Program-for-Results
    (PforR) with a US$60 million Investment Project Financing (IPF) component, introduces a results-based approach with
    the potential to propel Nigeria’s efforts to ensure that all its people have access to sustainable and safely managed
    WASH services. It introduces an innovative approach to sector programming that leverages incentives to
    simultaneously deliver infrastructure that works, policies that govern, and institutions that sustain. The technical
    assistance (TA) provided under the IPF component will address critical institutional development and capacity gaps
    within implementing agencies. The Program is fully aligned with the World Bank 2021–25 Country Partnership
    Framework for Nigeria, as well as Nigeria’s Economic Reform and Growth Plan for 2017–20 and the Government’s
    Economic Sustainability Plan (ESP) to respond to the economic crisis induced by COVID-19.

     Country Context
    2. Nigeria is central to the World Bank’s mission of eliminating global poverty. A multi-ethnic and diverse federation
    of 36 autonomous states, Nigeria is Africa’s largest country (over 200 million people) and largest economy (nominal
    GDP of around USD 450 billion in 2019). With an abundance of resources and a young and dynamic society, it has the
    potential to be a giant on the global stage. But with over 40 percent of its population (over 80 million people) in
    poverty, Nigeria is also among the countries with the largest number of people living below the poverty line. Economic
    growth, at 2.2 percent in 2019, has been below the rate of population growth since 2016, when Nigeria experienced
    its first recession in two decades. Fragility, conflict and insecurity afflict many parts of the country, in particular the
    northeast. Corruption and weak capacity plague the public sector, and on many human development indicators,
    Nigeria ranks amongst the lowest in the world. To realize its considerable potential, and to fulfill the government’s
    ambition to lift 100 million Nigerians out of poverty by 2030, Nigeria has to make tangible progress on multiple fronts,
    at both the federal and sub-national levels.

    3. Nigeria’s poor human capital outcomes reflect the low levels of public expenditure and weaknesses in service
    delivery. In terms of the Human Capital Index (HCI), Nigeria, in 2020, was the 7th lowest in the world—168th out of 174
    countries. A baby born in Nigeria today, will, if the levels, quality and coverage of human capital investments and
    service delivery remain unchanged, enter the labor force 18 years from now only 36 percent as productive as she
    would be if she were to enjoy the benefits of a complete quality education and full health. Human development
    outcomes are particularly low among girls and young women in Nigeria. Girls have fewer educational opportunities,
    more limited access to credit and productive resources, and poorer labor market outcomes even when gaps in human
    capital are considered.

Feb 06, 2021                                                                                                          Page 3 of 13
          The World Bank
          Nigeria Sustainable Urban and Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Program (P170734)


    4. The economic and human impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on Nigeria will be severe, even if Nigeria manages
    to contain the outbreak locally. Because of Nigeria’s vulnerability to oil price shocks, with the sharp fall in oil prices
    as a result of the COVID-19 crisis, the economy is estimated to have contracted by over 4 percent in 2020, and
    consolidated government revenues to fall by over 3 percent of GDP (nearly USD 15 billion) or more, at a time when
    fiscal resources are urgently needed to contain the outbreak and initiate counter-cyclical and pro-poor fiscal measures
    to protect the lives and livelihoods of the nearly 90 million Nigerians in extreme poverty and millions of others in urban
    areas who are dependent on the informal economy. Estimates suggest that the extreme poverty rate could go up by
    a couple of percentage points and that the number of poor could increase by between 10 to 15 million by 2022.1 The
    human and economic costs would be amplified if the outbreak becomes more severe, leading to a deeper recession
    and greater health-related costs. Since the first COVID-19 infection case was identified in late February 2020, by
    January 4, 2021 Nigeria had recorded 91,351 cases and 1,318 deaths.

    5. Nigeria faces significant challenges in responding to the COVID-19 pandemic, but the government has responded
    proactively. The response has focused on containing the outbreak, marshaling the needed fiscal resources in the face
    of severe fiscal constraints, and taking steps to mitigate the adverse impacts of the economic downturn and lay the
    ground for a robust recovery. Because of Nigeria’s size, population, socioeconomic, and federal administrative
    structure, coupled with its longstanding unfinished structural reform agenda, implementation of the crisis response
    will be challenging.

    Sectoral and Institutional Context

    6. Even before the pandemic, Nigeria’s WASH sector was in a state of emergency: in 2019, approximately 60 million
    Nigerians were living without access to basic drinking water services, 80 million without access to improved
    sanitation facilities and 167 million without access to a basic handwashing facility. 2 Strikingly, Nigeria is set to
    become the country with the most open defecators in the world,3 with 23 percent of Nigerians practicing open
    defecation. The situation is even worse regionally – 51 percent of the population in the North Central Region practices
    open defecation. In rural areas, 39 percent of households lack access to at least basic water supply services, while only
    half have access to improved sanitation and almost a third (29 percent) practice open defecation – a fraction that has
    marginally changed since 1990.

    7. In urban areas, poor performance has plagued Nigeria’s water utilities for decades, while fecal sludge is largely
    released untreated into the environment. While 92 percent of urban residents had access to basic drinking water
    services in 2019, this figure is distorted by the fact that urban water utilities largely fail to meet the needs of their
    already small customer base, forcing a majority of people to rely on expensive and often unsafe coping alternatives,
    such as private water vendors and shallow private wells. Tragically, access to piped water on premises in urban areas
    has declined from 32 percent in 19904 to 7 percent in 2019, and the performance of Nigeria’s utilities is significantly
    below the African average across most indicators.5 Although access to improved sanitation in urban areas is relatively
    high at 82 percent, access to safely managed sanitation services is a paltry 25 percent, with collected fecal waste
    usually discarded in open drains or informal dumping sites, causing serious environmental impact.


    1 See World Bank (June 2020), Nigeria Development Update (Spring 2020)—Nigeria in Times of COVID-19: Laying Foundations for a Strong

    Recovery.
    2 National Outcome Routine Mapping (WASH NORM) 2019. Federal Ministry of Water Resources (FMWR).
    3 Although India still had a greater number of open defecators, it continues making significant progress on sanitation access and use.
    4 2015 Update and MDG Assessment. WHO (World Health Organization), and UNICEF (United Nations Children’s Fund).
    5 World Bank, 2017. A Wake-Up Call: Nigeria Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene Poverty Diagnostic.



Feb 06, 2021                                                                                                                                 Page 4 of 13
          The World Bank
          Nigeria Sustainable Urban and Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Program (P170734)




    8. The low rates of WASH access in rural areas and small towns are compounded by weak service delivery models
    and inadequate sector capacity, resulting in failed infrastructure and wasted investment. In 2015, more than 38
    percent of the 90,500 improved water points and around 46 percent of the 5,100 water schemes in the country were
    nonfunctional. This lack of sustainability is driven by a combination of poor siting, subpar construction quality, water
    scarcity and seasonality exacerbated by climate change, and insufficient management and operations and
    maintenance (O&M). Rural sanitation programming, which has depended heavily on social mobilization and behavior
    change approaches such as Community Led Total Sanitation (CLTS), has shown limited results in Nigeria. Vital
    complementary approaches have not yet been implemented at scale, such as sanitation marketing and incentive
    mechanisms for the poor.

    9. WASH access in health care facilities (HCF) and schools is lagging, increasing the risk of infection for both patients
    and staff and hindering educational outcomes. In 2019, just 55 percent of HCF had a basic water service; just 10
    percent provided basic sanitation services; and just 20 percent had access to basic hygiene services. Meanwhile only
    33 percent of schools had access to basic water services, while 39 percent had no water service. Only 26 percent had
    access to basic sanitation services (meaning improved facilities which are single-sex and usable), while 76 percent
    lacked handwashing facilities. A paltry 3 percent of schools had girls’ sanitation facilities with provisions for menstrual
    hygiene management (MHM), while only 19 percent of schools provided accessible to those with limited mobility.

    10. Such poor sector performance is especially concerning given that access to WASH is an important determinant
    of human capital outcomes, including early childhood survival, health and educational attainment – all of which in
    turn affect labor productivity and efficiency. Approximately 73 percent of the total burden of intestinal infections in
    Nigeria is associated with inadequate WASH. About 253,800 WASH attributable deaths occurred in Nigeria in 2016,
    with 119,900 of those deaths occurring from diarrheal diseases.6 There is robust evidence that access to safe water
    supply and improved sanitation decreases the incidence of diarrhea in young children. Also, a large part of the chronic
    malnutrition burden is owing to the unhygienic environment in which children grow up, often a result of high levels
    of open defecation across densely populated areas. Access to WASH can impact years of schooling by freeing up time
    that children spend collecting water to attend school, reducing the prevalence of disease that can keep them out of
    school, and contributing to a safe and healthy learning environment while at school. Gender inequities exacerbate
    such impacts on human capital.

    11. In recent years, the FGN has strengthened its commitment towards improving access to WASH services, spurred
    on by the alarming degree to which Nigeria’s WASH sector is underdeveloped compared with its regional
    counterparts. This led to the President declaring a State of Emergency in 2018 and launching the NAP aimed at
    ensuring universal access to sustainable and safely managed WASH services by 2030, commensurate with the SDGs.
    The NAP is a 13-year strategy prioritizing actions within three phases: Emergency Plan, Recovery Plan, and
    Revitalization Strategy. It builds upon the Partnership for Expanded Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (PEWASH)
    strategy that sought to better harmonize and expand efforts to improve rural WASH services. In 2019, FMWR launched
    the Clean Nigeria: Use the Toilet campaign to achieve an open defecation free Nigeria by 2025.

    PforR Program Scope

    12. The World Bank-supported Program will support the implementation of a subset of activities set out in the NAP
    within the selected Program states over six-year period. The Program will support the construction and rehabilitation

    6 Prüss‐Ustün et al. 2019. “Burden of disease from inadequate water, sanitation and hygiene for selected adverse health outcomes.”



Feb 06, 2021                                                                                                                             Page 5 of 13
          The World Bank
          Nigeria Sustainable Urban and Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Program (P170734)


    of WASH infrastructure in urban and rural areas and small towns, as well as various activities to support the
    development and use of WASH services. In addition, it will specifically incentivize key policy and institutional reform
    at the state level, as well as the establishment and operationalization of the National WASH Fund housed at the
    FMWR. Seven states have been selected by the FMWR through a transparent evaluation process against predefined
    eligibility and readiness criteria. Additional states that meet the Program’s eligibility criteria can access TA under the
    IPF component to support them to achieve readiness for investment under the PforR. Their potential inclusion in
    subsequent years is contingent upon: (1) their expression of interest; (2) achievement of the Program’s eligibility
    criteria; (3) achievement of the Program’s readiness criteria; and (4) satisfactory technical, fiduciary and E&S
    assessments by the World Bank. Financing allocations to Program states under both the PforR and IPF instruments are
    notional and actual allocations will be made based upon performance, therefore promoting competition among
    existing Program states and allowing additional states to enter the Program. This results-based approach to financing
    will therefore incite states to rapidly expand access to sustainable services, fostering nationwide momentum towards
    the achievement of the SDGs.

    13. While the Program does not target all reforms elaborated within the NAP, it will support the full and sustained
    implementation of select state-level reforms within every component of the NAP (see Table 1). Considered critical
    and impactful to the achievement of the PDO and for sustainability, included reforms form the basis of the eligibility
    and readiness criteria and DLIs, and are designed to address gaps identified through the technical assessment.


                                  Table 1. Objectives of National Action Plan supported by SURWASH PforR

                                Relevant                Select State and Federal Reforms Incentivized through SURWASH
         National Action
                            SURWASH Results
        Plan Components
                             Areas and DLIs
                                                  State: Establish and build capacity of state and local level WASH institutions,
                                                  including regulatory functions, autonomous urban utilities, and LGA WASH
                                                  Departments; Board of Directors, professional management team, and
        Governance         RA 1
                                                  performance contracts within urban utilities
                                                  Federal: Reinforce FMWR’s role for policy guidance and sector coordination
                                                  through Program activities and National WASH Fund
                                                  State: Develop and enforce infrastructure quality standards; provision of
        Sustainability     RA 1 and RA 2          technical support to WASHCOMs/WCAs; water quality monitoring; improve
                                                  O&M; Risk, Resilience and Emergency Response Plans
                                                  State: Support Clean Nigeria campaign; establish urban sanitation authority;
                                                  consolidate institutional and regulatory reforms; strengthened capacity;
        Sanitation         RA 1 and RA 2          performance contracts between public authority and private operators;
                                                  citywide inclusive sanitation; scale up behavior change and education
                                                  campaigns
                                                  State: Approved cost recovery, tariff, and subsidy policies; tariff studies;
                                                  improved service provider financial management and creditworthiness;
        Funding &
                           RA 1 and RA 2          improved billing and collections; approved and sufficient budget allocation
        Financing
                                                  and release
                                                  Federal: National WASH Fund
        Monitoring &                              Federal and State: Establish and operationalize national WASH MIS system
                           RA 1
        Evaluation                                State: Annual reporting by local and state WASH institutions



Feb 06, 2021                                                                                                                 Page 6 of 13
          The World Bank
          Nigeria Sustainable Urban and Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Program (P170734)


    14. While the Program supports the construction and rehabilitation of WASH infrastructure, investments of
    particularly high E&S risks will be excluded from financing. Excluded activities include the construction and/or
    rehabilitation of wastewater treatment plants, the desilting of surface waters, and large-scale water (surface and
    groundwater) resource infrastructure, including large dams or activities involving the allocation or conveyance of
    water, such as inter-basin water transfers or activities resulting in significant changes to water quality or availability.
    Large scale land acquisition, resettlement, or livelihood displacement of more than 100 people are also deemed high
    risk and cannot be financed.

   C. Proposed Program Development Objective(s)

    15. Program Development Objectives (PDO) are to increase access to water, sanitation, and hygiene services and to
    strengthen sector institutions in participating states of Nigeria.

    16. The Program will increase access to basic water supply services through the construction and rehabilitation of
    water supply infrastructure. Household-level improved sanitation and hygiene services will be provided through
    support of the Clean Nigeria: Use the Toilet Campaign. Improved WASH services will be constructed and rehabilitated
    within institutions (schools and HCF) and public spaces (markets, motor parks, etc.).

    17. Relevant State and LGA-level sector institutions will be strengthened within participating states. These include the
    following institutions, or equivalent: (1) the Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Agency (RUWASSA) for rural WASH, (2)
    the Small Town Water Supply and Sanitation Agency (STWSSA) for small town WASH, (3) the State Water Authority
    (SWA) for urban water supply, (4) the state urban sanitation authority, (5) the state WASH regulatory function, and
    (6) LGA WASH Departments. Additionally, the FMWR will be strengthened at the federal level. The Program seeks to
    ensure that the roles and responsibilities for service provision, TA, monitoring and evaluation, and regulation are
    clearly established, and that these institutions improve their capacity to better execute their responsibilities.

    18. The PDO will be measured using five PDO results indicators:
        a. Number of states achieving policy, institutional, and regulatory (PIR) plan targets. 7
        b. Number of people provided with access to a basic drinking water service (number, disaggregated by gender,
            urban/rural and small towns).
        c. Number of people provided with access to improved sanitation services (number, disaggregated by gender,
            urban/rural and small towns).
        d. Number of communities having achieved and/or maintained community-wide sanitation status (declared
            and verified as ODF+8).
        e. Number of schools and healthcare facilities with improved water supply, sanitation and handwashing
            facilities constructed or rehabilitated (number, disaggregated by urban/rural).

    19. The Program will support the GoN to achieve the Program objectives through two Results Areas. Results Area 1
    will support activities designed to enact necessary policy reforms and enhance the capacity of institutions required
    for effective and sustainable service delivery, including the FMWR, state and local governments, service providers, TA
    providers, and community-based organizations. Meanwhile, Results Area 2 will support an integrated package of

    7 Program states will be assessed against the achievement of their PIR plan through the annual performance assessment (APA), including

    critical reforms as described in Table 3. Achieved critical reforms must then be sustained during each subsequent Program year and will
    continue to be tracked through the APA.
    8 See verification protocol for definition of ODF+



Feb 06, 2021                                                                                                                            Page 7 of 13
          The World Bank
          Nigeria Sustainable Urban and Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Program (P170734)


    investments to expand access to and increase the use of WASH services in urban and rural areas and small towns. It
    includes the development of priority infrastructure to improve water supply service delivery and WASH infrastructure
    in institutions (schools and healthcare facilities) and public places (markets, motor parks, etc.). It also supports
    implementation of the Clean Nigeria: Use the Toilet Campaign to improve sanitation and hygiene practices.


   D. Environmental and Social Effects

    20. An ESSA was conducted by the World Bank to review the existing systems for E&S management and assess how
    these systems perform in practice across all tiers of Government. The ESSA evaluated the acceptability of the
    Borrower’s systems (laws, regulations, standards and procedures) against the core principles for managing identified
    E&S issues and impacts. The ESSA also includes a review of due diligence practices, performance track record, budget
    and institutional capacity of implementing agencies across all tiers of Government pertaining to E&S management.
    Consultations were carried out with various stakeholders at the Federal, State and LGA level during the preparation
    of the draft ESSA. These included government staff, regulatory WASH agencies, environmental regulatory agencies,
    nongovernmental organizations and sector experts. Public consultation and dissemination of the ESSA will be
    conducted with the state implementing agencies prior to the project appraisal. As per the assessment conducted and
    findings via the ESSA the E&S risks are rated Substantial.

    21. An E&S screening of initial risks associated with the implementation of the PforR was conducted using the Bank’s
    PforR principles and screening criteria to determine whether there may be linked or associated activities which would
    be required to meet Program objectives from an E&S sustainability and inclusion perspective. The anticipated E&S
    risks are expected to be associated with medium-scale civil works entailing drilling of boreholes, construction and
    rehabilitation of water points and water schemes, construction and rehabilitation of water facilities in associated
    institutions (schools and health centers) and public spaces (markets, bus stations, etc.), protecting the quality and
    quantity of water sources for relevant water facilities, household-level sanitation activities, and construction and
    rehabilitation of latrines in associated institutions (schools and health centers) and public spaces (markets, bus
    stations, etc.). Civil works and operational sanitation and hygiene activities will likely generate adverse site-specific
    risks and impacts such as the need for the disposal and management of excavated material generated from
    construction/rehabilitation activities during the construction phase, potential to contaminate water ways and ground
    water due to poorly designed systems, occupational health and safety of workers both during the construction and
    operational phases, increased level of dust, noise and vibration and public nuances from moving of construction
    vehicles and machinery and overall civil works, community health and safety risk and the potential pollution of surface
    and groundwater sources due to non-monitored operations, improper management of waste water and fecal sludge
    generated from sanitation facilities and discharge to natural systems unless properly treated and managed.

    22. The social issues/risks associated with the Program include impacts due to land acquisition for construction
    (permanent and temporary), impacts on cultural heritage and women’s safety if facilities are not sited properly, labor
    risks due to workforce brought into rural areas by contractors, resultant impacts on community health, sexual
    exploitation and abuse (SEA) and GBV issues and potential influx due to improved water and sanitation infrastructure.
    As many of the areas would be in underserved remote communities, there is potential for conflict between the
    communities if all do not receive equal benefits from the Program. There are also conflict zones in parts of Nigeria.
    The movement of goods and services and contractors may pose security risks to the Program. The program will assess
    the potential risk posed by security arrangements to those within and outside the program site and adopt the
    Voluntary Principles on Security and Human Rights as the relevant good international industry practice approach.


Feb 06, 2021                                                                                                        Page 8 of 13
          The World Bank
          Nigeria Sustainable Urban and Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Program (P170734)


    23. Investments of particularly high E&S risks will be excluded from financing under the Program, with others
    subject to additional screening. Excluded activities include the construction and/or rehabilitation of wastewater
    treatment plants, the desilting of surface waters, and large-scale water (surface and groundwater) resource
    infrastructure, including large dams or activities involving the allocation or conveyance of water, such as inter-basin
    water transfers or activities resulting in significant changes to water quality or availability. Furthermore, other
    proposed activities with an uncertain level of risk could be subject to an additional E&S screening mechanism for
    acceptability. Such activities include, but are not limited to, the construction or rehabilitation of water treatment plant
    and fecal sludge treatment facilities; and the large-scale construction of water supply mains. Large scale land
    acquisition for any Program activity is also deemed high risk which cannot be funded under the PforR. Any Program
    activity that entails large scale resettlement or livelihood displacement of more than 100 Project Affected Persons
    (PAPs) will not be funded by the PforR. For any resettlement below 100 PAPs, the implementing agencies will prepare
    Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs).

    24. E&S Management: The E&S team has conducted capacity assessments of the Federal Project Implementation
    Unit (FPIU) and all seven Program States. This assessment builds on the preliminary capacity assessment that was
    conducted to assess the FMWR’s capacity for rural WASH only. The full assessment covers the urban, rural and small-
    town water supply and sanitation sector for all participating states and the FPIU. The initial assessment revealed that
    the FPIU that was originally formed for rural WASH had some experience with previous World Bank Safeguards but
    was not familiar with the Bank’s PforR requirements. From the initial assessment it was determined that the E&S risk
    management does not play a role in the development or operational stages of rural WASH projects and relevant
    capacities are weak in terms of experience, policies, guidelines and human resources. Although the FMWR has
    implemented some projects sponsored by international agencies, the assessment reveals that these projects do not
    fully translate to lessons learnt or transferable experiences for the core staff. This may be partly due to the fact that
    most of the E&S roles are carried out by external consultants, therefore leading to the attrition of experience and
    knowledge of the due diligence process. Based on the E&S assessment there are distinct variations in institutional
    mandates and the capacity of Federal and State Water Agencies and Urban Water Departments. Rural and Urban
    Water Departments at all levels of Government are separate with varying E&S experience. Some states have systems
    in place based on lessons learnt from previous projects supported by either the World Bank or other development
    partners. For example, among the seven proposed states, the states benefiting from and currently implementing the
    UW3 Project have experience using the Bank’s E&S protocols. Meanwhile, other states show significant gaps in this
    regard. Overall, there is a general lack of institutional capacity to identify, monitor and manage E&S risks by
    implementing agencies as most of the E&S components are actively managed by external consultants. More so, most
    of the policies and institutional structures in place among the participating states have arrangements on urban
    components of the WASH sector, while the small town and rural components lack adequate institutional capacity,
    policies and procedures. At the federal level, the FPIU has hired two E&S specialists; one for environment and the
    other for social. The two specialists have been drawn into the FPIU based on their knowledge and lessons learnt from
    previous urban water projects, particularly given their experience in managing the UW3 Project. The ESSA has
    comprehensive details of the E&S capacity of each of the respective participating States and the FPIU.

    25. It is anticipated that, both at the Federal and state level, SPIUs will need to recruit E&S specialists who will have to
    be trained on the requirements of the ESSA to effectively manage E&S risks. These specialists will manage risks during
    implementation, including using E&S screening criteria, ensuring the development of requisite E&S assessments and
    relevant documents by external consultants/firms, overseeing stakeholder consultation, managing contractor
    performance and conducting implementation monitoring and reporting. TA will need to be cascaded down to LGA-
    level WASH agencies as well.


Feb 06, 2021                                                                                                           Page 9 of 13
          The World Bank
          Nigeria Sustainable Urban and Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Program (P170734)


    26. Geographic location. The Program will be national in scope, involving a state selection process to target both TA
    and investment in accordance with a set of eligibility and readiness criteria, respectively. Within each selected state,
    LGAs will be targeted through an additional set of prioritization criteria. Criteria for state selection and draft criteria
    for LGA prioritization can be found in Annex 9.

    27. Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50): OP 7.50 is applicable as the Program aims to provide WASH
    services in select rural, small towns and institutions (schools and health facilities), with potential impacts on both
    groundwater and surface water. Some Program sites fall within transboundary river basins that are shared with
    neighbor countries and therefore considered “international waterways,” including the Niger river basin (shared with
    Benin, Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Cameroon, Algeria, Guinea, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Chad)
    and the Lake Chad river basin (shared with Algeria, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Libya, Niger and Sudan).
    Given the small scale and diffuse nature of eligible activities financed by this Program and that investments of
    particularly high environmental risk will be excluded, the Program will not adversely affect the flow, quantity or quality
    of the water flowing to other riparian countries and will not be appreciably harmed by other riparians’ water use. In
    accordance with the World Bank's OP 7.50 paragraph 1, both the Lake Chad Basin Commission (LCBC) and the Niger
    Basin Authority (NBA) have been notified of the Program by the FMWR. The LCBC responded favorably to the Program,
    while no objection was received from the NBA within the allotted timeframe.

    28. Consultations and Information Disclosure. An all stakeholders’ conference will be held at least once a year during
    Program implementation, including representatives of both Federal and state stakeholders, to facilitate information
    sharing and consultation on key program aspects. To ensure there is proper information dissemination, buy-in, and
    adequate feedback systems for all stakeholders, a proper stakeholders management system shall be established
    throughout the project lifecycle. At the federal level, there shall be an all stakeholders conference once a year to
    consult, engage and gauge feedback from all WASH sector stakeholders. Beyond this, the FPIU shall also engage
    regularly with all relevant institutional stakeholders at the federal level who have requisite oversight in the
    management of WASH sector projects. At the State level, Program states shall ensure adequate stakeholder
    engagement is conducted across all state and local government level implementing agencies. Each Program unit shall
    establish a clear stakeholder engagement protocol consistent with federal and state guidance as established by the
    FPIU and the relevant SPIU. All stakeholder engagement protocol shall include proper stakeholder mapping
    mechanisms, engagement processes, timelines, feedback mechanisms and proper documentation procedures. In all,
    the stakeholder management process shall emphasize free prior and informed consent of all project affected entities
    as much as practical. Feedback will be considered in subsequent decisions.

    29. Citizen engagement. Following the state selection process and the prioritization of LGAs for investment at the
    state level, SPIUs will ensure that beneficiary communities within Program LGAs are consulted from the start and that
    all elements of the Program are planned and designed through participatory processes as outlined in the Stakeholder
    Engagement Plan (SEP) and the Program’s communications strategy elaborated in the POM. This process shall include
    the involvement of WASHCOMs, WCAs, service providers, and other relevant stakeholders. If WASHCOMs and WCAs
    do not currently exist within a rural community or a small town, they will be established during the planning phase in
    accordance with relevant state or FMWR guidelines to enable their participation in the process. In addition, the
    Program will put in place a basic Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) for RA 1 regarding WASH service provision. The
    Program will ensure that all stakeholders and persons potentially affected by the Program are aware of the GRM and
    how to use it as well as monitor its effectiveness. Beyond grievances, beneficiary communities will have a role in the
    M&E process through citizen-led monitoring guided by experiences from other projects and countries. Beneficiary
    communities will also play a primordial role in driving social and behavior change in order to achieve and sustain
  . community-wide open defecation free status.

Feb 06, 2021                                                                                                         Page 10 of 13
                       The World Bank
                       Nigeria Sustainable Urban and Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Program (P170734)


    .
 ESF_LEGAL_T BL




           Legal Operational Policies


                                                                                     Triggered?

                  Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                        Yes

                  Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60                                 No

           Summary of Assessment of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts (With IPF Component for PforR)
    .

                  30. E&S impacts under the TA component: The Bank will provide TA and capacity-building activities that address
                  weaknesses, identified capacity gaps and institutional deficiencies within States and the FMWR. The E&S impacts are
                  negligible and are addressed separately through the E&S Review Summary (ESRS) prepared in line with the Bank’s E&S
                  Framework requirements. The ESSA and Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) will be publicly disclosed by the Bank and
                  the GoN prior to project appraisal. The TA will assist the client in preparing a Security Management Plan (SMP) and
                  will support security interventions, including security personnel and law enforcement to improve its capacity to react
                  to incidents and enforce the law; and reduce criminal and violent activities to the PAPs and beneficiaries. Prior to
                  deploying security personnel, the PIUs shall take measures to ensure that security personnel are: (i) screened to
                  confirm that they have not engaged in past unlawful or abusive behavior, including excessive use of force; and (ii)
                  adequately instructed and trained, on a regular basis, on the use of force and appropriate behavior and conduct.


            E. Financing

                                                         Program Financing (Template)


                                              Sources                                        Amount                   % of Total
                                                                                           (USD Million)
                   Counterpart Funding                                                                175.00                       20.00

                     Borrower/Recipient                                                               175.00                       20.00

                   International Development Association (IDA)                                        700.00                       80.00

                     IDA Credit                                                                       700.00                       80.00
                  Total Program Financing                                                             875.00



    .



Feb 06, 2021                                                                                                                   Page 11 of 13
          The World Bank
          Nigeria Sustainable Urban and Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Program (P170734)



   CONTACT POINT


  World Bank

   Name :                  Antonio Manuel Rodriguez Serrano
                           Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
   Designation :                                                   Role :        Team Leader(ADM Responsible)
                           Specialist
   Telephone No :          5220+32928 /                            Email :       amrodriguez@worldbank.org

   Name :                  Gerhardus Nicolaas Albertus Soppe
                           Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
   Designation :                                                   Role :        Team Leader
                           Specialist
   Telephone No :          202-535-9298                            Email :       gsoppe@worldbank.org


  Borrower/Client/Recipient

   Borrower :              Federal Republic of Nigeria
                                                                                 Director, International Economic
   Contact :               Aisha Omar                              Title :
                                                                                 Relations Department, FMoF
   Telephone No :          2348033115666                          Email :        ishay2k2006@yahoo.com

  Implementing Agencies

   Implementing
                           Federal Ministry of Water Resources
   Agency :
   Contact :               Engr. Benson Ajisegiri                  Title :       Director Water Supply and PPP
   Telephone No :          0023408033738149                        Email :       bajisegiri1@yahoo.com


   Implementing
   Agency :
   Contact :               Engr. Abdulhamid Gwaram                 Title :       PIU Coordinator
   Telephone No :          002348060779770                         Email :       a_gwaram@yahoo.com




Feb 06, 2021                                                                                               Page 12 of 13
          The World Bank
          Nigeria Sustainable Urban and Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Program (P170734)



   FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
   The World Bank
   1818 H Street, NW
   Washington, D.C. 20433
   Telephone: (202) 473-1000
   Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects




Feb 06, 2021                                                                                           Page 13 of 13
