Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        NG Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Sector Project (P170734)




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                         Project Information Document (PID)




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                         Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 06-Sep-2019 | Report No: PIDC26989




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Sep 03, 2019                                                                                          Page 1 of 11
         The World Bank
         NG Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Sector Project (P170734)


  BASIC INFORMATION


  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE

  Country                                        Project ID                    Parent Project ID (if any)   Project Name
  Nigeria                                        P170734                                                    NG Sustainable Rural
                                                                                                            Water Supply and
                                                                                                            Sanitation Sector
                                                                                                            Project (P170734)
  Region                                         Estimated Appraisal Date      Estimated Board Date         Practice Area (Lead)
  AFRICA                                         Jun 22, 2020                  Sep 10, 2020                 Water

  Financing Instrument                           Borrower(s)                   Implementing Agency
  Investment Project Financing                   Federal Republic of Nigeria   Federal Ministry of Water
                                                                               Resources

   Proposed Development Objective(s)

    The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase access to water, sanitation and hygiene services and to
    strengthen capacity for service delivery in selected rural areas and small towns of Nigeria.

    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

   SUMMARY-NewFin1

   Total Project Cost                                                                                                       450.00

   Total Financing                                                                                                          450.00
                             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                              350.00

   Financing Gap                                                                                                               0.00

   DETAILS     -NewFinEnh1




   World Bank Group Financing

       International Development Association (IDA)                                                                          350.00

          IDA Credit                                                                                                        350.00

   Non-World Bank Group Financing

       Counterpart Funding                                                                                                  100.00
          Borrower/Recipient                                                                                                100.00


Sep 03, 2019                                                                                                              Page 2 of 11
          The World Bank
          NG Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Sector Project (P170734)




  Environmental and Social Risk Classification                              Concept Review Decision
  Substantial                                                               Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to
                                                                            continue


  B. Introduction and Context

  Country Context

     1. More of the world’s poor live in Nigeria than in any other country. Frequently referred to as ‘the Giant of Africa’,
        Nigeria has the largest population in Africa at over 190 million, with current projections that it will reach
        approximately 400 million people and be the third most populous country by 2040. More than 90 million Nigerians
        currently live in extreme poverty.1 Poverty has been rising in rural areas – where an estimated 52 percent of the
        population lives – and in the northern zones. As a result, 120 million Nigerians (45 percent of the population) will
        be living in extreme poverty by 2030.2 With a gross national income per capita of US$2,100 (in 2017 – Atlas
        method, WDI), Nigeria is classified as a lower-middle-income country. Despite chronic poverty, it is richly
        endowed, has a relatively young, rural, and multiethnic population, and accounts for the largest economy in Africa.

     2. A key development challenge in Nigeria revolves around inclusive economic growth, as economic growth thus
        far has had limited impact on reducing poverty and building shared prosperity. High levels of poverty persist as
        progress toward poverty reduction has stagnated, but Nigeria has the potential to become an economic
        powerhouse through the effective management of abundant resources and ramped up investments in human
        capital. Realizing inclusive growth is the underlying objective of Nigeria’s Economic Recovery and Growth Program
        (ERGP) 2017-2020. To achieve more inclusive growth and reduce poverty, the government and people of Nigeria
        must meet the challenges of creating opportunities for gainful employment for the growing population and
        enhancing human capital to take advantage of the opportunities.

     3. Although the Federal Government of Nigeria (FGN) has achieved progress in health, education, and safety nets
        over the last decade, Nigeria still faces human capital challenges that dim the prospects of sustained economic
        growth, especially in rural areas. Nigeria ranks 152 out of 157 countries on the Human Capital Index.3 Using this
        measure, a child born in Nigeria today is predicted to be 34 percent as productive when she grows up as she could
        be if she enjoyed complete education and full health. In 2016, two out of every five children under five (44 percent)
        suffered from chronic undernutrition (low height-for-age), which is among the highest in the world. Another 11
        percent were wasted (low weight for height) and 32 percent were under-weight (low weight for age). Under five
        mortality was 100 per 1,000 live births in 2017. Maternal mortality is among the highest in the world, estimated
        at 814 deaths per 100,000 live births for 2015, accounting for 19 percent of maternal deaths globally. Finally, an
        estimated 27 percent of primary school aged children – close to 9 million children, are not attending school.4
     4. Access to water supply, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) is an important determinant of human capital
        outcomes, including early childhood survival, health and educational attainment – all of which in turn affect

 1 World Bank Databank population estimates and projections.
 2 World Data Lab. See https://worldpoverty.io.
 3 HCI (Human Capital Index) (database), World Bank, Washington, DC, http://www.worldbank.org/en/publication/human-capital.
 4 WDI.



Sep 03, 2019                                                                                                                  Page 3 of 11
         The World Bank
         NG Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Sector Project (P170734)


           labor productivity and efficiency. Overall, approximately 73 percent of the total burden of enteric infections5 in
           Nigeria is associated with inadequate WASH.6 About 253,800 WASH attributable deaths occurred in Nigeria in
           2016, with 119,900 of those deaths occurring from diarrheal diseases.7 There is robust evidence that access to
           safe water supply and improved sanitation decrease the incidence of diarrhea in young children,8 have shown a
           large part of the chronic malnutrition burden is owing to the unhygienic environment in which children grow up,
           often a result of high levels of open defecation across densely populated areas. Access to WASH can impact years
           of schooling by freeing up time that children spend collecting water to attend school, reducing the prevalence of
           disease that can keep children out of school, and contributing to a safe and healthy learning environment while
           at school.9 Gender inequities exacerbate such impacts on human capital.

  Sectoral and Institutional Context

      5. Nigeria’s WASH sector requires immediate attention; services are scarce throughout the country, with the rural
         poor being less likely to have access. In 2018, a total of 47 million Nigerians were living without access to improved
         drinking water, 78 million without access to improved sanitation facilities and 150 million without access to a basic
         handwashing facility.10 The majority of rural households (58 percent) lack access to an improved water source
         within 30 minutes roundtrip and some 33 percent of households lack access to any improved water source,
         regardless of distance, while only 18 percent have access to improved water on premises. In 2015, more than 38
         percent of the 90,500 improved water points and around 46 percent of the 5,100 water schemes in the country
         were nonfunctional (deemed out of service).11 Further, nearly 30 percent of water points and water schemes
         appeared to fail in the first year of operation after construction, presumably because of the poor construction
         quality.12 Meanwhile, less than half of all rural households (48 percent) have access to improved sanitation, while
         a third practice open defecation, a percentage that has marginally increased since 1990. Only one third have
         access to basic sanitation and 5 percent to safely managed sanitation.13

      6. WASH access in health care facilities (HCF) and schools is lagging, increasing the risk of infection for both
         patients and staff and hindering educational outcomes. In 2018, just 46 percent of HCF had an improved water
         service available when needed and on premises; and just 12 percent of HCF nationally provided basic sanitation
         services14 and in rural areas 27 percent of HCF had no sanitation service. On average, rural HCF had just one toilet

 5 Enteric infections include diseases such as diarrhea, typhoid and paratyphoid fevers, and other intestinal infections.
 6 World Bank, 2017. A Wake-Up Call: Nigeria Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene Poverty Diagnostic. WASH Poverty Diagnostic. World Bank,

 Washington, DC. © World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/27703 License: CC BY 3.0 IGO.
 7 Prüss‐Ustün et al. 2019. “Burden of disease from inadequate water, sanitation and hygiene for selected adverse health outcomes: An

 updated analysis with a focus on low- and middle-income countries.” International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health 222:
 765-777.
 8 A synthetic review and meta-analysis of health impact assessments of WASH interventions show water interventions reduce diarrhea morbidity by

 34 percent, sanitation interventions reduce it by 28 percent, while promotion of handwashing with soap results in a 40 percent reduction (Wolf et
 al. 2018. Impact of drinking water, sanitation and handwashing with soap on childhood diarrheal disease: updated meta-analysis and meta-
 regression. Tropical Medicine and International Health 23(5): 508–525.).
 9 A meta-analysis of school-based WASH interventions found that overall these resulted in a 69 percent reduction in school absenteeism and were

 similarly associated with lower dropout rates (Andres et al. 2018).
 10 Calculated using 2018 population and access percentages from 2018 WASH NORM survey.
 11 A water point provides access to a number of beneficiaries at one designated collection point. A water scheme, conversely, includes a water

 distribution system from the point of origin to destinations such as households and farms.
 12 World Bank, 2017. A Wake-Up Call: Nigeria Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene Poverty Diagnostic. WASH Poverty Diagnostic. World Bank,

 Washington, DC. © World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/27703 License: CC BY 3.0 IGO.
 13 World Bank, 2019. Nigeria Rural Water, Sanitation and Hygiene Services: Access and Sustainability. World Bank, Washington, DC.
 14 Basic sanitation services are defined as improved facilities which are usable, with at least one toilet dedicated for staff, at least one sex-separated

 toilet with menstrual hygiene facilities, and at least one toilet accessible for people with limited mobility.

Sep 03, 2019                                                                                                                                   Page 4 of 11
         The World Bank
         NG Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Sector Project (P170734)


          for patients. Only 40 percent of HCF had access to basic hygiene services. Meanwhile only 36 percent of schools
          had access to basic water services, while 52 percent had no water service. Only 33 percent had access to basic
          sanitation services (meaning improved facilities which are single-sex and usable). Only 11 percent of schools had
          girls’ sanitation facilities with provisions for menstrual hygiene management (MHM), and only 30 percent of the
          schools with latrines had at least one compartment accessible to those with limited mobility (WASH NORM 2018).

     7. Women and girls suffer disproportionately from the lack of adequate WASH services. They bear the burden of
        water collection over long distances, which has been associated with negative effects on well-being, school
        attendance, and a higher risk of gender-based violence (GBV). A high prevalence of open defecation and the poor
        quality of sanitation facilities also compromise the convenience, safety, health, and dignity of rural women and
        girls, particularly those with disabilities in managing their menstrual hygiene needs. For example, the UN reports
        that one in ten girls in Sub-Saharan Africa miss school during their period – and may eventually drop out – often
        due to the lack of proper sanitation and hygiene facilities at school.15 Gender disparities are exacerbated by the
        relatively low participation of women and vulnerable groups in committees responsible for the planning,
        implementation, and operation and maintenance (O&M) of WASH facilities.

     8. Challenges within the WASH sector are compounded by climate-related risks. As one of the 10 countries most
        vulnerable to climate change,16 climate adaptation will need to be prioritized. Climate change inaction (business-
        as-usual) could cost the country an estimated 2 to 11 percent of GDP by 2020 and between 6 and 30 percent by
        2050, affecting the livelihoods of more than 90 million households.17 Four major climate related changes are
        predicted to occur over the next several decades that will have major economic and social implications for Nigeria:
        (1) by 2050, the average temperature is projected to rise by 1-2 degrees Celsius, especially in the north; (2) rainfall
        patterns are likely to become more variable; (3) extreme weather events are likely to become more frequent; and
        (4) rising sea levels will threaten coastal settlements, towns, and cities. All changes threaten the reliability and
        quality of both ground and surface water, while the rising sea levels – and related increases in the water table –
        threaten the structural integrity of sanitation facilities, rendering them structurally unsound, unusable, and
        potentially leading to further contamination of water sources. Climate change adaptation measures will include
        improved watershed management and the replacement of seasonal for permanent water sources.

     9. Implementation of sector policies remains weak with most states lacking modern policy frameworks
        institutions and capacities. All three tiers of government play a role in the delivery of WASH services to the
        population (Figure 1). At the national level, the Federal Ministry of Water Resources (FMWR) is responsible for
        policy making, oversight, and investment support for water resources management and development (surface
        water and groundwater), water supply and sanitation, and irrigation and drainage. The responsibility for the
        delivery of WASH services rests with state and local governments. Each of the 36 states has its own legal and
        institutional framework, resulting in significant variation in service delivery.

     10. Weak governance of the sector, a historic lack of prioritization of WASH, and insufficient pressure by the public
         undermines service provision. Key policy making, oversight, planning, service provision, regulation, and financing
         functions are not well defined and are seldom adequately implemented or enforced. Until recently, the reform of
         WASH services has not been high on the political agenda of federal and state governments, resulting in continued
         low coverage and poor service quality. Moreover, service providers such as state water authorities continue to

 15 UNESCO (2014). Puberty education & menstrual hygiene management - good policy and practice in health education - Booklet 9. Paris, France.
 16 According to the 2017 Climate Change Vulnerability Index.




Sep 03, 2019                                                                                                                          Page 5 of 11
         The World Bank
         NG Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Sector Project (P170734)


           operate under direct political interference with marginal autonomy, capacity, and incentives to improve
           performance. As civil society is neither well organized or sufficiently demanding, little pressure is being put on the
           government to improve and expand delivery.

                            Figure 1: Institutional roles and responsibilities in the WASH sector in Nigeria




           Notes: FMWR = Federal Ministry of Water Resources; FPIU = Federal Project Implementation Unit; LGA = Local Government
           Area; PEWASH = Partnership for Expanded Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene; RUWASSA = Rural Water Supply and
           Sanitation Agency; SMWR = State Ministry of Water Resources; SPIU = State Project Implementation Unit

     11. Public funds for WASH services are insufficient for the expansion, upgrade, and repair of infrastructure, limiting
         effective service delivery. Between 2006 and 2010 (the latest period for which data is available), Nigeria’s
         investment in WASH capital expenditure was on average 0.32 percent of GDP, lower than the regional average of
         0.70 percent of GDP.18 Beyond low investment levels, weak regulation and poor coordination of Federal and state-
         financed investments degrade efficiency in public expenditure. The FMWR does not sufficiently incentive state
         governments to develop service infrastructure or to engage in reform. Furthermore, innovative approaches to
         increasing sector financing have yet to be seriously explored, such as encouraging the entry of private firms by
         passing an enabling law to regulate private sector participation.

     12. Systems for monitoring and regulatory oversight of the WASH sector are inadequate, lack transparency, and
         are limited by weak capacity, adversely impacting the engagement of both government and development
         partners. The chronically high failure rates of water facilities and mixed results from recent sanitation
         interventions, such as WaterAid’s Sustainable Total Sanitation (STS) project,19 suggest that monitoring and
         regulatory oversight suffers from a lack of coordination and adequate data management systems. Although the
         FMWR officially maintains a centralized monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system, the National Water Information
         System (NAWIS), it is unclear whether this system has been thoroughly implemented and maintained. The
         Partnership for Expanded Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (PEWASH) program, launched in 2016, includes a
         series of commitments designed to address this problem, including rolling out a new country-wide information
         management system (WASH Information Management System, or WASHIMS), implementing a new set of
         monitoring indicators, and conducting routine program reviews.

 18 World Bank, 2017. A Wake-Up Call: Nigeria Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene Poverty Diagnostic. WASH Poverty Diagnostic. World Bank,

 Washington, DC. © World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/27703 License: CC BY 3.0 IGO.
 19 Abramovsky et al., [no date]. Institute for Fiscal Studies. Improving CLTS targeting: Evidence from Nigeria. IFS Briefing Note BN183. Co-authored

 with WaterAid and EDePo at IFS. https://www.ifs.org.uk/uploads/publications/bns/BN183.pdf Accessed online: May 2019.

Sep 03, 2019                                                                                                                               Page 6 of 11
         The World Bank
         NG Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Sector Project (P170734)



     13. In recent years, the FGN has strengthened its commitment towards improving access to WASH services, spurred
         on by the alarming degree to which Nigeria’s WASH sector is underdeveloped compared with its regional
         counterparts.20 This led to the President declaring a State of Emergency in 2018 and launching the National Action
         Plan for the Revitalization of Nigeria's Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene Sector (AP) aimed at ensuring universal
         access to sustainable and safely managed WASH services by 2030, commensurate with the SDGs. The AP is a 13-
         year strategy prioritizing actions within three phases: Emergency Plan, Recovery Plan, and Revitalization Strategy.
         The AP builds upon the PEWASH strategy, launched in 2016, that sought to better harmonize and expand efforts
         to improve rural WASH services. During the launch of the AP, the president specifically emphasized the importance
         of support from state governments and sector stakeholders to achieving the SDG targets and announced that
         Federal support to state governments will be conditioned on their commitment to both implement the AP and
         end open defecation by 2025 in their respective states.

  Relationship to CPF

     14. There is a clear rationale and a pressing need for a transformational operation addressing the sustainability of
         rural WASH in Nigeria. Over the past decade, the Bank’s WASH sector engagement has exclusively focused on
         urban areas, without a large rural intervention since the 1970s (although the Bank supported small towns as
         recently as 2004). However, around 30 percent of rural community-level microprojects implemented under the
         Social Protection GP’s Community Social Development Program (P090644) are water related. The FGN’s PEWASH
         strategy provides a well-established framework for the delivery of rural WASH services at scale; however, it has
         not yet been rolled out nationwide and will require further elaboration to improve the sustainability of rural WASH
         services. The rationale for continued Bank involvement is to maintain the momentum of sector reforms and
         developments initiated through the Bank’s support in the development of the AP and during previous World Bank-
         financed engagements: the Nigeria WASH Poverty Diagnostics (P158634), the Nigeria Rural Water, Sanitation and
         Hygiene Services: Access and Sustainability report (P165828), the Third National Urban Water Sector Reform
         Project (P123513), and the aforementioned Community and Social Development Project (P090644). Coordination
         with the World Bank Health, Nutrition and Population GP’s Accelerating Nutrition Results in Nigeria (ANRiN)
         (P162069) operation, and the proposed Nigeria Improved Child Survival Program for Human Capital MPA
         (P167156) will ensure that potential synergies are explored, particularly where targeting the same geographical
         areas and leveraging community-based platforms for service delivery.

     15. The proposed lending operation is closely aligned with the World Bank’s twin goals of ending extreme poverty
         and boosting shared prosperity, and more specifically, with the World Bank’s Nigeria Systematic Country
         Diagnostic (SCD). By improving access to sustainable WASH services in rural Nigeria, the operation directly
         contributes to two of the four identified pathways for tackling key constraints towards achieving the twin goals
         within the country: (1) building human capital to bridge the north-south divide, and (2) rebuilding social contracts.
         Improved access to clean WASH services would significantly improve critical human capital deficits by: (i)
         improving health and nutrition outcomes through reduced prevalence of water- and fecal-borne disease and
         enteric pathogens, (ii) improving educational outcomes through reduced absentee and drop-out rates, and (iii)
         reducing the risk of health care-associated infections. Simultaneously, the transparent planning and utilization of


 20 As revealed in: World Bank, 2017. A Wake-Up Call: Nigeria Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene Poverty Diagnostic. WASH Poverty Diagnostic.

 World Bank, Washington, DC. © World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/27703 License: CC BY 3.0 IGO.

Sep 03, 2019                                                                                                                          Page 7 of 11
         The World Bank
         NG Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Sector Project (P170734)


          public resources towards improved service delivery fostered by the project can help break the current vicious
          cycle of low trust in Nigeria and help establish state legitimacy.

  C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

     16. The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase access to water, sanitation and hygiene services and to
         strengthen capacity for service delivery in selected rural areas and small towns of Nigeria.

  Key Results (From PCN)

     17. Key results indicators for the proposed project could include:
            • Number of people provided with access to an improved water source within 30 minutes roundtrip
                (total/female)
            • Number of people provided with access to improved sanitation facilities (total/female)
            • Indicator of water supply infrastructure sustainability (to be defined)
            • Number of Rural Communities or local government areas (LGAs) that achieve and sustain community-
                wide sanitation status (declared and verified as ODF+21)
            • Number of schools and healthcare facilities provided with access to basic WASH services
            • Monitoring system for WASH in rural communities and small towns established and operationalized

  D. Concept Description

     18. This project represents a first step in achieving Nigeria’s goal to ensure that all Nigerians have access to
         sustainable and safely-managed WASH services in rural areas. This goal was enshrined in the AP. Given the
         tremendous challenge at hand, the World Bank plans a long-term engagement in the rural WASH sector involving
         multiple projects and leveraging other activities in the country portfolio to promote sector reforms and deliver on
         the human capital agenda. This project will focus not only on improving access to WASH services in selected states,
         but on establishing the policies, regulations, procedures, institutional frameworks, and supply chain and
         infrastructure management models required to improve sector performance over the long-term along critical
         dimensions including: governance, technology and technical competency, ownership, private sector participation,
         M&E, access to finance, sustainability, inclusion, and resilience.

     19. This proposed US$350 M lending operation will be financed by the FMWR and implemented by the participating
         states to deliver an integrated package of WASH interventions in selected rural areas and small towns of
         Nigeria. The project will pursue an LGA-wide approach, whereby all rural areas and small towns will be targeted
         within each project LGA. States and, subsequently, LGAs, will be chosen through a clear selection process using
         established criteria. Learning from both national and international experiences has led to the proposal for a
         results-based instrument with strong TA. Components 1 and 2 will make use of mechanisms that incentivize results
         through government delivery channels, which may include disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs) and/or
         performance-based contracts/grants.

     Component 1: Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene Service Delivery (US$ 300 M)



 21 ODF+ refers to sustaining the status of open defecation free, ensuring proper operation and maintenance of the sanitation facilities, and ensuring

 the adequacy of the entire sanitation service chain (definition to be agreed with the counterparts during project preparation).

Sep 03, 2019                                                                                                                              Page 8 of 11
         The World Bank
         NG Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Sector Project (P170734)


     20. This component will be implemented in selected states by the State Project Implementation Unit (SPIUs) in
         collaboration with local and community-level stakeholders with an overall objective of increasing access to
         improved WASH services within rural communities and small towns. Preliminary priority areas for project support
         have been identified and will be based on a sector-approved menu of technology options to be developed under
         Component 2. These areas include the following infrastructure investments for water supply, sanitation, and
         hygiene: i) construction and rehabilitation of water points and water schemes in rural communities and small
         towns; ii) construction and rehabilitation of WASH facilities and handwashing station; and iii) where onsite excreta
         treatment and disposal is not feasible, construction of small-scale fecal sludge disposal/treatment facilities.

     21. TA and procurement of goods and services will support the above listed water supply, sanitation, and hygiene
         interventions. This will include: i) protection of the quality and quantity of water sources for relevant water
         facilities; ii) implementation of household-level sanitation and hygiene activities; iii) introducing technologies to
         be developed under Component 2 to safely manage fecal sludge; and improving the sustainability of WASH
         facilities.

     Component 2: Sector Institutional Development and Implementation Support (Cost US$ 50 M)

     22. This TA component will be implemented by the FPIU with an overall objective of enhancing the capacity of relevant
         federal, state, and local government agencies and stakeholders for WASH program planning, AP implementation,
         and PEWASH strategy operationalization. All training and capacity building activities shall promote the inclusion
         of women to improve representation in the sector. Preliminary priority areas for project support have been
         identified and include the following: i) development of standards, systems, and processes; and ii) capacity building
         within sector agencies.

     Component 3: Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC Cost US$ 0 M)

     23. This component will allow for the reallocation of project funds to support emergency response and reconstruction
         following an eligible crisis or emergency at the national or sub-national level. It would draw from uncommitted
         loan resources under the other project components. A CERC Annex will be prepared as part of the Project
         Operations Manual that details the provisions for activating and implementing the CERC, including specific eligible
         emergencies, a list of potential activities to be supported, fiduciary procedures, Environmental and Social (E&S)
         requirements, and monitoring and reporting processes.

     Geographic Location and Other Characteristics

     24. Geographic location. The project will be national in scope, involving a state selection process to target both TA
         and investment in accordance with a set of eligibility and readiness criteria, respectively. Within each selected
         state, LGAs will be targeted through an additional set of prioritization criteria.

     25. Citizen engagement. Following the state selection process and the prioritization of LGAs for investment at the
         state level, SPIUs will ensure that beneficiary communities within project LGAs are consulted from the start and
         that all elements of the project are planned and designed through participatory processes as outlined in the
         Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP). In addition, the project will put in place a basic Grievance Redress Mechanism
         (GRM) for Component 1 regarding WASH service provision. The project will ensure that all project stakeholders
         and persons potentially affected by the project are aware of the GRM and how to use it as well as monitor its

Sep 03, 2019                                                                                                        Page 9 of 11
            The World Bank
            NG Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Sector Project (P170734)


             effectiveness. Beyond grievances, beneficiary communities will have a role in the M&E process through citizen-
             led monitoring guided by experiences from other projects and countries.

         26. Gender and social inclusion. The project will undertake a social assessment during preparation, as part of the
             Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and state led Environmental and Social Impact
             Assessments (ESIAs), to examine project-related gender gaps (such as in access to WASH services and the
             underrepresentation of female employees in sector institutions) and considerations for disability inclusion. Given
             the disproportionate impact from insufficient access to WASH services, the project will include strategies to
             empower women, the poor, people with disabilities, and other vulnerable stakeholders within beneficiary
             communities to participate in project planning and design. The project will promote gender equality within LGA-
             level WASH Departments and community-level WASHCOMs and WCAs. Women-friendly and accessible sanitation
             and hygiene facilities will be adopted for institutional and public settings.

         27. Climate change. Greenhouse gas (GHG) accounting will be conducted during preparation. Rural water supply
             infrastructure constructed through this project will primarily involve handpumps or mechanical pumps powered
             through the national power grid or solar-power, therefore resulting in minimal carbon emissions. However, in
             exceptional circumstances, diesel power may be considered as an option of last resort.

         28. Maximizing finance for development. The project seeks to leverage and empower the private sector to tackle the
             many challenges associated with rural WASH services provision. This includes supporting the development of
             comprehensive supply chains, training private mechanics and artisans, and piloting new and innovative
             infrastructure management and maintenance models that provide the proper incentives for private sector entities
             to improve service sustainability. A potential strategy for sanitation is the provision of small loans through
             microfinance institutions that allow households to overcome their severe credit constraints.


     Legal Operational Policies                                                            Triggered?
     Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                           Yes
     Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60                                                    No

     Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
     .


 .
     CONTACT POINT


     World Bank
     Antonio Manuel Rodriguez Serrano, Luis Alberto Andres
     Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist


     Borrower/Client/Recipient



Sep 03, 2019                                                                                                        Page 10 of 11
         The World Bank
         NG Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Sector Project (P170734)


  Federal Republic of Nigeria
  Aliyu Ahmed
  Director, IERD
  ahmed4.aliyu@gmail.com

  Implementing Agencies
  Federal Ministry of Water Resources
  Abdulhamid Gwaram
  PIU Coordinator
  a_gwaram@yahoo.com


  Benson Ajisegiri
  Director RWSS
  bajisegiri1@yahoo.com


  FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
  The World Bank
  1818 H Street, NW
  Washington, D.C. 20433
  Telephone: (202) 473-1000
  Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects



  APPROVAL

  Task Team Leader(s):                      Antonio Manuel Rodriguez Serrano, Luis Alberto Andres

  Approved By
  APPROVALTBL
  Environmental and Social Standards
  Advisor:
  Practice Manager/Manager:

  Country Director:




Sep 03, 2019                                                                                        Page 11 of 11
