Public Disclosure Authorized   Public Disclosure Authorized   Public Disclosure Authorized   Public Disclosure Authorized
Disclaimer:


This Karachi Water and Sewerage Services Improvement project’s draft Environmental and Social Impact
Assessment (ESIA) was prepared by the Government of Sindh broadly following Good International
Industry Practices (GIIP) as those required under the Bank’s Environmental and Social Framework (ESF).


The review of this ESIA is a key part of the Bank’s due diligence process and is currently ongoing. This
draft ESIA may still contain gaps to fully address all pertinent E&S issues in the project. Any gaps will be
covered through supplemental studies, assessments, and/or plans that will be completed in a reasonable
timeframe to ensure compliance with the ESF.


For the benefit of potentially project affected people (PAP) and other interested stakeholders, and in
alignment with the Bank’s Policy on Access to Information this Executive Summary of the draft ESIA is
being disclosed as soon as it became available. This disclosure, however, should not be considered as a

final clearance of the ESIA by the Bank.
Pakistan


                     Government of Sindh


Second Karachi Water and Sewerage Services Improvement
                 Project (KWSSIP-2)

               K-IV Augmentation Works




Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
                 (ESIA)




           Karachi Water and Sewerage Board (KWSB)
                                      Executive Summary

1. The Second Karachi Water and Sewerage Improvement Project (KWSSIP-2) will be implemented
   by the Government of Sindh together with the Karachi Water and Sewerage System Board
   (KSWB). This is the second project series (SOP-2) of the KWSSIP which will deepen the reforms
   commenced under SOP-1. This project consists of three components with the overall objective of
   increasing the access to safe water and sanitation in Karachi City, Pakistan.

2. One of the subcomponents of the Component 2 of SOP-2 is the KIV Augmentation Works which
   aims to convey about 260 MGD of water from the government financed KIV water reservoirs going
   to the existing water networks in Karachi City by installing water pipes. There are three new water
   supply networks that will be installed under this subcomponent.

3. The overall E&S risk of SOP-2 is high considering that the environmental risk is substantial while
   the social risk is high, based on the internal E&S risk classification of World Bank. An ESIA was
   prepared for KIV Augmentation Works to assess the E&S risks associated with the construction
   and operation of this subcomponent and develop a corresponding ESMP to avoid or minimize the
   adverse impacts to the environmental and stakeholders.

4. The scope of the ESIA includes (i) review of the applicable national E&S legislative and policy,
   (ii) assess the existing physical, biological and socio-economic baseline conditions, (iii) Identify
   potential adverse and positive E&S impacts from all stages of the project, (iv) assess and compare
   different subproject alternatives in terms of E&S impacts, (v) identify stakeholders that are likely
   to be affected or have interest or a stake in the project, with emphasis on disadvantaged and
   vulnerable groups and carry out consultation to solicit their concerns regarding the project, and (vi)
   provide ESMP for all stages of the project as a tool for the implementation of the suggested
   measures, along with monitoring and evaluation mechanism with adequate resources including
   capacity building of implementing agencies.

5. The KIV Augmentation Works will consist of laying water pipes from three KIV reservoirs to
   Karachi City. There three routes identified: (i) Route 1 will convey water from Reservoir 1 to the
   Y Junction in Landhi. This will transport 65 MGD of water and is approximately 28 km long. (ii)
   Route 2 consists of 39.5 km long pipe that will convey 130 MGD water from Reservoir 2 to Gulbai
   and (iii) Route 3 will run from Reservoir 3 to Qasba and Banaras and will consist of 28.5 km pipe
   to transport 65 MGD water.

6.   The RoW of this project consist of the 5-m trench for the water pipe (diameter of pipe ranges from
     6 to 8 ft), 2 meters from one side of the trench and additional 10 meters from the other side.

7. The proposed water pipes will be installed in open/barren areas, built-up areas, green areas/parks,
   nullah/drain and roads. There are two water bodies near the proposed routes namely, Lyari River
   and Gujjar Nullah. These water bodies receive the sewage from the nearby households but are
   usually dry. There are about 1,719 trees located within the proposed three routes of which, two tree
   species, Guggul and Bhai Guggul are considered as critically endangered and endangered,
   respectively, in the IUCN Red list.

8. There are about 66 sensitive receptors identified within the RoW which include nine shrines and
   graveyards, 29 mosques, 20 educational institutes, and eight health institutes.
   9. The following are the potential environmental and social risks and impacts during the construction
      phase of the project.

Impacts related to ESS 2: Labor and Work Conditions

   10. The construction workers will be exposed to the occupational health and safety hazards associated
       with the construction activities. To ensure safety protocols are implemented during construction,
       the contractor is required to develop and implement an OSH Program.

   11. Workers may also be exposed to labor risks such as child and forced labor, GBV, discrimination,
       SEA/SH and labor exploitations. A Labor Management Procedure was developed for KWSSIP-2
       to manage the identified labor risks. The key highlights of the LMP on how to address the issues of
       child and forced labor, labor influx, GBV, SEA/SH, occupational health and safety, and trafficking
       will be included in the bid documents of the contractors.

Impacts related to ESS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention Management

   12. Oil/chemical spill and leaks may contaminate the nearby water bodies and soil. Appropriate
       measures to contain the leaks and proper maintenance of the equipment shall be observed.

   13. Wastewater will be generated by the workers and from the construction sites. Surface run-off from
       the excavated areas may also increase the suspended solids of the water bodies. Wastewater and the
       surface runoff should not be discharged directly to the water bodies without proper treatment.

   14. Improper management of domestic solid wastes and hazardous wastes may cause deterioration of
       soil quality and water sources quality.

   15. Excavation activities may cause the generation of dust. Vulnerable groups such as children and the
       elderly are at risk when exposed to high dust emission. With this, mitigating measures such as
       regular watering of construction sites, covering of spoils and other measures to contain or minimize
       the dust emissions shall be implemented.

   16. Vehicles and heavy equipment will emit gaseous pollutants when in use. All vehicles and equipment
       should be maintained in good working condition to minimize the exhaust emissions and subsequent
       impacts

Impacts related to ESS 4: Community Health and Safety

   17. One of the major impacts of the project is the generation of traffic within the area. The water pipes
       will cross major highways and roads which may cause road closures during construction. The
       delivery of construction materials onsite, the operation of heavy equipment and the tunnel activities
       may also increase the traffic congestion in the area. These activities may also cause road accidents
       and road damages. A traffic management plan should be implemented, and the contractor should
       inform the public if there will be road closures.

   18. Passersby and vehicles may also accidentally fall in the excavated areas especially during night.
       With this, barricades, warning signs and safety signages will be provided int the construction site.

   19. The local community may also be exposed to communicable and vector-borne diseases because of
       the influx of workers. The influx of workers may increase the crime rate within the locality
       including GBV and SEA/SH. This is included in the LMP developed for KWSSIP-2.
   20. Social conflicts may arise between the labor force and local community. A GRM has been
       established to resolve all issue related to the community.

   21. A disruption in some basic services may also be experienced since there are existing sewer lines,
       gas pipes, electricity and telephone lines within RoW. This will be relocated prior the start of the
       construction. The public will be notified for the disruption and close coordination with the
       concerned departments will be done to reduce inconvenience to the residents.

Impacts related to ESS 5: Land Acquisition, Restriction on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement

   22. The whole RoW is owned by the government thus, land acquisition is not required. However, there
       are small business operators within the RoW that are needed to be relocated. A Resettlement Action
       Plan is being prepared and to be implemented.

Impacts related to ESS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural
Resources

   23. It is estimated that about 1,685 trees within the RoW are to be removed during construction. A tree
       plantation sub-plan was developed. All trees to be cut shall only be limited to within RoW and tree
       replacement shall be observed.

Impacts related to ESS 7: Indigenous People

   24. There are no know tribal or indigenous people within CoI.

Impacts related to ESS 8: Cultural Heritage

   25. There are no cultural sites within the CoI. However, shrine, graveyards and mosques are located
       within the CoI that may be exposed to the environmental and social impacts of the project.

   26. The operation of the project is limited to maintenance activities and repair of pipes if needed. The
       following are the potential E&S impacts of the O&M activities.

Impacts related to ESS 2: Labor and Working Condition

   27. Workers are exposed to occupational health and safety hazards when doing the repair or
       maintenance of the pipes. An OSH program should also be developed and implemented.

   28. Labor risks such as labor exploitation, child and forced labor are also a potential risk. The LMP
       developed for KWSSIP should also be implemented during operation phase.

Impacts related to ESS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention Management

   29. A standby generator will be operated as a backup power source. This may emit gaseous pollutants
       and may generate noise. However, this is expected to be minimal only since it will only be used
       during power outages.




Impacts related to ESS 4: Community Health and Safety
30. The project is expected to reduce and possibly eliminate water shortage and water borne diseases,
    increase water carrying capacity by installing new water mains and uplift the aesthetics of the area
    through tree plantations.

31. Pipe damages/leaks and illegal water connections along the proposed KIV Augmentation Works
    can be a point of entry of contaminants and therefore, will deliver contaminated water to the
    households. With this, a regular inspection of the pipes should be done. A Water Safety Plan should
    also be developed and implemented to ensure the safety of the water.

32. As part of the ESIA, an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) to mitigate the
    identified environmental and social risks. In addition, a Stakeholder Engagement Plan, a Labor
    Management Procedure and a Resettlement Action Plan were developed for this project. A CESMP
    should also be developed by the contractors to demonstrate their approach on how to comply with
    the ESMP. An Environmental and Social Monitoring Plan was also developed to monitor and verify
    the effectiveness of the implementation of mitigating measures in terms of minimizing the negative
    impacts. The total estimated cost for the environmental and social management, monitoring and
    auditing during pre-construction, construction and O&M (annual cost and will be updated for next
    upcoming years accordingly) comes to about PKR 136.08 million excluding resettlement and
    compensation cost.

33. The proposed project is under the PIU of KWSSIP-2 during the pre-construction and design phase.
    The Project Director (PD) has the overall responsibility for the design and pre-construction
    requirements. During construction, the ESC will be responsible for the overall implementation of
    the ESMP, RP, and other related requirements. The operation of the project will be under the direct
    jurisdiction of Engineers and Plant Managers, who shall also be responsible for the monitoring and
    compliance to the ESMP.

34. A Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was developed to address any complaints or grievances
    that may arise during the implementation of the project. Complaints will include, but not limited
    to, E&S issues (dust, noise, air pollution, social and cultural issues), damage and blockage of public
    utilities, traffic inconvenience, gender-based violence (GBV) and harassment, resettlement issues
    including loss of livelihood; and issues related to compensation of resettlement impacts. Separate
    Grievance Redress Committees (GRC) are to be formed for the community, subproject and at the
    PUI level. A GRC dedicated to resolve GBV-related issues will also be formed. The objectives of
    the GRM are (i) establish an organizational structure to resolve any grievances from individuals
    and communities fairly and equitably, (ii) provide a platform for the aggrieved individual or
    community to deliver their grievances, (iii) ensure that affected communities and individuals are
    treated fairly at all times, (iv) identify flaws in the operational functions of the project and suggest
    corrective measures; and (v) ensure the sustainability of the project. Complainants may lodge their
    grievances through several channels, including online, mail, phone, WhatsApp, e-mail, and
    complaint boxes. Moreover, PIU has established an e-Portal for filing and tracking progress of
    complaints lodged online.

35. This ESIA report should be updated as needed due to changes in project design, baseline conditions
    or identification of potential new impacts.
