Public Disclosure Authorized
                                      The World Bank
                                      Second Karachi Water And Sewerage Services Improvement Project (kwssip-2) (P171422)




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Additional Financing Appraisal
                                          Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                       Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                 (AF ESRS Appraisal Stage)


      Public Disclosure
                                              Date Prepared/Updated: 08/26/2024 | Report No: ESRSA03664




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Aug 26, 2024                                                                                 Page 1 of 15
                             The World Bank
                             Second Karachi Water And Sewerage Services Improvement Project (kwssip-2) (P171422)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID         Product                           Operation Acronym       Approval Fiscal Year

                     P171422              Investment Project Financing      KWSSIP-2                2025
                                          (IPF)

                     Operation Name       Second Karachi Water and Sewerage Services Improvement Project (KWSSIP-
                                          2)

                     Country/Region       Beneficiary country/countries     Region                  Practice Area (Lead)
                     Code                 (borrower, recipient)

                     Pakistan             Pakistan                          SOUTH ASIA              Water


                     Borrower(s)          Implementing Agency(ies)          Estimated Appraisal     Estimated Board
                                                                            Date                    Date

                     Islamic Republic     Province of Sindh through the     26-Aug-2024             12-Dec-2024
                     of Pakistan          Karachi Water and Sewerage




Public Disclosure
                                          Corporation (KWSC)

                     Estimated            Total Project Cost
                     Decision Review
                     Date

                     06-Aug-2024          1,000,200,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     Provide safely managed water and sanitation services in Karachi and increase KWSC’s financial
                     and operational performance


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or
                     Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The proposed Second Karachi Water and Sewerage Services Improvement Project (KWSSIP 2)
                     will invest US$600 million of which 40 percent to be financed by IBRD. These investments will
                     scale-up infrastructure rehabilitation and expansion, complemented by capacity building to


                    Aug 26, 2024                                                                                   Page 2 of 15
                             The World Bank
                             Second Karachi Water And Sewerage Services Improvement Project (kwssip-2) (P171422)


                     increase operational and financial performance and improvements to the enabling environment.
                     The project builds on the achievements of the ongoing Bank-funded Karachi Water and
                     Sewerage Services Improvement Project (KWSSIP) that was approved in June 2019. The Project
                     will benefit around 16 million people in Karachi. The project activities of KWSSIP 2 will be
                     grouped into four components. Component 1: Capacity Building and Reform of KWSC, focuses on
                     transforming KWSC into an efficient utility through technical assistance, HR reforms, NRW
                     reduction, water safety plans, and establishment of a water quality testing tab, strengthen
                     KWSC’s corporate governance, and increase its operational and financial performance other
                     initiatives. These activities will contribute to strengthen KWSC’s corporate governance and
                     increase its improving KWSC's operational and financial performance. Component 2: Safely
                     Managed Water and Sanitation Services, focuses on providing safely managed water and
                     sanitation services. This component will finance activities that will directly address Karachi's
                     water supply and sanitation challenges by investing in infrastructures, including addressing
                     water shortages, reduce network leaks, improve service quality, including in low-income areas.
                     Component 3: Project Management and Studies, will finance the project's management costs,
                     including coordination, supervision, risk management, and preparation for future water and
                     wastewater infrastructure projects. Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response Component
                     (CERC), has no funds allocated but it will allow us to reallocate uncommitted loan resources to
                     support emergency response and reconstruction if needed.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview




Public Disclosure
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     Project investments are in urban and semi urban areas of Karachi and surrounding areas, and
                     proposed interventions for the improvement of water supply schemes and wastewater treatment
                     facilities are widespread over a large geographical area. All sub-project locations, such as the K-
                     IV augmentation, the Malir Basin wastewater treatment plant, as well as the filtration plants, will
                     be within or in the vicinity of Karachi.

                     Karachi is the largest, most diverse and pluralistic city of Pakistan, with a large variety of ethnic,
                     religious and social groups. Karachi has been named among the 10 least livable cities in the
                     world by the Economic Intelligence Unit based on security, access to and quality of services, and
                     poor infrastructure. Air pollution, lack of proper waste management infrastructure, and
                     degradation of water bodies are the major environmental issues. In recent years, the city has
                     been severely affected by climate change including heat waves, sea level rise, droughts, and
                     floods. Since the early nineties, Karachi has suffered due to serious law and order issues and
                     experienced a high incidence of crime and political, ethnic, and sectarian violence. However, the
                     level of violence and crime has continued to decrease in the last few years.

                     The terrain of Karachi is mostly flat or rolling plains. Several small natural or man-made drainage
                     channels pass through various parts of the city, with general drainage running from western and
                     northern areas to the south into the seasonal Lyari and Malir rivers – which carry the city’s
                     sewage. The southern limit of the city is the Arabian Sea.

                     Bulk water treatment and supply: Karachi has an allocated quota of 650 MGD water from
                     Keenjhar Lake and Hub Dam against a demand of 1,200 MGD, resulting in a huge unmet water

                    Aug 26, 2024                                                                                   Page 3 of 15
                             The World Bank
                             Second Karachi Water And Sewerage Services Improvement Project (kwssip-2) (P171422)


                     demand. Bulk water is collected and treated by the conventional water treatment plants and
                     distributed by a system which is at least 40-45 years old. Approximately 210 MGD of water is
                     supplied without treatment[1]. The Government’s Greater Karachi Bulk Water Supply System (K-
                     IV) project (not financed by the World Bank), in its first phase, aims to bring in additional 260
                     MGD water to Karachi from Keenjhar Lake via a new water conveyance system over 110 km,
                     along with construction of transmission line providing the interconnection for the 132/11kV Grid
                     Station with the K-IV Pumping Complex to meet the 50 MW energy load demand required for the
                     operationalization of K-IV Main water pumps (K-IV – main or K-IV Phase 1). The K-IV
                     Augmentation subproject under KWSSIP-2 will connect the K-IV reservoirs and the city’s existing
                     water network through the laying of large pipelines. Thus, K-IV Main (encompassing the Water
                     Conveyance System and Power Transmission Line) is an Associated Facility and is a key
                     component of this project. Keenjhar is the second largest freshwater lake of Pakistan and is also
                     a Ramsar site. The water storage capacity of the lake has been artificially increased through
                     embankments. The lake is already a major source of drinking water supply to most of the areas
                     of Karachi even though its ecology is degraded due to effluent discharge from the Hyderabad-
                     based industries and contamination caused by tourist activities.

                     Waste water collection and treatment: The city’s existing wastewater treatment facilities are
                     under-capacity, dilapidated and working sub-optimally, resulting in an estimated 475 MGD of
                     sewage being discharged into the Arabian Sea via the storm water network. As stated above, the
                     natural drainage network of Karachi consists of two major river systems - Malir River on the east




Public Disclosure
                     and Lyari River which passes through the center draining most of the city’s storm water. These
                     rivers and their tributaries have been affected severely due to rapid and disorganized
                     urbanization. In the rainy season, the river basins experiences localized flash floods and millions
                     of gallons of untreated wastewater are discharged into the Arabian sea. Both river basins receive
                     domestic and industrial wastewater resulting in highly contaminated surface waters that exceed
                     the limit of Sindh Environmental Quality Standards. Of the three existing sewage treatment
                     plants, TP-1 and TP-3 are on the Lyari river and TP-2 is on the Malir river (Mehmoodabad). The
                     latter is almost entirely non-functional, while the two TPs on Lyari river are also sub-optimal. For
                     the Lyari river though, KWSC is working on its own to improve the performance and capacity of
                     TP-1 and TP-3. An environmental audit of TP-3 was conducted under KWSSIP-1. The audit
                     provided technical recommendations and concluded that TP-3 does have the capacity of treating
                     additional effluent resulting from provision of sewerage network to katchi abadis under the
                     project. However, for Malir river, TP-2 is not only non-functional, most of its land has also been
                     encroached. Therefore, the project entails a larger and more advanced treatment plant (TP-4) to
                     treat the domestic effluent of the Malir River.

                     [1] Situational Analysis of Water Resources of Karachi, WWF 2019

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and
                     Social Risks and Impacts
                     Currently, as part of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) for KWSSIP 1, there is one
                     Environmental Specialist, one Social Specialist and one Gender Specialist position and this team
                     is also supporting the preparation of KWSSIP 2. In view of the anticipated increase in workload
                     under KWSSIP-2 and given that KWSSIP-1 will continue to be implemented concurrently, one


                    Aug 26, 2024                                                                                   Page 4 of 15
                             The World Bank
                             Second Karachi Water And Sewerage Services Improvement Project (kwssip-2) (P171422)


                     additional Senior Environmental Specialist, one Senior Social Specialist and one Senior Gender
                     Specialist will be hired. As part of the field staff, two Environmental Specialists and two Social
                     Specialists will be hired along with an Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) Specialist. To
                     ensure that the Environmental and Social capacity of KWSC is also strengthened, an Institutional
                     assessment is being carried out with the purpose of establishing an E&S cell within the
                     Corporation as part of the wider institutional reform agenda of KWSC. It is expected that the cell
                     will be established during the first year of project effectiveness. The PIU E&S staff will initially
                     provide direct supervision of the implementation of the ESF for the project and the roles and
                     responsibilities will gradually transition to KWSC E&S cell as it becomes fully staffed. A firm will
                     be recruited to provide specialized program management support to PIU. The PIU will report to IA
                     management represented by the Managing Director. The PIU is expected to coordinate activities
                     with related Bank financed Karachi projects, particularly the Competitive and Livable City of
                     Karachi (CLICK) projects which target complementary measures to improve the quality of life in
                     Karachi. A Project Steering Committee was established under KWSSIP-1 to provide oversight and
                     high-level coordination which will continue for KWSSIP-2. The Steering Committee includes high
                     level representatives of all agencies involved in the Project Steering Committee shall provide
                     planning and strategic guidance and facilitate multi-stakeholder cooperation for the
                     development and implementation of a vision, policy reforms and investment program towards
                     the improvement of the Karachi’s sanitation and sewerage services. The Bank team will continue
                     to provide support to build IA’s capacity for management of E&S issues and trainings related to
                     ESF regularly.




Public Disclosure
                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                            High


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                           Substantial
                     The project’s Environmental Risk Rating is “Substantial.” Component 2 of the Project includes a
                     series of large-scale investments, namely the expansion and construction of new water
                     transmission mains K-IV- Augmentation, Malir basin river wastewater treatment TP-IV,
                     rehabilitation of existing wastewater pumping stations along with the construction of
                     transmission line for connecting the 132/11kV Grid Station with the K-IV Pumping Complex to
                     meet the 50 MW energy load demand required for the K-IV Main water pumps and
                     reconstruction and rehabilitation of existing water treatment plants. The investment in
                     construction of either new or rehabilitation of existing bulk water supply schemes, would
                     happen in a large geographical area around the existing infrastructure or in a new alignment.
                     Risks and impacts during the construction phase are diverse and include (i) an increase in air
                     and noise pollution, (ii) loss of trees and vegetation, (iii) generation of construction wastes and
                     wastewater, (iv) quarrying activities and associated soil erosion, and (v) Occupational Health
                     and Safety (OHS) and Community Health and Safety issues including traffic disruptions due to
                     the activities in densely populated areas. During project operation, risks and impacts include
                     the generation of sludge from wastewater and water treatment, OHS hazards related to
                     chemicals management, potential soil and groundwater contamination due to any leakages of
                     the sewerage pipes, the inclusion of water from sewerage pipes into the water distribution


                    Aug 26, 2024                                                                                   Page 5 of 15
                             The World Bank
                             Second Karachi Water And Sewerage Services Improvement Project (kwssip-2) (P171422)


                     system and over-abstraction from Keenjhar Lake without offsetting or regulating additional
                     withdrawals for K-IV Phase 1. Additionally, components of the project may also be exposed to
                     flash floods, which need to be considered while finalizing the project designs.
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating                                                                            High
                     The social risk for KWSSIP-2 is rated as “High”. The most important social risk for the project is
                     linked with significant legacy issues deriving from the land acquisition (for water conveyance
                     system) carried out under the prevailing Land Acquisition Act for the government-financed K-IV
                     Phase 1 which is considered an Associated Facility to this project. For the power transmission
                     line component of K-IV Main, major issues related with land and land-based assets are not
                     envisaged as the preliminary route estimate passes though Government owned land. However,
                     this will be confirmed when the ESIA and Land Acquisition and Resettlement Plan (LARP)
                     studies for the transmission line are finalized. Other significant social issues include potential
                     livelihood, accessibility, and Community Health and Safety issues, as the project will involve
                     works in densely populated areas. During its due diligence, it has been confirmed that no Anti-
                     Encroachment Drives (AED) resulting in forced evictions have taken place on the project's
                     direct footprint. The project does not anticipate private land acquisition as the required land
                     and Right of Ways (RoW) are already owned by KWSC or the GoS. Civil works in the densely
                     populated and congested urban environment of katchi abadis may result in temporary
                     negative livelihood impacts due to civil works (e.g., due to restricted access) on businesses,
                     transporters, vendors, hawkers, etc. The project investments also pose labor-related risks and
                     impacts (e.g., working conditions, OHS, contract terms, etc.). Additional social risks include the




Public Disclosure
                     exclusion of vulnerable communities from project benefits and the lack of meaningful
                     engagement and consultation with communities, particularly vulnerable groups such as
                     women, the elderly, minorities, and the poor. Other key social aspects include potential social
                     exclusion of marginalized groups and religious minorities while selecting katchi abadis and
                     areas for priority water and sewerage networks. Furthermore, in the case of rehabilitation of
                     networks – in both katchi abadis and settled areas – the existing ‘informal’ connections may be
                     affected.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being
                     Considered
                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards
                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and                                    Relevant
                      Social Risks and Impacts

                      ESS1 is relevant to the Project. One key environmental challenge relates to the project’s
                      potential contribution to the cumulative impacts associated with water depletion of Keenjhar
                      Lake as well as overall degradation of Karachi’s coastal waters including the lower tip of the
                      Indus Delta before entering the Arabian Sea. The K-IV Augmentation ESIA (disclosed locally on
                      April 25, 2024, and on the World Bank website on May 21, 2024) is informed by a water-
                      balance study for Keenjhar Lake, which determined that, after mitigation (see description for
                      Kalri Baghar Feeder Upper, KBFU rehabilitation below), the impacts of the additional water
                      withdrawals required for this project are negligible. To mitigate risks of this project

                    Aug 26, 2024                                                                                   Page 6 of 15
                             The World Bank
                             Second Karachi Water And Sewerage Services Improvement Project (kwssip-2) (P171422)


                      contributing to further degradation of the Keenjhar Lake ecology, the Sindh Irrigation
                      Department has recently awarded a contract to rehabilitate the KBFU canal to restore its
                      hydraulic capacity. This rehabilitation would allow additional delivery of Indus water to
                      Keenjhar Lake from Kotri Barrage, enabling the reliable supply of the extra 260 MGD needed
                      for K-IV Phase 1 while maintaining existing agricultural water withdrawals and safeguarding
                      the lake’s ecology. Based on the water balance performed as part of the project feasibility and
                      ESIA process, withdrawals from the Indus at Kotri Barrage by the rehabilitated KBFU to offset
                      K-IV withdrawals represent only approximately 3 percent of the current withdrawals at Kotri
                      Barrage and therefore additional contributions to E&S impacts at Kotri Barrage or further
                      habitat and ecosystem services degradation downstream are foreseen as negligible. The KBFU
                      rehabilitation works are expected to take at least three years, with a completion date of June
                      2027 at the earliest, which aligns with the expected completion date of both, the K-IV Phase 1
                      and K-IV Augmentation. The GoS has committed to convene a committee to further monitor
                      and coordinate construction timelines of KBFU rehabilitation, K-IV Phase 1, and K-IV
                      Augmentation and applying adaptive management mitigations measures should any
                      unforeseen negative social and environmental impacts occur. The Project activities under
                      Component 2 involve large scale water supply network and sewerage networks construction
                      and rehabilitation that can potentially have large scale environmental and social impacts such
                      as: loss of vegetation; generation of noise and dust; solid waste generation; temporary
                      blockage of access and diversion of local traffic due to mobilization of heavy machinery and
                      localized excavation works within areas subjected to public access; potential temporary




Public Disclosure
                      drainage impacts related to excavation and temporary stockpiling of excavated material;
                      works to resurface pavement following excavation and installation of valves; temporary
                      localized cutting of domestic water supply services while works are taking place along water
                      supply lines or at the plants; localized economic displacement and livelihood related impacts
                      during project works in the congested localities, etc. Replacement of old sewer networks which
                      entails interruptions in receiving effluent from subscribers may damage other communication
                      infrastructure (telephone, electricity). Construction activities associated with Malir interceptors
                      and wastewater treatment facility (TP-4) may pose, besides the above-mentioned risks, the
                      additional risk of potential land-use change related to the current agriculture practices in Malir
                      riverbed using untreated effluent. Once the interceptor is laid, the available quantity of
                      effluent is expected to decrease which may force people to abandon agriculture. Construction
                      activities have typical occupational health and safety risks, health and safety risks of nearby
                      communities, traffic safety and emergency response & preparedness, especially in the areas
                      where population density is high. Other potential social issues needed to be addressed relate
                      to exclusion of vulnerable communities from project benefits and lack of meaningful
                      engagement and consultation with communities, particularly vulnerable groups such as
                      women, the elderly, minorities, the poor, people living in low-income settlements etc. In
                      addition, there may be resistance by users to tariff reforms proposed as part of the sub-
                      component 1.2 as well as to institutional reform measures and revision in HR policies proposed
                      under Components 1 by IA personnel and labor unions. The client has prepared an ESIA for the
                      Malir Basin Wastewater interceptor and the TP-4 Wastewater Treatment Plant to identify the
                      potential risks and impacts associated with these works. The client has also prepared and
                      disclosed sub-project specific ESMPs for priority water network expansion and rehabilitation,
                      water and sewerage networks improvement in low-income areas, priority sewer network


                    Aug 26, 2024                                                                                   Page 7 of 15
                             The World Bank
                             Second Karachi Water And Sewerage Services Improvement Project (kwssip-2) (P171422)


                      rehabilitation and expansion, rehabilitation and construction of water filtration plants and
                      energy improvements in pumping stations to mitigate the risks and impacts during the
                      development of the various infrastructure. The ESIA and ESMPs cover required E&S measures,
                      proportionate to the levels of potential risks and impacts, to be included in the design and
                      construction as well as OHS/community health measures, and mandate coordination with the
                      relevant agencies, local community, and other stakeholders. Additionally, a revised ESIA is
                      underway for the Malir Basin Wastewater Interceptor and the TP-4 Wastewater Treatment
                      Plant, which will include the full TP-4 wastewater reuse scheme, and it is expected to be
                      finalized and disclosed prior to commencement of bidding for TP-4. The IA has prepared an
                      Environment and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) under ESS1 which is part of the legal
                      agreement between the Bank and the Borrower. For managing social impacts, besides the
                      mentioned ESIAs and ESMPs, the following documents have been prepared, finalized, and
                      disclosed by the Client: - A Labor Management Plan was disclosed locally on May 30, 2024, and
                      on the World Bank website on June 27, 2024. - A merged Resettlement Plan covering Malir
                      Basin wastewater interceptor, priority sewer network, and K-IV Augmentation works was
                      disclosed locally on May 27, 2024, and on the World Bank website on June 27, 2024. - An
                      Abbreviated Resettlement Plan for Katchi Abadis was disclosed locally on July 24, 2024, and on
                      the World Bank website on July 31, 2024. - A Stakeholder Engagement Plan was disclosed
                      locally on May 27, 2024, and on the World Bank website on June 27, 2024. As K-IV Phase 1 is
                      considered an Associated Facility of this project an Environmental and Social Audit was
                      conducted. Details of the outcome of this Audit are further elaborated under the ESS5 section




Public Disclosure
                      below, and corrective action is covered under the ESCP. For the construction of transmission
                      line for provision of power for K-IV Main water pumps, the environmental impacts are primarily
                      foreseen as: ecological disturbances, environmental contamination, and risks to worker[s] and
                      community health and safety. The work for this part of the K-IV Main is yet to start. Sindh
                      Transmission and Dispatch Company (STDC) has submitted a technical feasibility to draw
                      power from Jhimpir-2 which is a National Transmission and Dispatch Company (NTDC) facility.
                      NTDC NOC for the feasibility of the project was received on August 21, 2024. STDC has taken
                      on board a technical consultant as well as the E&S consulting firm. Design work on route
                      drawing and plan profile has been initiated. Simultaneously, work on ESIA for the transmission
                      line will start. STDC has agreed to carry out the ESIA in complete alignment with the World
                      Bank ESF requirements and this has been reflected in the ESCP accordingly.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                Relevant

                      The project involves diverse stakeholders. Since the geographic scope of the project is the
                      entire urban area of the city and water conveyance routes from water sources, all citizen
                      groups living across the city and along water conveyance alignments will be directly or
                      indirectly impacted and are considered key stakeholders of the project. Furthermore, there are
                      NGOs, civil society organizations and media groups (print, electronic, social) in Karachi which
                      will be interested in the project. Stakeholders also include IA personnel and labor unions, local
                      governments, elected representatives, academia, and various government agencies such as
                      GoS departments, cantonment boards, SSWMB etc. As required under ESS10, IA has prepared
                      a detailed Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), disclosed locally on May 27, 2024, and on the
                      World Bank website on June 27, 2024. The plan identifies key stakeholders and provides


                    Aug 26, 2024                                                                                   Page 8 of 15
                             The World Bank
                             Second Karachi Water And Sewerage Services Improvement Project (kwssip-2) (P171422)


                      modes and mechanism to ensure that all stakeholders are and remain engaged throughout the
                      life of the project. The project GRM established for KWSSIP-1 will continue to be used for
                      KWSSIP-2 also, as reflected in the ESCP. The SEP includes details of the GRM. Additional
                      stakeholders, particularly vulnerable and/or disadvantaged groups such as women, people
                      living in low-income settlements, minorities, the poor etc. have been identified and their
                      engagement during project implementation are described under the SEP. The SEP is a ‘living’
                      document and hence, may be updated periodically during project implementation. The SEP
                      also outlines the mechanisms for information sharing and disclosure and for ongoing
                      consultation, including with women and vulnerable/marginalized groups such as the poor,
                      residents of katchi abadis (low-income settlements), minorities, elderly etc. The ESCP includes
                      the condition for updating the SEP, as required, during project implementation.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                      Relevant

                      The project will involve direct workers (IA employees transferred to the PIU, specialists
                      engaged from the market); contracted workers engaged in construction work and consultancy
                      services for the project (e.g. 3rd party monitoring of E&S compliance); and primary supply
                      workers (e.g. for equipment required for the project). An assessment of the number of workers
                      has been made as part of the LMP process, estimating the required workforce at around 3,500
                      during the construction phase and around 1,200 during the operations phase. The construction
                      phase would also entail establishment of workers camps, which has been accounted for in the
                      relevant ESIAs / ESMPs. The operations phase workforce is mostly comprised of existing KWSC




Public Disclosure
                      employees. Pakistan has comprehensive labor laws covering the terms and conditions of
                      employment, termination of contracts, working time and rest time (working hours, paid leave,
                      maternity leave and maternity protection, other leave entitlements), prevent child and forced
                      labor, minimum age and protection of young workers, equality, pay issues, workers’
                      representation in the enterprise, trade union and employers’ association regulation and other
                      aspects. In addition, Pakistan has also ratified several ILO labor conventions. However,
                      management of labor issues with regards to GBV/SEA, GRM and OHS will need to be improved
                      along with enhancement of implementation and supervision capacity, mainly through
                      supervision consultants. These gaps have been incorporated in the LMP for KWSSIP-2, which
                      has been prepared and disclosed (locally on May 30, 2024, and on the World Bank website on
                      June 27, 2024). The LMP includes an assessment of potential labor related risks; an overview of
                      labor regulations, policies, and procedures; an assessment of and a plan to prevent GBV/SEA
                      and harassment; contract terms and conditions; working age regulations; mechanism for
                      redressal of labor related grievances; and other requirements of ESS2. The GBV risk mitigation
                      action plan will be prepared prior to implementation of project activities. Most importantly,
                      consistent with the requirements of ESS2, a GRM for project related labor issues is also
                      outlined in the LMP. The LMP reviewed the measures already in place in KWSC for OHS and put
                      in place systems to enhance existing mechanisms and maintain a safe working environment.
                      The system will include (i) identification of potential hazards (ii) provisions and enforcement of
                      preventive and protective measures (iii) training of workers and maintenance of training
                      records (iv) documentation and reporting of accidents and incidents (v) remedial and
                      corrective actions (vi) emergency prevention and preparedness and response arrangements to
                      emergency situations; and (vii) remedies for adverse impacts such as occupational injuries,


                    Aug 26, 2024                                                                                   Page 9 of 15
                             The World Bank
                             Second Karachi Water And Sewerage Services Improvement Project (kwssip-2) (P171422)


                      deaths, disability, and disease. Periodic review of OHS policies and procedures will be made
                      mandatory. In addition to the project workers identified above, several employees working
                      with other government departments (including KWSC) who might be asked by the government
                      to perform certain tasks (full-time or part-time) for the project, but their services are not
                      formally transferred to the project. ESS2 will not apply to such workers, and they will remain
                      subject to the terms and conditions of their employment with IA. However, the provisions of
                      ESS2 related to protection in the work force (i.e. regarding child labor, minimum age and
                      forced labor) and OHS will apply to such IA employees. The OHS measures in KWSSIP 2 LMP
                      essentially build upon and further strengthen the OHS practices adopted under KWSSIP-1. It is
                      to be noted that no major accidents, fatalities and/or loss-time injuries have happened during
                      the implementation of KWSSIP-1.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and                                  Relevant
                      Management

                      ESS3 is relevant as the efficient use of water and energy, and the reduction and otherwise
                      management of pollution, as required by ESS3, are central to achieving the objectives of the
                      proposed project, and according to ESS3 this project will be deemed as “significant user of
                      water”. The construction activities under Component 2 will involve extraction of water from
                      various water sources, use of construction material, disposal of construction waste, emission of
                      dust and noise and run off from construction sites. The project via its Associated Facility will
                      extract water from Keenjhar Lake and from various other pumping locations within the existing




Public Disclosure
                      water supply network. The Project is planning to source 260 MGD from Keenjhar Lake. As
                      noted above, the ESIA prepared for the K-IV Augmentation included a water balance study to
                      assess water demand of other water users and requirements for sustaining ecosystem services
                      in the area and to propose measures to minimize the loss of water in the water supply network
                      and sewerage system, and other water conservation measures. As a key mitigation measure,
                      the GoS has committed to rehabilitate the KBFU to offset the water withdrawn as a result of
                      this project and avoid contributing to further degradation of Keenjhar lake. The client will
                      produce regular updates of the water balance study of Keenjhar Lake. Potential pollution could
                      come from disposal of construction wastes, spoils, domestic waste (refuse, wastewater), and
                      hazardous wastes (paints, solvents, used fuel, used chemicals), as well as use of hazardous
                      materials such as chlorine and discharge of sludge and effluents from the water and sewerage
                      treatment facility during operations. The ESIA for the Malir Basin Interceptor has assessed the
                      potential impacts of wastes handling and disposal and informed the ESMP of the requirements
                      for appropriate waste disposal practices for mitigating and preventing pollution from the
                      mentioned sources. Waste management and pollution mitigation measures will be further
                      addressed in the waste management procedures under the Contractor ESMPs (CESMP).
                      Furthermore, pollution prevention will be sought through the project intervention of building
                      the wastewater treatment plant, which will be designed according to WB EHS Guidelines.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                       Relevant

                      ESS4 is relevant as the construction and operation of the project activities under component 2
                      as well as Associated Facility could involve community health and safety hazards. These may
                      include road and traffic safety during construction works, potential exposure to dust,


                    Aug 26, 2024                                                                               Page 10 of 15
                             The World Bank
                             Second Karachi Water And Sewerage Services Improvement Project (kwssip-2) (P171422)


                      noise/vibration, hazardous and non-hazardous waste and other health and safety risks for the
                      nearby communities. In particular, the management of construction sites requires protocols for
                      barricades and signaling of construction areas to ensure pedestrian safety. In addition, to
                      avoid and minimize potential impacts from construction activities there is the need for
                      adequate site management practices and effective consultation with communities. Since the
                      project involves the provision of water supply and sewerage treatment services, it is critical to
                      ensure safe drinking water supply and proper sewerage treatment to the users and reducing
                      potential leakage in the water supply network as well as avoidance of any seepage of
                      wastewater from sewerage pipes into water distribution pipes. Therefore, the Client has
                      prepared ESIAs and ESMPs for activities under component 2 to address all these potential
                      health and safety risks associated with the Project. As part of the C-ESMPs, the contractors will
                      prepare traffic management plans, community health and safety measures and emergency
                      response preparedness plans to mitigate all the health and safety risks during construction of
                      the Project. In view of the assessed potential risk of GBV/SEA, a GBV risk mitigation action plan
                      will also be prepared prior to implementation of project activities. Due to the sensitivities
                      around water supply in Karachi, there is a potential for security risks during project
                      implementation and hence a security risk management plan will be prepared during project
                      implementation. The World bank Guidelines on the use of security personnel will be adopted
                      should there be a need for the use of security personnel during implementation.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and                                    Relevant




Public Disclosure
                      Involuntary Resettlement

                      ESS5 is relevant for KWSSIP-2. Following are the major streams where physical and / or
                      economic resettlement impacts have taken place or are potentially envisaged: K-IV Main
                      (Associated Facility); Priority Sewer Network; Malir Interceptor; K-IV Augmentation; and Katchi
                      Abadis. First, it should be noted that during its due diligence the World Bank confirmed that no
                      Anti-Encroachment Drives (AED) resulting in forced evictions have taken place on the direct
                      footprint of the project. These AED are commonly practiced forced evictions ordered by the
                      Sindh Supreme Court that are not consistent with ESS5 and targeted at informal settlers and
                      encroachers on public lands and RoW. It has been established that K-IV Main, currently under
                      construction, is an Associated Facility (as per ESS1 criteria). K-IV Main has two major
                      components: an almost 110 km water conveyance system being implemented by WAPDA, and
                      an approximately 30 km power transmission line to be implemented by STDC. Work on the
                      laying of the water conveyance system has already been started. Therefore, an audit has been
                      conducted to identify gaps between the government’s standards and procedures and the
                      requirements of ESS5, including among other factors, for land acquisition, resettlement, and
                      livelihood impacts; entitlements for vulnerable groups/categories; and stakeholder
                      consultation and grievance redress. Based on the audit, a Corrective Action Plan–Resettlement
                      (CAP-R) was developed. The CAP-R determined that around 12,469 acres land were required
                      under the original alignment out of which about 11,396 acres were government land in the
                      districts Malir and Thatta, whereas about 1,073 acres belong to private owners (341 affected
                      households) in Malir district. As per land acquisition data received from the office of Project
                      Director (PD) for K-IV Main, only 54% of affected households received compensation for their
                      affected land. The CAP-R also notes that 14 of the affected persons have taken legal recourse


                    Aug 26, 2024                                                                               Page 11 of 15
                             The World Bank
                             Second Karachi Water And Sewerage Services Improvement Project (kwssip-2) (P171422)


                      for settling the compensation rates. The original alignment for K-IV main has been updated.
                      For the most part, the land taken for the original alignment overlaps with the land required for
                      this new alignment. However, approximately 22 additional acres will need to be acquired
                      affecting around 80 residential / commercial / other structures. The CAP-R takes all these
                      aspects into account and provided an estimated budget of approx. PKR 2,200 M (around USD 8
                      M). This budget has been earmarked in the project planning documents and CAP-R is currently
                      being implemented. For construction of transmission line for K-IV Main water pumps, STDC has
                      also agreed to develop a detailed LARP by issuing a variance order to the ESIA consultants,
                      though according to the current estimates, private land acquisition is not envisaged for the
                      power transmission line. It has also been agreed that all E&S instruments pertinent to power
                      transmission line will be reviewed and endorsed by the World Bank; the ESIA will become part
                      of the bidding documents for the EPC (engineering, procurement and construction) contracts;
                      and no physical work will start prior to payment of compensation under the above mentioned
                      LARP. Priority sewer network, Malir interceptor and TP-4 Wastewater Reuse scheme, and K-IV
                      augmentation do not require private land acquisition. All proposed infrastructure will be
                      constructed on land/RoW already owned by IA. However, some resettlement and/or livelihood
                      impacts on squatters and/or encroachers who have either settled in or extended on the RoW
                      have been identified. To minimize resettlement impacts, the project design engineers
                      optimized the proposed alignments of various pipelines and sewers whenever possible. To
                      manage any unavoidable impact on encroachers’ dwellings and livelihoods, the IA has
                      developed a single Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) that contains details of all the three sub-




Public Disclosure
                      projects (including the 14 schemes of the priority sewer network sub-project). The RAP
                      identifies, primarily in congested locations, impacts involving resettlement of enterprises (e.g.
                      small shops, kiosks etc.) and in some instances dwellings that are situated in the RoW. The
                      RAP has also identified the need to partially remove structures that have extended onto the
                      RoW (e.g. stairs). For the Malir Interceptor and Priority Sewer Projects, a total of 80 PAPs were
                      identified who would be temporarily affected by the project activities during the construction
                      phase only. K-IV Augmentation project will have a temporary impact on livelihood of 279 PAPs
                      for which they will be compensated. Overall, the Resettlement Budget for the three projects is
                      estimated as around PKR. 82 M (~ USD 300,000/-). An Abbreviated RAP (ARAP) for the selected
                      low-income communities or Katchi Abadies where project interventions are to be implemented
                      has also been prepared and disclosed on July 31, 2024. Based on the socio-economic field
                      surveys performed for this ARAP, only 34 Project Affected Persons (PAPs) were identified in six
                      of these communities: Zia Colony, Muhammadi Colony, Ali Muhammad Goth, Sharif Colony,
                      Mujahid Colony, and Muslimabad Colony. Impacts on this Katchi Abadies will be limited to
                      partial removal of structures such as stairs and other perimeter constructions, which will not
                      result in physical resettlement. No PAPs were identified in the remaining four low-income
                      communities. The total estimated cost for implementing the ARAP is around PKR 1.1 million
                      (~USD 4,000/-).

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management                              Relevant
                      of Living Natural Resources

                      ESS6 is relevant as the Project activities could have potential impacts on natural habitats due
                      to loss of vegetation along the route of the bulk supply water schemes, potential change in


                    Aug 26, 2024                                                                               Page 12 of 15
                             The World Bank
                             Second Karachi Water And Sewerage Services Improvement Project (kwssip-2) (P171422)


                      flows in surface waterways and lakes. As noted above, the main source of raw water that the
                      project is going to affect is Keenjhar Lake, which is declared as Ramsar sites. Keenjhar Lake
                      has been serving as a reservoir to supply water to Karachi for many years. However, to
                      determine any potential incremental or cumulative impacts of this project on this lake, a water
                      balance and ecological assessment has been conducted as part of the ESIA process, and a
                      Keenjhar Lake Conservation Action Plan was prepared following the mitigation hierarchy. It
                      was determined that the incremental impacts to the lake can be essentially avoided if the
                      rehabilitation of KBFU canal, which is now underway, is successfully completed. As mentioned
                      earlier, E&S impacts of increased bulk water withdrawals from the Indus via the rehabilitated
                      KBFU to mitigate additional withdrawals from Keenjhar Lake for K-IV would be extremely
                      limited (i.e., only 3% percent of the total annual withdrawals from Kotri Barrage). The footprint
                      of the civil works and direct impacts on the lake are limited to the water intake facility.
                      Therefore, the potential accumulated or incremental ecological impacts on Keenjhar lake and
                      the mangrove forests located in Indus Delta due to further water withdrawal from Indus River
                      resulting from the interventions associated to the project are considered negligible. The KBFU
                      will be rehabilitated by the Government of Sindh to maintain the water level of the Keenjhar
                      lake before an equal or lesser amount is withdrawn for K-IV Main and Augmentation.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically                          Not Currently
                      Underserved Traditional Local Communities                                               Relevant

                      There are no IPs in the project area and therefore ESS7 is not relevant.




Public Disclosure
                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                            Not Currently
                                                                                                              Relevant

                      ESS8 is not relevant as there is no known/documented cultural heritage present in the project
                      locations that have already been identified. However, the impacts on cultural heritage shall be
                      identified once the location and route of the proposed interventions are finalized. The ESIAs
                      prepared so far did not identify any cultural heritage sites in the proposed project locations.
                      However a cultural heritage management plan will be prepared if a site is identified during
                      project implementation, if required.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                     Not Currently
                                                                                                              Relevant

                      ESS9 is not relevant as the Project does not include inclusion of any financial intermediaries.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply
                      OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                     Yes
                      OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                              No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features



                    Aug 26, 2024                                                                               Page 13 of 15
                             The World Bank
                             Second Karachi Water And Sewerage Services Improvement Project (kwssip-2) (P171422)


                      Use of Borrower Framework                                                                         No
                      None. The borrower has not proposed adoption of the borrower/government's E&S Framework
                      to address and manage environmental risks and impacts of the project. The project will apply
                      the Bank’s ESF and its Environmental and Social Standards (ESSs) along with the Government’s
                      E&S requirements.


                      Use of Common Approach                                                                            No
                      Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB), Government of Sindh, The AIIB project preparation
                      fund supported the preparation of E&S instruments in accordance with the ESF.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities
                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or
                     frameworks are planned or required by implementation?
                     The following E&S instruments have been prepared:
                     ·      A draft Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) for the Malir Basin Interceptor
                     and TP-IV Wastewater Treatment Plant was disclosed locally on April 25, 2024, and on the World
                     Bank Website on May 13, 2024.
                     ·      A draft ESIA for K-IV Augmentation was disclosed locally on April 25, 2024, and on the
                     World Bank website on May 21, 2024. This ESIA is informed by the Keenjhar Lake Conservation




Public Disclosure
                     Action Plan.
                     ·      A Corrective Action Plan to align the resettlement planning and implementation of the
                     government-financed K-IV Phase 1 with the World Bank’s ESF was disclosed locally on May 27,
                     2024, and on the World Bank website on June 27, 2024. Corrective Action Plan payments to
                     private landowners will be completed before works on K-IV Augmentation construction begins.
                     ·      A Labor Management Plan was disclosed locally on May 30, 2024, and on the World Bank
                     website on June 27, 2024.
                     ·      A merged Resettlement Action Plan covering Malir Basin wastewater interceptor, priority
                     sewer network, and K-IV Augmentation works was disclosed locally on May 27, 2024, and on the
                     World Bank website on June 27, 2024.
                     ·      An Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (ARAP) for Katchi Abadis was disclosed locally
                     on July 24, 2024, and on the World Bank website on July 31, 2024.
                     ·      A Stakeholder Engagement Plan was disclosed locally on May 27, 2024, and on the World
                     Bank website on June 27, 2024.
                     ·      Five Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) were disclosed locally as of
                     July 20, 2024. These five ESMPS were for the following subcomponents: Provision of Safely
                     Managed Drinking Water and Sanitation Services in Selected Katchi Abadis; Priority Water
                     Distribution Network Rehabilitation and Expansion; Priority Sewer Network Rehabilitation and
                     Expansion; Improving Energy Efficiency; and Rehabilitation and Reconstruction of Water
                     Treatment Plants.
                     ·      K-IV (Phase-1) Water Balance Study
                     ·      Ecological Assessment for Downstream Indus Impacts (including Keenjhar Lake
                     Conservation Action Plan)
                     ·      E&S Review Report for K-IV


                    Aug 26, 2024                                                                               Page 14 of 15
                              The World Bank
                              Second Karachi Water And Sewerage Services Improvement Project (kwssip-2) (P171422)


                     ·        Gender Action Plan

                     ESIA for construction of transmission line for 50 MW power demand for K-IV Main is currently
                     underway.




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                     Task Team           Khairy Al-Jamal                      Title:       Senior Water Supply and
                     Leader:                                                               Sanitation Specialist

                     Email:              kaljamal@worldbank.org

                     TTL Contact:        Davison Muchadenyika                 Job Title:   Senior Urban Development
                                                                                           Specialist

                     Email:              dmuchadenyika@worldbank.org

                     TTL Contact:        Tiziana Smith                        Job Title:   Water Specialist




Public Disclosure
                     Email:              tsmith4@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                  Khairy Al-Jamal, Davison Muchadenyika, Tiziana Smith

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:         Anita Bimunka Takura Tingbani

                     ADM Social Specialist:                Kamran Akbar




                    Aug 26, 2024                                                                                Page 15 of 15
