Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Second Karachi Water and Sewerage Services Improvement Project (KWSSIP-2) (P171422)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                Project Information Document (PID)


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 04-Sep-2024 | Report No: PIDA0096




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     Second Karachi Water and Sewerage Services Improvement Project (KWSSIP-2) (P171422)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                      Operation ID                  Operation Name
                                                                                         Second Karachi Water and
                                                                                         Sewerage Services
Pakistan, Pakistan             SOUTH ASIA                  P171422
                                                                                         Improvement Project
                                                                                         (KWSSIP-2)
Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
Investment Project
                               06-Sep-2024                 12-Dec-2024                   Water
Financing (IPF)
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                               Province of Sindh through
                               the Karachi Water and
Islamic Republic of Pakistan
                               Sewerage Corporation
                               (KWSC)

Proposed Development Objective(s)
Provide safely managed water and sanitation services in Karachi and increase KWSC’s financial and operational
performance

Components
Component 1: Capacity Building and Reform of KWSC
Component 2: Safely Managed Water Supply and Sanitation Services
Component 3: Project Management and Studies
Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                  Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?            Yes

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                          999.60

  Total Financing                                                                                               999.60


                                                                                                                   Page 1
         The World Bank
         Second Karachi Water and Sewerage Services Improvement Project (KWSSIP-2) (P171422)


                of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                240.00
   Financing Gap                                                                                                    0.00

 DETAILS
 Private Sector Investors/Shareholders

 Equity                                        Amount         Debt                                          Amount

    Government Contribution                         730.60       Commercial Debt                                  188.00

         Government Resources                       200.60           Unguaranteed                                 188.00

         IBRD                                       240.00

         Other Donors                               290.00

    Non-Government Contribution                      81.00

         Private sector Equity                       81.00

 Total                                              811.60                                                        188.00


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
Environmental And Social Risk Classification
High


 Decision
 The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate



 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context

1.       Poverty reduction has slowed amid recent shocks, while growth has remained volatile and slow. Pakistan made
significant progress towards reducing poverty between 2001 and 2018 with the expansion of off-farm economic
opportunities and increased inflow of remittances. However, rapid poverty reduction has not fully translated into
improved socioeconomic conditions, as human capital outcomes have remained poor, with high levels of stunting at 40
percent and learning poverty at 77 percent. Critical constraints—including persistent fiscal and current account deficits,
protectionist trade policies, unproductive agriculture, a difficult business environment, a heavy state presence in the
economy, and a financially unsustainable energy sector, have mostly remained unaddressed, leading to slow and volatile
growth. Progress with poverty reduction has recently slowed amid macroeconomic instability, the COVID-19 pandemic,
and the catastrophic 2022 floods. The estimated lower-middle income poverty rate is 40.1 percent (US$3.65/day 2017
purchasing power parity) for the year 2023–24, virtually the same as the poverty rate in 2018, but with 7 million more


                                                                                                                      Page 2
         The World Bank
         Second Karachi Water and Sewerage Services Improvement Project (KWSSIP-2) (P171422)


Pakistanis living below the poverty line.

2.     Pakistan experienced heavy monsoon rains in 2022 leading to catastrophic and unprecedented flooding with
enormous human and economic impacts. Roughly 33 million people were impacted, and many permanently displaced.
More than 13,000 kilometers (km) of roads were destroyed, 2.2 million houses damaged, around 3.8 million hectares of
crops were flooded, and an estimated 1.2 million livestock were killed. Limited access to input and output markets and
temporary disruptions to supply chains subsequently drove up food prices and added to existing price pressures resulting
from reduced agricultural yields and the global rise of food prices. The Government’s Post-Disaster Needs Assessment1
estimated that the need for rehabilitation and reconstruction is at US$16.3 billion.

3.       The country has made recent progress towards macroeconomic stabilization, but risks remain high and faster
growth will require substantial reforms. Real gross domestic product (GDP) growth contracted by 0.2 percent year-on-
year in fiscal year (FY) 23, after growing by 6.2 percent in FY22 and 5.8 percent in FY21. Accumulated economic imbalances,
including high fiscal deficits, and increasing debt, depleted Pakistan’s buffers, which led to high vulnerability to
catastrophic floods, increasing world commodity prices, and tight global financing conditions. Repeated delays in
implementing the previous International Monetary Fund (IMF) Extended Fund Facility program and the associated decline
in external financing inflows saw foreign reserves fall to critically low levels, amid high inflation and sharp depreciation.
Following the expiry of the incomplete Extended Fund Facility program, a nine-month Stand-By Arrangement was
approved by the IMF, with the IMF Board approving the final review in April 2024. Under the Stand-By Arrangement,
exchange rate flexibility was restored, import controls were eased with some recovery in foreign exchange reserves, and
new measures were introduced to contain the budgeted FY24 deficit. Nonetheless, risks remain high. Short-term stability
depends on continued fiscal restraint and new external financing inflows. A new IMF program is currently being negotiated
to support continued sound economic management, new official inflows, and structural reforms. Robust economic
recovery over the medium term will require the steadfast implementation of a much broader fiscal, energy, and economic
reform agenda.

4.      According to the 2022 Country Climate and Development Report (CCDR), Pakistan’s high vulnerability to climate
change is a risk multiplier, compounding its human and economic development challenges. Pakistan consistently ranks
among the top 10 countries most affected by climate change worldwide.2 More frequent and extreme weather events
adversely impact ecosystems, people, and their settlements and infrastructure. Droughts, flooding, and heatwaves are
prevalent risks across Pakistan. Coastal cities like Karachi are also vulnerable to climate change–induced sea level rise,
cyclones, saltwater intrusion, and coastal erosion. Unless addressed, the combined risks from climate change and
environmental degradation will further aggravate Pakistan’s economic fragility and could ultimately reduce annual GDP
by 18 to 20 percent per year by 2050.

5.       Pakistan also faces a daunting unfinished agenda on human development, which compounds its structural
macro fragility and creates a drag on the economy. The country currently ranks 141 out of 174 on the Human Capital
Index, scoring 41 out of 100. The stunting rate of children under five remains among the highest in the world, at 40 percent.
Evidence suggests that the lack of safely managed water supply, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) services is partly
responsible for this staggering loss of human potential.3



1 Government of Pakistan. 2022. Pakistan Floods 2022 Post-Disaster Needs Assessment. Ministry of Planning Development & Special Initiatives.
2 Eckstein, David, Vera Künzel, and Laura Schäfer. 2021. “Global Climate Risk Index 2021.” Germanwatch Briefing Paper.
3 Mansuri, Ghazala; Sami, Mohammad Farhan; Ali, Muhammad; Doan, Hang Thi Thu; Javed, Bilal; Pandey, Priyanka (2018). When Water Becomes a Hazard: A

Diagnostic Report on The State of Water Supply, Sanitation and Poverty in Pakistan and Its Impact on Child Stunting. WASH Poverty Diagnostic Washington, D.C.:
World Bank Group (WBG).


                                                                                                                                                                 Page 3
          The World Bank
          Second Karachi Water and Sewerage Services Improvement Project (KWSSIP-2) (P171422)


    Sectoral and Institutional Context

6.       Safely managed WASH services are the foundation of public health and quality of life and are central to
addressing the stunting crisis in Pakistan; however, Pakistan lags on WASH service indicators because of decades of
underinvestment. Close to 126 million people in Pakistan (half of the population) do not receive safely managed water
services, 166 million (three-quarters of the population) do not have access to safely managed sanitation services, and 36
million lack basic hygiene services.

7.      Unsafe drinking water is a long-standing problem across Pakistan. Data from the Pakistan Council of Research in
Water Resources, a federal entity that has been monitoring drinking water quality nationwide annually since 2002, showed
that 61 percent of drinking water samples tested nationwide failed to meet national drinking water quality standards in
20204. This failure rate has not changed much since the water quality monitoring program began. Sindh province has the
worst drinking water quality in the country, with 85 percent of samples failing to meet water quality standards, followed
by Balochistan at 59 percent, Punjab at 51 percent, and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa at 43 percent failure rate. A 2017 Supreme
Court case that lasted two years with over 100 hearings ordered a series of measures to ensure safe water for all Sindh
residents, 5 but the water quality has gotten worse since then.

8.       WASH is a provincial mandate, and provinces are at different stages in their journey to address the service gaps.
Punjab and Sindh, the two largest provinces, have made commitments to address service gaps and have enabling policies
and plans in place, such as the Punjab Water Policy 2018, Punjab WASH Sector Development Plan (2014-2024), Sindh
Water Policy 2023, and Sindh WASH Sector Development Plan (2016-2026). Both provinces have also passed laws to
enable service providers to become financially sustainable. In Punjab’s secondary cities, WASH services are the mandate
of local governments. The Punjab Water Act (2019) strengthened the regulatory framework for water service delivery in
Punjab. It enabled new institutions to emerge, such as the Punjab Rural Municipal Services Company (PRMSC), a
corporatized public company established in 2021 with a mandate to provide WASH services in rural areas. Similarly, the
recently enacted Karachi Water and Sewerage Corporation (KWSC) Act 2023 converted the Karachi Water and Sewerage
Board into a corporate entity with enhanced financial and managerial autonomy. However, massive capital injection is
needed to address longstanding infrastructure gaps in all provinces.

9.      A new generation of provincial programs is emerging that places more emphasis on service delivery (as opposed
to purely infrastructure) and the financial performance of service providers as a necessity for sustainability. For instance,
the Punjab Cities Program (PCP) is building the capacity of local governments to provide WASH services in selected
secondary cities6. Further, the Program focuses on improving revenue collection and systems for O&M. So far, PCP has
reached 3.15 million people (about 79 percent of the program area’s population) with safely managed water and
sanitation services. In Sindh, the Karachi Transformation Plan (KTP), conceived in 2019 as a joint program of the
Government of Sindh (GoS) and the Federal Government, promised to address service delivery issues (including WASH) in
Karachi by investing in critical infrastructure and transforming the performance of service providers, such as the KWSC.
Reforms are also under way in rural water supply and sanitation, subject of a separate Bank supported program.

10.      KWSC is the largest water utility in Pakistan, and its performance is of national significance, given the size and
role of Karachi as Pakistan’s economic and financial hub. KWSC currently provides water and sanitation services to about

4
  Hifza, R., Fauzia. A., Kiran, A., and M. Ashraf (2021). Drinking Water Quality in Pakistan: Current Status and Challenges. Pakistan Council of Research in Water
Resources, Islamabad, pp. 141
5 Shahab Usto vs. Government of Sindh, 2017

6 In general, the 100,000-population threshold is regarded in literature as the lower limit to define a secondary city. In the context of Pakistan, this excludes provincial
and national capitals. World Bank, 2024. Realizing the Potential of Pakistan’s Secondary Cities. Washington DC: World Bank.


                                                                                                                                                                      Page 4
        The World Bank
        Second Karachi Water and Sewerage Services Improvement Project (KWSSIP-2) (P171422)


17 million people, almost 84 percent of the city’s population. The water distribution network is estimated to be over
11,000 km long, serving 1.07 million registered connections. Service hours are intermittent and typically range from two
hours every two days to four hours per day, with widespread rationing being the norm. Many Katchi Abadis7 are
unconnected and rely on informal means to acquire water. The network operates at low pressures with frequent water
supply interruptions due to insufficient hydraulic capacity and high leakages. Non-revenue water (NRW) is around 64
percent. Existing water production only meets about 50 percent of the city’s water demand, leading to a daily water crisis
that profoundly impacts livability and productivity. The sanitation situation is even worse. The sewer network covers only
about 75 percent of the city, with aging pipes, insufficient capacity, malfunctioning pumping facilities, and a lack of
treatment capacity. The city’s three wastewater treatment plants (TP, I, II, and III) have a total installed capacity of 150
million gallons per day (MGD) but treat only 50 MGD out of the estimated 472 MGD generated.

11.     Karachi and KWSC’s water supply challenges are complicated by high (and increasing) competition for water
(especially for Indus Water), a deteriorated and complex water supply system, and the lack of regional water resources
planning and cooperation. Karachi’s primary water source is the Indus River, which is also the primary source for the
province’s extensive irrigation system and drinking water outside of Karachi. Karachi’s current allocation from the Indus is
guaranteed by the Pakistan 1991 Indus Water Apportionment Accord. However, there is no water resources management
plan or allocation mechanism within Sindh Province, nor are there formal operating rules for critical infrastructure
conveying water to Karachi. The water for Karachi is abstracted from the Indus River at Kotri Barrage, the most
downstream barrage on the Indus. Kotri regularly faces water shortages and extremely low downstream flows in the dry
season. From Kotri Barrage, Indus water for Karachi is stored in Keenjhar Lake, an artificially enhanced lake and a protected
Ramsar site, before it is conveyed to Karachi. Before abstraction at Keenjhar Lake, water is managed by the Sindh Irrigation
Department, while, downstream of Keenjhar, the water is managed by the KWSC, creating coordination challenges. Under
the ongoing World Bank-financed Sindh Water and Agriculture Transformation Project (SWAT P167596), the GoS has
committed to improving regional water planning practices, which will be a significant step towards enhancing Karachi’s
water security and increasing water productivity in agriculture, which would allow water reallocation without impacting
agricultural production. Likewise, the ongoing World Bank-financed Sindh Barrages Improvement Project (P131324 and
AF P179051) is also working to enhance efficiency and improve the management of provincial water resources.

12.      From a financial and human resources standpoint, KWSC performs well below expectations for a water utility
serving a commercial hub. The utility has 1.07 million registered customers compared to Karachi Electric’s 3.5 million in
the same area. No household has a meter, and only 75 percent receive water bills. Billing efficiency is about 36 percent,
and O&M cost recovery is around 73 percent. The total number of staff at KWSC is approximately 9,843. Staff productivity
is low at 9.5 per 1000 connections, suggesting overstaffing. At the same time, the utility has been unable to recruit new
talent due to a GoS hiring moratorium from 2008 to 2024. A lack of diversity in the workforce undermines KWSC's
potential. Women are only four percent of the workforce – mostly in lower-paying, non-technical roles. Only ten women
hold technical and managerial positions compared to 630 men. Due to the water sector being traditionally male-
dominated sector perceived as not supportive for women, and due to a lack of skills training, it is difficult for women to
break into the sector. Recently, KWSC has been making nascent efforts to create an enabling environment for recruiting

7 Karachi’s unplanned areas can be divided into three main subcategories: (i) katchi abadis that have been regularized or are awaiting

regularization; (ii) slums, which are very dense inner-city areas with deficient infrastructure; and (iii) villages or goths, which have become part of
the urban sprawl. Often, these different types of unplanned areas are mixed together and recognized as katchi abadis. Over 570 Katchi Abadis are
recognized by the Sindh Katchi Abadi Authority, and the World Bank estimates that over 50% of Karachi’s population lives in Katchi Abadis. WBG
(2018). Transforming Karachi into a Livable and Competitive Megacity: A City Diagnostic and Transformation Strategy. Washington, DC, USA

                                                                                                                                                    Page 5
        The World Bank
        Second Karachi Water and Sewerage Services Improvement Project (KWSSIP-2) (P171422)


more women by establishing a Women’s Development Centre that includes a daycare and increasing training
opportunities for women within the organization.

13.       In 2019, as part of the KTP, GoS embarked on a 10-year investment program to provide universal access to
safely managed WASH services in Karachi, backed by reform commitments to transform KWSC into a financially viable
utility. The investment program addresses five interlinked structural problems in Karachi’s water and sanitation system:
a bulk water supply shortfall, a leaky water distribution network, an unreliable supply that does not meet drinking water
quality standards, a lack of wastewater collection and treatment capacity, and persistent poor service levels, especially in
Katchi Abadis. The program scope included short-term interventions to rapidly improve services and KWSC revenues while
laying the groundwork for more significant infrastructure investments. The World Bank supported these short-term
interventions through a US$40 million IBRD loan for the Karachi Water and Sewerage Services Improvement Project
(KWSSIP; P164704) that is due to close on June 30, 2025.

14.      So far, KWSC is on track to deliver, for the first time, disinfected drinking water for two million people by June
2025. A new KWSC Act 2023 helped strengthen KWSC’s financial and managerial autonomy, although its full benefits will
take time to materialize through sustained change management and stakeholder engagement. A new Board of Directors
with more independent members is in place. The Board appointed a new Chief Executive Officer and Chief Operating
Officer in 2023 through open market competition. The new management team has prioritized revenue-enhancing
measures, including digitalizing hydrant management, addressing illegal connections, increasing metering, and recovering
arrears. As a result of these measures, KWSC’s revenue has more than doubled, from PKR 11,930 million in FY2019/2020
to PKR 26,690 million in FY2023/2024. In addition, construction of the long-awaited Great Karachi Bulk Water Supply
Scheme (K-IV) Phase 1, jointly financed by GoS and the Federal Government as mandated by the federal Executive
Committee of the National Economic Council, to bring an additional 260 MGD of bulk water from Keenjhar Lake, has picked
up momentum after initial delays and is now expected to be completed in 2027. With this intervention, KWSC could
increase its bulk water capacity from 650 to 910 MGD – enough to meet about 75 percent of current demand. At the same
time, KWSC plans to make priority investments in network rehabilitation to address hydraulic bottlenecks and control
water losses before more water comes online.

15.     In sum, this new generation of WASH programs in both Sindh and Punjab, with their sharper focus on services
and service provider performance, offers a springboard for new national WASH platforms to leverage additional capital
from development partners and the private sector to scale up safely managed WASH services through long-term
programmatic investments that address infrastructure deficits and core governance reforms simultaneously in both urban
and rural areas. The proposed Pakistan Urban WASH Services Multi-phase Programmatic Approach (MPA) provides the
entry point for such a multi-province platform targeting urban and peri-urban areas.8 It is a US$2.3 billion 10-year MPA
consisting of a “platform of projects” of a similar nature across provinces—with one overarching objective: to provide
safely managed WASH services to approximately 30 million people in urban areas by 2035 while building the capacity of
service providers to continue investing in keeping up with population growth. To kick-start this urban WASH platform and
offer more predictability to other potential financiers, the World Bank plans to commit a total of US$840 million IBRD
within the next four years, starting with Karachi. The World Bank’s investment would leverage an additional US$1.4 billion
from the federal and provincial governments, the private sector, and Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs), principally
the Asian Development Bank (ADB), Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB), and Islamic Development Bank (IsDB).

8 A separate Rural WASH services MPA is planned for FY26.



                                                                                                                        Page 6
       The World Bank
       Second Karachi Water and Sewerage Services Improvement Project (KWSSIP-2) (P171422)




 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

 Development Objective(s)

16.      Provide safely managed water and sanitation services in Karachi and increase KWSC’s financial and
operational performance.

Key Results

17.      The PDO indicators are (i) People provided with safely managed water (including female and youth) (number);
(ii) People provided safely managed sanitation (including female and youth) (number); and (iii) KWSC’s operating cost
coverage ratio improved (percent). The first two indicators are WBG corporate scorecard indicators.

18.       Safely managed water service means drinking water from an improved water source accessible on premises,
available when needed (for a minimum of 12 hours per day), and free from fecal and hazardous chemical contaminants
(including, but not limited to, fluoride, arsenic and lead). Safely managed sanitation means using an improved sanitation
facility that is not shared with other households and where excreta is safely disposed of in situ or removed and treated
offsite.

  D. Project Description

19.      The project scope consists of three components that contribute to the PDO: (i) Component 1 – Capacity Building
and Reform of KWSC, (ii) Component 2 – Safely Managed Water Supply and Sanitation Services; and (iii) Component 3 –
Project Management and Studies. A fourth component – the Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC), with
zero allocation, will provide flexibility to GoS to reallocate funds to support emergency response activities in case of an
eligible emergency.

20.      Component 1 – Capacity Building and Reform of KWSC (US$14 million, of which IBRD US$5.6 million, AIIB US$5.6
million, GoS US$2.8 million): This component will finance capacity building and reform support activities to enable KWSC’s
evolution into a well-functioning utility that is also resilient to climate change. Specifically, the component will finance (i)
technical assistance and capacity building related to technical and commercial operations, including asset management,
geographic information systems (GIS) and data systems, hydraulic modeling, NRW reduction, billing and revenue
management, financial management, communications, and customer service; (ii) implementation of organizational
structure reforms to enhance efficiency, accountability and commercial orientation in service delivery; (iii)
implementation of a human resource reform plan, including a gender-inclusive recruitment and training strategy; (iv)
preparation and implementation of water safety plans, including the establishment of a centralized water quality testing
laboratory that will be capable of carrying out biological and key chemical (including lead and other heavy metals); (v)
rehabilitation and upgrade of office spaces and establishing an innovation, research, development, and learning center;
(vi) technical assistance on PPPs and outsourcing; (vii) preparation of all required regulations and guidelines to enable full
operationalization of the new KWSC Act 2023; and (viii) any other capacity-building activities necessary to strengthen
KWSC’s corporate governance and increase its operational and financial performance and adaptive capacity, including



                                                                                                                           Page 7
       The World Bank
       Second Karachi Water and Sewerage Services Improvement Project (KWSSIP-2) (P171422)


support to the newly Environmental and Social (E&S) cell at KWSC that has been established in partnership with KWSSIP-
1 and support to improve groundwater management.

21.      Component 2 –Safely Managed Water Supply and Sanitation Services (US$958.56 million, of which IBRD
US$223.8 million, AIIB US$223.8 million, ADB US$50 million, GoS US$191.9 million, Private capital US$269 million): The
component will finance investments to enhance Karachi’s water supply and sanitation infrastructure, based on the
priorities identified in the 2008 master plan (to be updated in 2024). The medium-term investment plan addresses five
interlinked structural problems in Karachi’s water and sanitation system: a bulk water supply shortfall, a leaky water
distribution network, an intermittent supply that does not meet drinking water quality standards, a lack of wastewater
collection and treatment capacity, and persistent poor service levels, especially in Katchi Abadis. This component will
finance investments including (i) the expansion of safe drinking water and sanitation services in at least seven Katchi
Abadis in Karachi, benefiting over half a million people. Investments will include rehabilitation and expansion of water
distribution systems, installation of in-line chlorination units, metered house connections, sewerage network
rehabilitation and expansion, and accompanying social marketing and behavior change communication; (ii) priority
sewerage network rehabilitation and expansion to restore network integrity in critical areas and reduce sewer overflows
and flooding that currently impact an estimated 3.02 million people in these areas; (iii) rehabilitation and upgrading of the
existing water distribution network, including the creation of pressure zone boundaries and district meter areas for
physical water loss monitoring, installation of in-line chlorination facilities, and installation of modern, digital-technology-
enabled network monitoring systems, including modern flow meters (district, domestic and bulk customer meters),
pressure loggers, automatic metering reading and advanced metering infrastructure, and remote monitoring and sensing
tools to monitor real-time residual chlorine levels. The component will also finance network expansion to areas of the city
that are currently not covered. In addition, the component will finance a performance- based NRW reduction program to
reduce both physical and commercial water losses; (iv) energy-saving interventions to reduce energy consumption in
KWSC’s pumping stations and water treatment plants as well as considering the utilization of feasible renewable energy
resources, and thus reduce energy costs and KWSC’s carbon footprint; (v) three transmission mains to bring 260 MGD of
treated water into the existing network from three separate water treatment plants currently under construction as part
of the K-IV Bulk Water Project ; (vi) rehabilitation and reconstruction of old and poorly performing water treatment plants
and (vii) Malir Basin Wastewater Interceptor, Wastewater Treatment and Recycling Plant and recycled water distribution
network.

22.      Component 3 – Project Management and Studies (US$26.44 million– of which IBRD US$10.58 million, AIIB
US$10.58 million, GoS US$5.28 million): This component finances (i) the incremental project management and
coordination costs, including design review and construction supervision, project management support, E&S risk
management, and project results monitoring and evaluation; and (ii) preparation of subsequent water and wastewater
infrastructure projects as per master plan under development with financing from KWSSIP-1, including feasibility studies,
engineering designs, E&S studies, and special studies on applicability of trenchless technology in water and wastewater
infrastructure development.

23.     Component 4 – Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) (US$0 million): Following an eligible
management crisis or emergency, the Borrower may request the Bank to reallocate project funds to support emergency
response and reconstruction. This component would draw from the uncommitted loan resources under the project from
other project components to cover emergency response.


                                                                                                                           Page 8
       The World Bank
       Second Karachi Water and Sewerage Services Improvement Project (KWSSIP-2) (P171422)




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate
 Legal Operational Policies                                                             Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                            Yes
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                      No


Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts

24.      The project’s Environmental Risk Rating is “Substantial.” Component 2 of the Project includes a series of large-
scale investments, namely the expansion and construction of new water transmission mains K-IV- Augmentation, Malir
basin river wastewater treatment TP-IV, rehabilitation of existing wastewater pumping stations along with the
construction of transmission line for connecting the 132/11kV Grid Station with the K-IV Pumping Complex to meet the
50 MW energy load demand required for the K-IV Main water pumps and reconstruction and rehabilitation of existing
water treatment plants. The investment in construction of either new or rehabilitation of existing bulk water supply
schemes, would happen in a large geographical area around the existing infrastructure or in a new alignment. Risks and
impacts during the construction phase are diverse and include (i) an increase in air and noise pollution, (ii) loss of trees
and vegetation, (iii) generation of construction wastes and wastewater, (iv) quarrying activities and associated soil erosion,
and (v) Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) and Community Health and Safety issues including traffic disruptions due to
the activities in densely populated areas. During project operation, risks and impacts include the generation of sludge
from wastewater and water treatment, OHS hazards related to chemicals management, potential soil and groundwater
contamination due to any leakages of the sewerage pipes, the inclusion of water from sewerage pipes into the water
distribution system and over-abstraction from Keenjhar Lake without offsetting or regulating additional withdrawals for
K-IV Phase 1. Additionally, components of the project may also be exposed to flash floods, which need to be considered
while finalizing the project designs.

25.       The social risk for KWSSIP-2 is rated as “High”. The most important social risk for the project is linked with
significant legacy issues deriving from the land acquisition (for water conveyance system) carried out under the prevailing
Land Acquisition Act for the government-financed K-IV Phase 1 which is considered an Associated Facility to this project.
For the power transmission line component of K-IV Main, major issues related with land and land-based assets are not
envisaged as the preliminary route estimate passes though Government owned land. However, this will be confirmed
when the ESIA and Land Acquisition and Resettlement Plan (LARP) studies for the transmission line are finalized. Other
significant social issues include potential livelihood, accessibility, and Community Health and Safety issues, as the project
will involve works in densely populated areas. During its due diligence, it has been confirmed that no Anti- Encroachment
Drives (AED) resulting in forced evictions have taken place on the project's direct footprint. The project does not anticipate
private land acquisition as the required land and Right of Ways (RoW) are already owned by KWSC or the GoS. Civil works
in the densely populated and congested urban environment of katchi abadis may result in temporary negative livelihood
impacts due to civil works (e.g., due to restricted access) on businesses, transporters, vendors, hawkers, etc. The project
investments also pose labor-related risks and impacts (e.g., working conditions, OHS, contract terms, etc.). Additional
social risks include the exclusion of vulnerable communities from project benefits and the lack of meaningful engagement
and consultation with communities, particularly vulnerable groups such as women, the elderly, minorities, and the poor.
Other key social aspects include potential social exclusion of marginalized groups and religious minorities while selecting
katchi abadis and areas for priority water and sewerage networks. Furthermore, in the case of rehabilitation of networks
– in both katchi abadis and settled areas – the existing ‘informal’ connections may be affected.


                                                                                                                         Page 9
       The World Bank
       Second Karachi Water and Sewerage Services Improvement Project (KWSSIP-2) (P171422)


 E. Implementation

26.      The Second Karachi Water Supply and Sewerage Services Improvement Project (KWSSIP-2) is the first phase of
the broader Pakistan Urban WASH MPA Program. At the national level, a National Coordination Committee (NCC),
chaired by the Secretary of Economic Affairs Division (EAD), Government of Pakistan (GoP), will guide and facilitate the
mobilization of concessional financing for the MPA program in line with established country procedures. The NCC will
comprise members from EAD at the federal level, representatives from provincial planning and development departments
of participating provinces, representatives of local government departments of participating provinces, and directors of
the project implementation unit (PIU) for each phase of the program. The NCC will meet once a year to review the progress
of all projects in the MPA. However, given that WASH is a provincial mandate, the responsibility for implementation and
coordination will stay with respective provincial governments. The decentralized nature of MPA provides an opportunity
to learn from the different implementation experiences of participating provinces.

27.     At the provincial level, an Inter-Provincial Local Government Ministers Forum (IPLGMF) will coordinate the MPA
program. This forum will also provide an opportunity for local government ministers in participating provinces to share
experiences regularly, agree on common approaches, and benefit from external support in the reforms and change
management processes they are overseeing. The IPLGMF will meet at least once annually, the forum itself will continue
to allow for rapid cross-learning between provinces and communicate that learning to stakeholders within the province.
An inter-provincial technical steering committee, comprising the project directors of the individual projects in the MPA,
will support both the NCC and IPLGMF as technical secretariat.

28.     KWSSIP-2 will retain the same implementation arrangements as KWSSIP. The existing project steering
committee (PSC) will provide overall strategic oversight and high-level coordination of the Karachi water and sanitation
investment program. KWSC will remain the secretariat to the PSC and will invite PIU directors to the PSC meetings, as
needed, to update on the overall project implementation progress, including its business plans and reform activities. The
KWSC Board of Directors will continue to champion and direct the KWSC reform process through an internal change
management task force comprising senior KWSC managers. The performance agreement to be signed between the GoS
and KWSC will commit KWSC (represented by its Board) to work towards the achievement of performance targets,
including but not limited to the KWSSIP-2 results framework and the targets in the Commitment of Cooperation for the
reform of KWSC (CoC) signed by the World Bank and GoS in 2019.

29.        KWSC has not had significant capital investment for over a decade and will need time to develop its capacity to
manage large projects. The last major project was in the mid-1990s. The PIU has suffered from high staff turnover,
struggles with monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and the management of project interdependences. These issues will be
mitigated by (i) hiring additional technical project management staff from the market, (ii) training PIU management and
staff, (iii) improving PIU management and administrative systems, and (iv) engaging a program management consultancy
firm to provide support in managing coordination and project interdependences. KWSC will strengthen its PIU with
additional technical and project management staff recruited from the market. In addition, KWSC will engage a Program
Management Consultancy (PMC) firm with experience in managing complex capital programs to provide support in
program coordination and managing interdependency risks.

30.     Existing PIUs managing various aspects of the Karachi water and sanitation capital program will remain but with
more robust coordination arrangements. The PIUs include the Water and Power Development Authority (WAPDA) PIU
for the K-IV Phase 1 project, a Sindh Irrigation Department PIU for the Kalgri Baghar Feeder Upper (KBFU) rehabilitation,
and the KWSSIP PIU. The GoS PPP unit will continue assisting KWSC (in liaison with transaction advisors) with the
procurement and execution of all PPP projects.

                                                                                                                     Page 10
     The World Bank
     Second Karachi Water and Sewerage Services Improvement Project (KWSSIP-2) (P171422)



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
CONTACT POINT

World Bank
 Khairy Al-Jamal
 Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

 Davison Muchadenyika
 Senior Urban Development Specialist

 Tiziana Smith
 Water Specialist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 Islamic Republic of Pakistan
 Adil Akbar
 Joint Secretary (Economic Affairs Division)
 akbar.adil@gmail.com

Implementing Agencies
 Province of Sindh through the Karachi Water and Sewerage Corporation (KWSC)
 Syed Salahuddin Ahmed
 Managing Director KWSC
 engrsalahuddin78@gmail.com
 Najam Shah
 Chairperson P&DD (GoS)
 chairmanpnd@gmail.com

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                      Khairy Al-Jamal, Davison Muchadenyika, Tiziana Smith



                                                                                                 Page 11
     The World Bank
     Second Karachi Water and Sewerage Services Improvement Project (KWSSIP-2) (P171422)


Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:             Josses Mugabi                         23-Jul-2024

Country Director:                     Gailius J. Draugelis                  04-Sep-2024




                                                                                           Page 12
