Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Chattogram Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation Project - II (P176429)




Public Disclosure Authorized

                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                             Concept Stage


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                       (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                         Date Prepared/Updated: 04/14/2022 | Report No: ESRSC02462




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Apr 14, 2022                                                                          Page 1 of 11
                               The World Bank
                               Chattogram Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation Project - II (P176429)



                     BASIC INFORMATION

                     A. Basic Project Data

                     Country                       Region                           Project ID                     Parent Project ID (if any)

                     Bangladesh                    SOUTH ASIA                       P176429

                     Project Name                  Chattogram Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation Project - II

                     Practice Area (Lead)          Financing Instrument             Estimated Appraisal Date       Estimated Board Date

                     Water                         Investment Project               9/5/2022                       12/15/2022
                                                   Financing

                     Borrower(s)                   Implementing Agency(ies)

                     People's Republic of          Chattogram Water Supply
                     Bangladesh                    and Sewerage Authority


                     Proposed Development Objective
                     The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) are to i) increase access to safe water supply and build capacity to



Public Disclosure
                     execute sanitation plans; ii) strengthen the operational performance of CWASA; and iii) build resilience and
                     preparedness to disasters.


                     Financing (in USD Million)                                                                                          Amount

                      Total Project Cost                                                                                                     397.00



                     B. Is the project being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project [including overview of Country, Sectoral & Institutional Contexts and
                     Relationship to CPF]
                     The project will support the Government of Bangladesh in achieving the SDG Goal 6 and advance the utility reform
                     agenda ensuring long-term sustainability of WSS service provision in Chattogram. The project will finance a
                     combination of support to strengthen institutional and financial sustainability, disaster management, support the
                     setting up of new organizational structure and operational systems for sanitation infrastructure creation and service
                     provision in the medium term, and assist in operationalizing infrastructure investments in water supply to ensure
                     equitable supply in the Chattogram service area. The proposed project provides emphasis on improving service


                    Apr 14, 2022                                                                                                        Page 2 of 11
                               The World Bank
                               Chattogram Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation Project - II (P176429)



                     delivery and institutional sustainability while scaling up access. Capacity building will be an integral part of the Bank’s
                     support.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1. Detailed project location(s) and salient physical characteristics relevant to the E&S assessment [geographic,
                     environmental, social]
                     As a sequel to Phase-I of the project, the Chattogram Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation Project (CWSISP-II) is
                     proposed to extend access to safe water supply, invest in developing resilience against natural disasters, and to
                     support the operational performance of Chattogram Water and Sanitation Authority (CWASA). The population of the
                     area under the Chattogram City Corporation (CCC) was 2.59 million in 2011 and estimated to have increased to about
                     3.2 million as of 2020 . Prior to CWSISP-I, the majority of the city’s population depended on shallow tube wells for
                     water with its inherent risks to public health. The proposed project, will expand access to piped potable water, with
                     the aim to reaching 100 percent of the population of Chattogram through the following interventions: (i)
                     Improvement of major Distribution Networks involving about 70 km trunk distribution mains with varying diameters
                     of 400 mm to 1000 mm, and distribution pipelines of approximately 750km; (ii) Improvement of water supply to low-
                     income communities in the Chattogram Metropolitan Area; and (iii) Installation of Water Supply Systems for
                     improving hygienic practices at selected institutions and public spaces. The investments in water systems for hygiene
                     aligns with the GoB’s WASH Strategy towards curtailing COVID-19 and to promote hand hygiene among the
                     population. At this concept stage, the specific layouts of the proposed water distribution networks and and related
                     works are unknown and will be determined when feasibility studies and designs are complete. No new water
                     production is proposed under this project as treated water is supplied from surface water treatment plants (SWTPs)



Public Disclosure
                     at Modhunaghat, Mohara and Karnaphuli. The plants draw water from the Karnaphuli and Halda Rivers, both located
                     in south-eastern Bangladesh and hosting important aquatic life including Ganges river dophins in the karnaphuli. The
                     Halda draws from uphill streams of the Chittogong Hill tracks, providing water and irrigation across the Halda basin,
                     and finally discharging into the Karnaphuli river. The Chattogram city also has patches of urban forest.
                     The footprint of activities is in built-up brownfield sites, urban, populated and largely contained within the CMA.
                     Most houses in the area serve mixed purposes as people reside and operate small/medium sized enterprises in the
                     same living units. In parts of the city, errand traders and vendors conduct business in the open, makeshift shelters,
                     sidewalks. This is characteristic of the unplanned neighborhoods where streets are narrow with clusters of small
                     shops. The construction of the distribution networks will occur along existing road networks and alleys with no need
                     for land acquisition. Nonetheless, construction works may restrict access to homes and disrupt economic activities.
                     Digging across some roads may cause traffic congestion and diversion with inconveniences for people during
                     construction activities. These impacts are expected to be temporary lasting the construction period. Based on
                     experiences from CWSISP-I, works under this project will be scheduled to avoid and/or minimize displacement and
                     disruption of income generating activities. Where unavoidable, CWASA will implement measures to mitigate the
                     adverse impacts of displacement. Ahead of construction, CWASA will consult local communities and affected persons,
                     disclose potential adverse impacts of projects, and discuss measures for addressing risks. In the case of errand traders
                     and vendors, the authority will identify vacant spaces in the vicinities for temporary relocation and serve advance
                     notification to enable them to relocate for the ensuing construction works. As in the case of CWSISP-I, traders will be
                     allowed to return to the previous spots when construction is complete.
                     D. 2. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity
                     The proposed project will be implemented by the Chattogram Water Supply and Sewerage Authority (CWASA), a
                     government agency with familiarity and experience in implementing World Bank-financed projects in the water and

                    Apr 14, 2022                                                                                                         Page 3 of 11
                               The World Bank
                               Chattogram Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation Project - II (P176429)



                     sanitation sector. Phase-I of the project – the CWSISP – was implemented by CWASA with satisfactory performance in
                     managing the environmental and social impacts of the project. At project closure, safeguards performance on CWSISP
                     was rated satisfactory, reflecting the existing capacity and commitment of CWASA to address environmental and
                     social impacts associated with projects of this nature. Key staff of CWASA who held oversight responsibilities on
                     CWSISP (e.g. Chemists) remain at post and are being proposed to serve as focal persons in support project
                     preparation including on environmental and social issues. Despite this relative project experience, the requirements
                     and full scope of the Bank’s Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) and relevant Environmental and Social
                     Standards are new to the staff, and suggest the need for upfront technical support from the Bank and experienced
                     consultants to enable CWASA operationalize the ESF as the guiding framework for managing social and environmental
                     impacts of the proposed investments. Specialisted E&S consultants will be hired to support the project preparation.
                     Where relevant, the Bank will provide orientation/training on the ESF to the consultants and focal persons as the
                     project is prepared. As part of the implementation arrangements, a project management unit will be set-up early in
                     the project preparation phase with adequate staffing and capacity to oversee the management of environmental and
                     social risks and impacts of the project. Component 4 of the project includes dedicated resources to hire additional
                     trained and experienced environmental and social consultants to support the project implementation. Prior to project
                     appraisal, an Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) and other relevant management plans will be drafted
                     with commitments, procedures and responsibilities for managing environmental and social impacts of the project.
                     The ESCP will also include staffing requirements to ensure compliance to the relevant ESSs throughout the project.
                     CWASA maintains two zonal offices in Chittogong. These offices provide day-to-day service delivery to the
                     communities and will be leveraged to support information disclosure and consultation activities under this project.




Public Disclosure
                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                       A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                    Substantial


                       Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                  Moderate
                       At the concept state, the environmental risk rating of the project is ‘moderate’. This is based on the nature of
                       physical works (pipe laying and installation of WASH facilities), which will be in built-up brownfield sites. No new
                       water production is proposed in this project. The proposed new distribution network will improve efficiency of the
                       supply system (water will be saved and distributed further). The typical per capita daily water demand is expected to
                       vary from 50 to 150 LPCD depending on socio-economic conditions of the water users. As noted above, the
                       implementing agency is familiar with the nature of physical works involved in the project and are expected to draw
                       from past experiences in managing risks associated with the project. The main environmental risks are expected to
                       materialize during construction phase, and include noise and dust pollution, dumping and disposal of excavated
                       materials, traffic congestion, as well as concerns for health and safety of workers and communities. Where feasible,
                       trenchless and pipe bursting technology will be considered to minimize the extent of excavations and trenching.
                       Some of the existing water lines are made of asbestos cement materials, and will be left in the ground. Where these
                       are removed, contractors will ensure careful handling and safe disposal of excavated materials. During operation
                       phase, main risks will be community and worker health & safety issues as well as some solid and liquid wastes
                       disposal (especially form the handwashing stations). At this concept stage, the scope and magnitude of these risks
                       and impacts are unknown. In line with the relevant World Bank Environmental and Social Standards, an
                       Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared with general procedures for assessing
                       and managing environmental and social risks during construction activities (including guidelines for handling and

                    Apr 14, 2022                                                                                                    Page 4 of 11
                               The World Bank
                               Chattogram Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation Project - II (P176429)



                       disposal of asbestos materials). It is expected that successful implementation of this project will have major positive
                       environmental impacts as the reduction in leakages will improve overall supply efficiency and reduce/delay the need
                       for further water abstractions (from rivers and groundwater). Also positive effects on COVID-19 control measures
                       are expected due to the increase in handwashing stations. Some greenhouse gas emissions savings are also
                       expected in the long-run due to energy savings and more efficient use of resources. Although the proposed TA
                       activity does not have any inherent environmental risk; its implementation will pave the way forward for important
                       positive environmental outcomes for the city as lack of effective wastewater management is a major cause of river
                       and coastal pollution. Currently, domestic wastewater is discharges directly to the soil (soak wells), canals and rivers.
                       Some parts of the city will have sewer system in few years.
                       Social Risk Rating                                                                                           Substantial
                       Social risks of the project is rated Substantial, as the proposed works may cause temporary, yet significant economic
                       displacements, notably disruption of income generating activities and restriction of access to facilities and
                       residential properties during the construction phase. Under component 1 of the project, excavation, earth
                       movement, trenching and pipe laying will occur along access roads, and traverse urban and populated
                       neighborhoods. Housing in Chattogram, especially in the ‘older’ parts of the city, typically serve residential and
                       economic purposes as residents often live upstairs and operate small enterprises on the ground floors of their
                       houses. In addition, errand traders and vendors operate small-scale table-top trading on sidewalks and road
                       shoulders. Excavation and trenching works are expected to disrupt economic activities and restrict access to homes
                       and businesses. These impacts are expected to be temporal, lasting the period when trenching is in progress.
                       Disconnection and relocation of public utility service lines may also occur where trenching requires cutting across
                       roads, pedestrian ways as well as gas and water service lines. As noted above, the ESMF to be prepared will include



Public Disclosure
                       procedures for assessing and managing social risks and impacts during construction activities. Based on the
                       experiences in Phase-I, the schedule for trenching work, for instance, may be phased during night hours to reduce its
                       disruptive impacts on the works on livelihood activities. Design works along with scheduling will inform the duration
                       for carrying out works and will help determine how works can be phased to minimize disruptive impacts on the local
                       population. Work during night hours will proceed with prior notification to residents. Noise and dust from night time
                       work will be kept to minimum. In line with ESS5, a Resettlement Framework will be prepared to clarify principles,
                       indicative mitigation measures, organizational arrangements and design criteria to be applied to sub-projects with
                       displacement impacts. Adding to economic displacement, other social risks include: (i) potential for social tension
                       between construction workers and slum dwellers which may arise if residents perceive that current construction
                       plans will create or exacerbate inequities in access to potable water; (ii) potential for increased COVID transmission
                       among the local population due to the presence of ‘outside’ workers in communities; and (iii) sexual exploitation
                       and abuse as well as sexual harassments (SEA/SH) due the potential for intimate interaction between workers and
                       girls/women. Prior to appraisal, the extent of risks related to SEA/SH will be assessed and mitigation plans adopted
                       to minimize or avoid the risks. Despite these notable risks, the project presents overall social benefits to the
                       targeted population, and aims to improve access to safe potable water and hygiene practices. As part of the project
                       preparations, the CWASA is consulting with local communities and stakeholders, disclosing available information
                       about the project and seeking community input and support for the project. A Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)
                       has been prepared under a project preparation advance to guide early stakeholder consultation and engagement
                       activities, will be prepared prior to appraisal.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESSs) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                    Apr 14, 2022                                                                                                        Page 5 of 11
                               The World Bank
                               Chattogram Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation Project - II (P176429)



                     B.1. General Assessment

                     ESS1 Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     Overview of the relevance of the Standard for the Project:
                     Given the scope of work defined in the PCN, the project is expected to pose some environmental and social risks and
                     impacts. Key environmental risks and impacts include noise and dust pollution, dumping and disposal of excavated
                     materials, traffic congestion, as well as concerns for health and safety of workers and communities (including Covid-
                     19 related risks). It should be noted that no new water production is proposed in this project. Distribution networks
                     will tap into existing SWTPs at Modhunaghat, Mohara and Karnaphuli; thus reducing the need for exploring different
                     water sources. On social risks and impacts, the proposed activities may result in displacement and disruption of
                     income generating activities during the construction phase. Other social concerns include issues of equitable access
                     to potable water for unserved and underserved low income populations in the city as well as the potential SEA/SH
                     which may arise from labor influx. Low income and vulnerable households, typically urban poor households operating
                     table-top business along the streets, may be constrained from access if tariffs are high. Issues about tariffs and access
                     will be included in a tariff review study to inform cost recovery. Under CWSISP-I, CWASA piloted a community-
                     managed water supply system to extend access to poor urban households. The effectiveness of this model will be
                     reviewed to inform scale up and improve tariff systems in low-income households under this project. The inherent
                     E&S risks and impacts of the project underscores the relevance for the ESS1 to be used as a guiding framework for
                     assessing and managing such impacts. At this stage of the project, design of pipeline alignments and locations of
                     WASH facilities are not finalized yet. As such, and in line with the ESS1 and applicable environmental regulations of
                     Bangladesh, an ESMF will be prepared with general guidelines and procedures for assessing and managing
                     environmental and social risks and impacts when designs are complete. The ESMF will inform risks screening and


Public Disclosure
                     subsequent design of E&S instruments that are required to address the impacts of sub-projects. In addition to
                     addressing notable risks, DWASA will ensure inclusive designs of communal water collection points, making sure they
                     guaranttee universal access. In the event that the CERC is activated, the ESMF will be updated along with a list of
                     ineligible activities to guide the assessment and management of risks related to eligible CERC activities.
                     Areas where “Use of Borrower Framework” is being considered:
                     The Government of Bangladesh (GoB) has policies for environmental risk management, albeit implementation and
                     oversight are weak. The project will not use the borrower framework for managing environmental and social risks.
                     Nonetheless, all project activities will be conducted in compliance with relevant national laws and regulations of
                     Bangladesh and the World Bank’s Environmental and Social standards.


                     ESS10 Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure
                     Demand for and access to potable water is a basic need which often draws significant interest from consumers and
                     stakeholders. Official statistics indicate that only 30 percent of the urban population of Bangladesh have access to
                     piped water services. At the same time, reliability and safety of water supplies remain problematic in the country,
                     with 70% of the population being exposed to unsafe drinking water. These challenges coupled with growing
                     urbanization often generate interest in water investment projects in the country. The proposed activities under the
                     project aims at extending improved water access to the entire Chattogram communty including urban poor and low
                     income income communities. Accordingly, this standard is considered relevant for this project and will serve as the
                     guiding framework for planning and implementing stakeholder consultation and information disclosure activities in
                     the project. In line with the standard, a stakeholder engagement plan (SEP) has been prepared by CWASA to serve as

                    Apr 14, 2022                                                                                                      Page 6 of 11
                               The World Bank
                               Chattogram Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation Project - II (P176429)



                     basis for early consultation of local communities, school authorities, health facility administrators, women, and other
                     water user groups. The SEP prioritizes timely disclosure of relevant information about the project, the population
                     areas targeted to benefit from the project, and the expected environmental and social impacts of these activities.
                     Prior to appraisal, the SEP will be updated to reflect the scope of risks and concerns associated with project designs.
                     The stakeholder engagement activities will discuss issues about access and tariffs in low income communities, discuss
                     issues about inclusive designs and universal access, promote safe hygienic practices and leveraged to disseminate
                     information about prevention measures against COVID-19. The SEP will identify the consultation and disclosure needs
                     for ESMF and site-specific project environmental and social management plans. The SEP will be implemented by the
                     Public Relations Unit of the CWASA.


                     B.2. Specific Risks and Impacts

                     A brief description of the potential environmental and social risks and impacts relevant to the Project.
                     ESS2 Labor and Working Conditions
                     Based on the scope of the project, direct workers – typically staff of the CWASA and contracted workers - will be
                     engaged to undertake specific project activities with inherent risks related to Occupational, Health and Safety (OHS).
                     Engineers from the Construction and Supervision Unit of CWASA and workers hired by contractors are expected to
                     carry out excavation, earth movement, trenching and pipe laying works during the construction of the project. Whilst
                     this risks is expected, the number of workers to be involved and the full scope of this risks cannot be ascertained at
                     this stage of the project. As the project preparaton advances, the Bank will liase with project engineers to assess the
                     number and type of workers that will be involved in the construction activities, and advice on training and mitigation



Public Disclosure
                     measures against OHS risks and impacts. During operations, women may be engaged in fee collection as well as
                     operations and maintenance of community-managed systesm in low-income neighborhoods, as CWASA attempts to
                     encourage community-managed water points and to engender WASH services in scuh communities. Working in the
                     context of COVID-19 may also expose workers to the risk of infections if adequate corona virus control measures are
                     not instituted at the sites. Consistent with the requirements of this standard, labor management procedures (LMPs)
                     will be prepared with guidance and measures to ensure OHS and control the potential spread of COVID-19 among
                     workers at project sites and offices. The LMP will clarify the terms and conditions under which women will be
                     engaged in tariff collection and outline avenues by which they can raise complaints and grievances related to their
                     involvement in operating community-managed water points.
                     Child labor is prevalent in Bangladesh, predominantly in agriculture and industry and could attempt to seek
                     construction related work under the project. In line with the standards, the use of child and forced labor is prohibited
                     in the project. Persons under the age of 18 are not allowed to work at any site or any facility being financed by the
                     project. Contractors will carry out age verification (using certified birth certificates and citizen identification cards) as
                     a precondition for employment. The project will provide accessible grievance mechanism to allow workers to raise
                     workplace concerns to be addressed by the CWASA, site foremen, and sub-station managers. The GRM will provide a
                     parallel avenue for SEA/SH-related grievances to be submitted for review and redress following the necessary
                     confidentiality requirements and sensitivities.


                     ESS3 Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management



                    Apr 14, 2022                                                                                                         Page 7 of 11
                               The World Bank
                               Chattogram Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation Project - II (P176429)



                     The project will support construction of improved and energy efficient water supply systems. The treated water is
                     sourced from Karnaphuli and Halda Rivers via existing surface water treatment plants. In addition, new WASH
                     facilities will be installed at public and communal areas to promote hand hygiene practice and help prevent the
                     spread of viral diseases including COVID-19. Despite these positive impacts, some project activities (i.e. excavation,
                     trenching, etc.) may cause pollution of air, soils, and water bodies during the construction phase. Similar impacts may
                     occur during the operation and maintenance of the water supply networks and are expected to be marginal.
                     Dometice wastewater in the city is currently is managed through direct discharge to soil (soak wells), canals and
                     rivers. However, CWASA has sewer and Sewage Treatment Plant projects under way sourced by Government funds.
                     The ESMF and subsequent ESIAs/ESMPs will be prepared and implemented to address these adverse impacts.


                     ESS4 Community Health and Safety
                     There will be some community health and safety risks during the construction phase of this project, especially during
                     the physical works along urban roads for laying water supply pipelines. These risks include traffic diversion and
                     congestion with the potential to exacerbate traffic conditions and induce vehicular accidents and injury; potential for
                     increased transmission of COVID-19 among workers and local population due to the presence of ‘outside’ workers in
                     communities; and the risk of SEA/SH which may materialize in slum and low-income areas during works due to
                     intimate interactions between workers and local women. In addition, there are risks of vector-borne disease that may
                     occur during operation and maintenance which needs to be properly managed. Works phased during night hours may
                     give rise to noise and nuisance in the communities. The ESMF will outline protocols to minimize transmission of
                     COVID-19 and detail out safety precautions for protecting community from CHS risks associated with construction




Public Disclosure
                     activities (such as protective labels, fences around trenches, traffic management related guidance). Construction
                     plans and ESMPs will set out plans for managing traffic diversions and community safety issues. Adding to managing
                     community health and safety risks, the project will have overwhelming positive impacts due to improved water
                     supply system and may help in spreading of COVID-19 by increasing the number of WASH facilities. The water
                     supplied after distribution networks are installed will comply with national drinking water quality standards. In
                     addition, the SEP will include messages aimed at promoting hand hygiene and actions to be adopted in preventing
                     COVID infections.


                     ESS5 Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement
                     As noted above, the construction, expansion and rehabilitation of water distribution networks will occur along access
                     roads, often traversing urban and populated areas. A 70km trunk distribution line measuring 400mm to 1000mm and
                     approximately 750km of distribution pipes will be laid to expand and improve access to potable water. These
                     activities are expected to induce economic displacement and relocation of public utility lines and services such as
                     water, gas, telephone and electricity. During construction activities errand vendors selling on table-tops may not be
                     able to operate their business especially when trenching and pipe laying is being carried out. In addition, excavated
                     materials and trenches are also expected to restrict access to homes, businesses, offices and other facilities of
                     interest to the population. Based on these expected impacts, this standard is considered relevant. Any restrictions on
                     land use which is connected to the project implementation will be undertaken through voluntary and good faith
                     negotiations between CWASA and local communities . However, loss of income resulting from disruption of livelihood
                     and economic activities as a result of project works will be compensated for in line with the objectives and
                     requirements of this standard. Prior to appraisal, a Resettlement Framework will be prepared to guide the conduct of


                    Apr 14, 2022                                                                                                    Page 8 of 11
                               The World Bank
                               Chattogram Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation Project - II (P176429)



                     resettlement planning and implementation throughout the project life. Upon completion of network layout designs, a
                     Resettlement Plan will be prepared and implemented with provisions for compensation and additional livelihood
                     assistance for Project-Affected Persons (PAPs). Based on the current scope of activities, no permanent land
                     acquisition is anticipated. All impacts related to involuntary resettlement and restriction of access to resources are
                     largely expected to be temporary, reversible and of moderate impacts.


                     ESS6 Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources
                     The proposed project activities will be in an urban area, that is already highly altered. However, there are some
                     sensitive sites in and around the city. This includes hills, trees and sensitive water bodies, such as the Halda River,
                     which is the country’s only natural spawning ground for major carps. The existing urban forests of the city area play
                     an important role in biodiversity, slope stability, as well as enhance the overall green landscape of the urban area.
                     The ESMF, when prepared, will provide general guideline and procedures for managing impacts related to
                     biodiversity and natural habitats.


                     ESS7 Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional Local Communities
                     Based on preliminary social assessment, there are no populations or groups in the project footprint that meet the
                     description of Indigenous People as noted in paragraph 8 of the World Bank’s ESS7. Chattogram is typically urban,
                     cosmopolitan, and inhabited by non-IP populations. Whilst some families may belong to IPs communities, they do not
                     live in distinct settlements and political systems from the mainstream population. Based on this assessment, this




Public Disclosure
                     standard is not relevant for managing risks in the project.


                     ESS8 Cultural Heritage
                     Based on the scope of activities and preliminary risks assessment, risks and impacts associated with cultural heritage
                     are not expected to occur. Excavation and trenching will involve depth of 1 to 2m, and are not expected to uncover
                     cultural artifacts. Nonetheless, the relevant aspects of this standard will be drawn to inform the ESMF and ensure
                     that artifacts, if discovered during works, will be duly registered and presented with the relevant authorities in
                     Bangladesh. The ESMF will include a Chance Find Procedure with relevant guidance project for securing requisite
                     permits from national authorities regarding cultural heritage registrations and the stakeholder consultation process
                     will include consultations related to identifying cultural heritage in collaboration with the communities.


                     ESS9 Financial Intermediaries
                     The project does not involve Financial Intermediaries therefore this standard is not relevant.


                     C. Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                     OP 7.50 Projects on International Waterways                                                                           No


                     OP 7.60 Projects in Disputed Areas                                                                                    No


                    Apr 14, 2022                                                                                                      Page 9 of 11
                               The World Bank
                               Chattogram Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation Project - II (P176429)




                     III. WORLD BANK ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL DUE DILIGENCE

                     A. Is a common approach being considered?                                                                            No
                     Financing Partners
                     The Government of Bangladesh is not receiving funds for joint activities related to this project


                     B. Proposed Measures, Actions and Timing (Borrower’s commitments)
                     Actions to be completed prior to Bank Board Approval:
                     The following instruments are required prior to approval (i) Environmental and Social Management Framework
                     (ESMF); (ii) Draft and disclose a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP); (iii) Resettlement Framework; (iv) Labor
                     Management Procedures; and (v) Conduct Feasibility studies of pipeline layouts
                     Possible issues to be addressed in the Borrower Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP):
                     (i) Hire and onboard staff and consultants with requisite knowledge and experience in managing environmental and
                     social risks of projects; (ii) undertake E&S screening, and where relevant, provide site-specific E&S instruments such
                     as ESIAs and RAPs




Public Disclosure
                     C. Timing
                     Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage ESRS                                                28-Feb-2022

                     IV. CONTACT POINTS

                     World Bank
                     Contact:              Arif Ahamed                         Title:              Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                   Specialist

                     Telephone No:         5764+4249                           Email:              aahamed@worldbank.org

                     Contact:              Yukiko Inoue                        Title:              Senior Financial Specialist

                     Telephone No:         +1-202-458-0786                     Email:              yinoue2@worldbank.org

                     Borrower/Client/Recipient
                     Borrower:              People's Republic of Bangladesh

                     Implementing Agency(ies)
                     Implementing Agency: Chattogram Water Supply and Sewerage Authority




                    Apr 14, 2022                                                                                                    Page 10 of 11
                               The World Bank
                               Chattogram Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation Project - II (P176429)




                     V. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     VI. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                Yukiko Inoue, Arif Ahamed

                     Practice Manager (ENR/Social)       Christophe Crepin Recommended on 23-Nov-2021 at 07:02:1 GMT-05:00

                     Safeguards Advisor ESSA             Charles Ankisiba (SAESSA) Cleared on 14-Apr-2022 at 12:00:34 GMT-04:00




Public Disclosure




                    Apr 14, 2022                                                                                              Page 11 of 11
