Public Disclosure Authorized
                                         The World Bank
                                         Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Program (P176619)

                                f




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                      Project Information Document (PID)


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                  Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 14-May-2023 | Report No: PIDISDSA34685




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Feb 21, 2023                                                                                         Page 1 of 8
          The World Bank
          Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Program (P176619)



   BASIC INFORMATION

 OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA
  A. Basic Project Data

   Country                                       Project ID                   Project Name            Parent Project ID (if any)
   Jordan                                        P176619                      Jordan Water Sector
                                                                              Efficiency Project
   Region                                        Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date    Practice Area (Lead)
   MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH                         31-Mar-2023                  15-Jun-2023             Water
   AFRICA
   Financing Instrument                          Borrower(s)                  Implementing Agency
   Investment Project Financing                  Ministry of Planning and     Ministry of Water and
                                                 International Cooperation,   Irrigation, Hashemite
                                                 Hashemite Kingdom of         Kingdom of Jordan
                                                 Jordan

   Proposed Development Objective(s)

   The project development objective (PDO) is to improve the efficiency of water services in Jordan

   Components
   Component 1. Sustainable non-revenue water reduction
   Component 2. Increased energy efficiency and reduced energy supply costs
   Component 3. Water security measures to underpin efficiency improvements
   Component 4. Project management and implementation support
   Component 5. Contingent Emergency Response Component



   PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

  SUMMARY                    -NewFin1




   Total Project Cost                                                                                                     300.00
   Total Financing                                                                                                       300.00
                             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                           200.00
   Financing Gap                                                                                                             0.00


  DETAILS      -NewFinEnh1




   World Bank Group Financing


Feb 21, 2023                                                                                                             Page 2 of 8
          The World Bank
          Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Program (P176619)



      International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                         200.00

   Non-World Bank Group Financing

      Trust Funds                                                                                                           50.00
         Concessional Financing Facility                                                                                    50.00
      Other Sources                                                                                                         50.00

         FRANCE: French Agency for Development                                                                              50.00

   Environmental and Social Risk Classification
   Substantial

   Decision
   The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

   Other Decision (as needed)

   B. Introduction and Context
      1.      Water scarcity is a key impediment to growth, development and poverty reduction in Jordan. Jordan
      is one of the most water-scarce countries in the world, which poses severe limits on agriculture and water
      supply to its cities. With only 97 cubic meter per capita per year, the available water is well below the absolute
      water scarcity threshold of 500 cubic meter per capita per year. Over 92 percent of the land in Jordan is
      classified as semi-arid or arid and receives less than 200 mm of rainfall per year.
      2.     Jordan has seen its population grow through a combination of organic growth and refugee influx–
      reducing the amount of water per person available as an economic input. Between 2011 to 2015, an
      estimated 1.3 million Syrian refugees fled to Jordan, an influx equivalent to 20 percent of Jordan’s pre-crisis
      population. The rapid increase in population has placed pressures on public services and infrastructure
      throughout the country, in particular electricity and water services. The combination of demand- and supply-
      side shocks led to a sharp rise in sector debt, impacting the sustainability of basic services delivery and the
      country’s fiscal position. As Jordan’s population has grown and become increasingly urbanized (91 percent
      in 2019), around half of Jordan’s available water is used for municipal water supply (including non-residential
      uses) and the other half is allocated to agriculture (compared with a global average of 70 percent of water for
      agriculture). Water scarcity severely constrains agricultural output in the country. Jordan also has high levels
      of non-revenue water (NRW is the difference between the amount of water put into the distribution system
      and the amount of water billed to consumers for technical or commercial reasons)— NRW accounts for
      approximately 50 percent of municipal water in Jordan.

      3.     The water sector is also the largest single energy consumer in Jordan, and half of water utilities’
      operational costs are for electricity. Significant energy is inherently required for pumping water to urban
      and agricultural areas because of Jordan’s natural hydrogeology and topography, and ageing infrastructure
      only increases the high energy requirements of the sector.



Feb 21, 2023                                                                                                           Page 3 of 8
          The World Bank
          Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Program (P176619)




      4.     Climate change and population growth will further reduce water resources availability at the same
      time that these factors will drive growth in demand for water. Across the Middle East and in Jordan, many
      of the effects of climate change on the water cycle are already observed and are expected to worsen in the
      future. The National Water Strategy 2016-2025 estimated that water demand would exceed available water
      resources by more than 26 percent by 2025.
      5.     GOJ has been proactive both in the analysis of water scarcity challenges and in attempts to formulate
      a response through the evolution of the national water program during the recent decades. Since the 1960s,
      the Ministry of Water and Irrigation (MWI) with the support of Central Government and from international
      technical and financial partners has pursued measures to forecast and respond to water scarcity in Jordan
      over the past decades including: (i) the development of water master plans and national strategies; (ii)
      reallocation from agriculture to domestic water supply; (iii) wastewater reuse in agriculture; (iv)
      improvements to water productivity in agriculture, and; (v) a program of PPPs to augment bulk water
      availability.
      6.     Reform of both the energy and water sectors has been a priority of the Government’s economic
      reform agenda and are a key pillar of the Economic Modernization Vision and its Executive Program (2023-
      2025). Energy and water sector reforms are central parts of the Jordan Reform Matrix (2018-2024) as they are
      recognized important drivers for economic competitiveness and growth. The Water Sector Financial
      Sustainability Roadmap (FSR) (approved by Cabinet of Ministers in November 2022), a deliverable under the
      Reform Matrix, outlines policy and investment actions needed to bring the water sector back into sustainable
      operations and to serve as a foundation and leverage new supply-side investments. The Economic
      Modernization Vision includes eight drivers of economic growth, including sustainable resources with the
      objectives of optimizing the use of natural resources to ensure sustainability, promoting inclusive sectoral
      growth and enhancing quality of life. Energy and water are the two anchors for sustainable resources
      economic growth driver. In the water sector, the Vision focuses on promoting water security in a financially
      sustainable manner, innovations in enhancing water production, sustainable water use through demand
      management, reducing sector inefficiencies and water losses and optimizing water use.

   C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

  Development Objective(s) (From PAD)
  The proposed project development objective (PDO) is to improve the efficiency of water services in Jordan

   Key Results
     7.     The proposed project will support results in (i) non-revenue water reduction; (ii) energy efficiency; (iii)
     water security and drought management; and (iv) strengthening systems to improve operational
     performance.

   D. Project Description

      8.      The proposed Series of Projects (SOP) provides the investment support and long-term approach
      needed for full implementation of the Water Sector Financial Sector Roadmap and to improve the efficiency
      and resilience of the water sector. Through the SOP, multiple projects financed by the World Bank contribute
      to the Government’s objectives to improve efficiency, service delivery and financial sustainability of the water

Feb 21, 2023                                                                                                          Page 4 of 8
           The World Bank
           Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Program (P176619)


      sector. The SOP is expected to be implemented between 2023 and 2032, through three proposed investments
      beginning with the proposed project, followed by two further investments in sector efficiency. The program
      is aligned with, and will contribute to, the Economic Modernization Vision, Government’s National Strategy
      for the Water Sector, and Non-Revenue Water Reduction and Energy Efficiency Strategies.
      9.     The first project in the series, (SOP1) will focus on improving water sector efficiency. Proposed
      interventions are grouped around five components:
       •       Component 1. Sustainable non-revenue water reduction. Aims to improve efficiency by reducing waste
               of the available water resources (financial and commercial) and overall improvement in operational
               systems in the water sector, in support of adaptation to climate change impacts on water availability.
               This component would strengthen NRW systems in the country to improve planning, operationalization,
               and help sustain NRW reduction over time.
       •       Component 2. Increased energy efficiency and reduced energy supply costs. The water sector in Jordan
               requires significant energy for operation - energy costs represent over half of the water utilities'
               operational costs - due largely to pumping costs associated with the extraction of deep groundwater,
               and conveyance of water from the source to population centers. This component would improve the
               efficiency of the water sector by reducing energy used, costs, and GHG emissions.
       •       Component 3. Water security measures to underpin efficiency measures. Given Jordan’s extreme water
               scarcity and frequent and intense droughts, improved water allocation will support different mechanisms
               to enable efficient and fair management of water shortages. This component will strengthen drought
               management with aims to apply a comprehensive drought risk management approach to increase
               capacity to monitor, forecast, plan for, and respond to droughts in the water sector. This component will
               also support preparation of studies for rehabilitation water storage systems.
       •       Component 4. Project management and implementation support. This Component would focus on
               project management required to implement this Project and to strengthen systems for the planned SOP.
       •       Component 5. Contingency Emergency Response. A Contingency Emergency Response Component
               (CERC) with zero allocation would be created and made implementation-ready to allow the GoJ to
               respond quickly in case of an eligible emergency. The mechanism will be defined in a specific CERC
               Operational Manual that will clearly outline the triggers, eligible expenditures, procurement thresholds,
               and procedures for using part of IBRD resources of the project to respond quickly in the event of an
               eligible emergency.


  .
  .
  Legal Operational Policies
                                                                           Triggered?

   Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                            Yes

   Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60                                     No




Feb 21, 2023                                                                                                           Page 5 of 8
           The World Bank
           Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Program (P176619)


  Summary of Assessment of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
  .

12. The Project Environmental risk is rated Substantial. The Project’s environmental risks are mainly related to the
    construction and rehabilitation of the water network and rehabilitation of groundwater wells, including: risks of
    air pollution, noise, , generation and improper management of non-hazardous waste, and hazardous waste as
    well as risks associated with use of chemicals, and low potential of increase in water extraction affecting the
    aquifers safe yield during operation. There are also risks of potentially uncovering old asbestos pipes during
    water network rehabilitation. Biodiversity assessment will be conducted for activities located in areas of
    biodiversity value and risks associated with treated wastewater due to alterations in water allocation planning
    will be assessed during preparation of water allocation and drought contingency plans.
      13. Social risks: SOP-1 has a variety of social risks and is rated Moderate. The Project has a variety of social
      risks and is rated Moderate. The main social risks are related to small to moderate-scale civil works across the
      national geographic scope of SOP-1, to be undertaken by different implementing agencies. No significant labor
      influx is expected, since most labor will be sourced from readily available local labor.
      14. The project has prepared environmental and social management instruments proportionate to the risks
      and impacts. Mitigation and monitoring measures to address the environmental and social risks are
      incorporated into the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Labor Managagement
      Procedures (LMP) that have been prepared. The project also has a robust Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)
      for meaningful engagement and information disclosure with affected parties throughout the project cycle.
      Works are expected to take place within existing rights-of-way and sites; a Resettlement Framework has been
      prepared for any small parcels of land, if needed. The project design incorporates resourcing and capacity
      building for environmental and social risk management and stakeholder engagement across the implementing
      agencies.

      E. Implementation

      Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
       15. The implementation arrangements are aligned with the current institutional architecture of the water
       sector in Jordan. A Steering Committee would be established to oversee and provide strategic guidance to
       project implementation. The Steering Committee will be chaired by the Minister of Water and include senior
       management from key stakeholder agencies and institutions such as Ministry of Water and Irrigation (MWI),
       Water Authority of Jordan (WAJ), Jordan Valley Authority (JVA), Miyahuna Water Company (MWC), Aqaba
       Water Company (AWC) and Yarmouk Water Company (YWC), , with representatives from MOPIC, the Ministry
       of Finance, Ministry of Agriculture, and the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources. WAJ would be
       responsible for overall project coordination with support from the Project Management Directorate (PMD). The
       water companies (MWC, AWC, and YWC) would be responsible for implementation of activities under
       Components 1 and 2. Each water company will be responsible implementing NRW reduction actions in the
       secondary and tertiary networks, and activities that improve energy efficiency. MWI will be responsible for
       implementing actions under Component 3 on hydro-informatics and drought risk management and JVA would
       be responsible for implementing actions under Component 3 on water storage. Alignment with Development
       Partners active in the sector would be facilitated through existing coordination mechanisms.

  .



Feb 21, 2023                                                                                                         Page 6 of 8
          The World Bank
          Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Program (P176619)



   CONTACT POINT

   World Bank

   Jacqueline Marie Tront
   Senior Water Resources Management Specialist

   Sally Zgheib
   Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

   Borrower/Client/Recipient
   Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation, Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
   TBD TBD
   TBD
   tbd@email.com
   Implementing Agencies

   Ministry of Water and Irrigation, Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
   TBD TBD
   TBD
   TBD@email.com


   FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT


   The World Bank
   1818 H Street, NW
   Washington, D.C. 20433
   Telephone: (202) 473-1000
   Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects



   APPROVAL


                                         Jacqueline Marie Tront
   Task Team Leader(s):
                                         Sally Zgheib

   Approved By

   Practice Manager/Manager:

   Country Director:                     Holly Welborn Benner                   15-May-2023

Feb 21, 2023                                                                                  Page 7 of 8
          The World Bank
          Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Program (P176619)




Feb 21, 2023                                                 Page 8 of 8
