Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Chattogram Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation Project - II (P176429)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                                         Project Information Document (PID)




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                         Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 27-Jul-2021 | Report No: PIDC31947




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Jul 26, 2021                                                                                          Page 1 of 18
         The World Bank
         Chattogram Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation Project - II (P176429)


  BASIC INFORMATION


  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE

  Country                                        Project ID                 Parent Project ID (if any)   Project Name
  Bangladesh                                     P176429                                                 Chattogram Water
                                                                                                         Supply Improvement
                                                                                                         and Sanitation Project -
                                                                                                         II (P176429)
  Region                                         Estimated Appraisal Date   Estimated Board Date         Practice Area (Lead)
  SOUTH ASIA                                     Mar 22, 2022               Aug 18, 2022                 Water

  Financing Instrument                           Borrower(s)                Implementing Agency
  Investment Project Financing                   People's Republic of       Chattogram Water Supply
                                                 Bangladesh                 and Sewerage Authority

   Proposed Development Objective(s)

    The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) are to i) increase access to safe water supply and build capacity to execute
    sanitation plans; ii) strengthen the operational performance of CWASA; and iii) build resilience and preparedness to
    disasters.

    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

   SUMMARY-NewFin1

    Total Project Cost                                                                                                    397.00

    Total Financing                                                                                                       397.00

                             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                            300.00
    Financing Gap                                                                                                            0.00

   DETAILS     -NewFinEnh1




    World Bank Group Financing

       International Development Association (IDA)                                                                        300.00

           IDA Credit                                                                                                     300.00

    Non-World Bank Group Financing
       Counterpart Funding                                                                                                  97.00



Jul 26, 2021                                                                                                            Page 2 of 18
           The World Bank
           Chattogram Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation Project - II (P176429)



            Borrower/Recipient                                                                                                   97.00




     Environmental and Social Risk Classification                              Concept Review Decision
     Substantial                                                               Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to
                                                                               continue


     B. Introduction and Context

     Country Context

 1.      Bangladesh has experienced rapid social and economic progress in recent decades and achieved lower-middle
 income status in 2015. Gross domestic product (GDP) grew by an average of about 6 percent per year since 2000 and
 accelerated to more than 8 percent in fiscal year (FY) 2019 (July 2018–June 2019). Strong labor market gains contributed
 to a sharp decline in the national poverty rate from 48.9 percent in 2000 to 24.5 percent in 2016, and extreme poverty
 rate from 34 percent to 13 percent over the same period.1 However, the pace of poverty reduction has slowed in recent
 years even as growth accelerated, particularly in urban areas and in the west of the country. Similarly, progress on shared
 prosperity slowed down between 2010 and 2016 after a decade of improvements, with annual consumption growth of
 the bottom 40 percent trailing that of the overall population (1.2 versus 1.6 percent). More than half of the population is
 vulnerable to poverty as their consumption levels are close to the poverty threshold. While tax collections are among the
 lowest in the world, under execution of the budget has contained the fiscal deficit, which has been below 5 percent of
 GDP since FY01. As a result, public debt remained at 33.7 percent of GDP at the end of FY19.

 2.       Economic growth suffered a sharp decline after the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic caused
 major disruptions to economic activity. Bangladesh had entered 2020 with a relatively strong macroeconomic position.
 Garment exports and remittances had narrowed the external deficit and international reserves were adequate. In the first
 half of FY20, growth started decelerating due to slowing global trade, exports declined due to deteriorating external
 competitiveness, and tightened access to finance constrained private investment growth. Growth during this period was
 primarily supported by remittance-fueled private consumption. The pandemic in early 2020 disrupted the supply of
 intermediate goods from China, reducing manufacturing output. As the pandemic intensified globally, Bangladesh’s export
 orders from Europe and the United States declined precipitously. Lockdown measures by the government resulted in a
 sudden stoppage of economic activity in many sectors. As a result, real GDP growth decelerated to 3.6 percent in FY21 .
 Inflation remained low at 5 percent in January 2021. A decline in imports and a large inflow of remittances, up over 30
 percent (year-on-year), contributed to a current account surplus between July 2020 and January 2021. The second round
 of lockdowns in the end of FY21 and early 2022 is likely to dampen the predicted mild recovery of economic activity. Weak
 demand and private investment, shortage of inputs, and severe financing constraints may continue to depress industrial
 production. Moreover, flooding in early FY21 has hampered Bangladesh’s agriculture production. Transportation and
 supply-chain disruptions will further dampen the recovery of agricultural production and perishables. Inflation is projected
 to hover around 5.7 percent, but the fiscal deficit is likely to rise with the continuation of elevated expenditure on social
 protection and economic stimulus.



 1
     Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics, Household Income and Expenditure Survey, 2000/01 through 2016/17.

Jul 26, 2021                                                                                                                 Page 3 of 18
         The World Bank
         Chattogram Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation Project - II (P176429)


 3.      The Government of Bangladesh (GoB) implemented the National Preparedness and Response Plan (NPRP) for
 COVID-19 that accords water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) interventions. The GoB responded rapidly to the COVID-
 19 pandemic by issuing the NPRP in March 2020.2 To facilitate planning and response, six country levels were identified
 for disease incidence and transmission, reduction in transmission, and the final recovery phase. Various means of
 prevention and control, including social distancing, quarantines, shutdowns, and other measures were mandated to
 reduce the spread of COVID-19. In line with the NPRP’s intervention areas for risk communication and infection prevention
 and control, the GoB WASH response strategy paper set out the sector priorities for the immediate, medium-term, and
 long-term responses to the COVID-19 emergency.3

 4.      Bangladesh remains extremely vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. The Global Climate Risk Index
 ranked Bangladesh as the world’s seventh most-affected country using 1999–2018 data.4 Rising temperatures leading to
 more intense and unpredictable rainfall during the monsoon season and a higher probability of catastrophic cyclones are
 expected to result in increased tidal inundation. It is estimated that a one-meter rise in sea levels is likely to submerge 18
 percent of arable land in coastal areas.5 Recent studies estimate that around 13.3 million people may become internal
 climate migrants by 2050.6 Additional rural-urban migration may have significant consequences for air and water pollution
 and unsustainable consumption of natural resources, while putting additional pressure on urban labor markets.
 Addressing climate risks is urgent to ensure sustainable economic development of the country.

  Sectoral and Institutional Context

 5.       Bangladesh has abundant water resources, but the water sector faces considerable challenges in achieving
 Sustainable Development Goal 6 (SDG 6). The Bangladesh Water Sector Diagnostic7 identified ‘Poor WASH service
 delivery in a growing economy’ as of one out of the six major challenges for the water sector in the country. Although
 Bangladesh has achieved its Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) target of halving the population without access to
 improved drinking water sources, Bangladesh ranks 126th in safety of drinking water with about 70 percent of its
 population being exposed to unsafe drinking water.8 Bangladesh is rapidly urbanizing but only 10 percent of urban
 households have access to piped water—this has not increased much over the last decade. For sanitation, urban
 households are dependent on pits and tanks that are cleaned infrequently, and sewerage coverage is sparse. There is no
 full-service chain available for sanitation (via sewerage or Fecal Sludge Management (FSM) even in the metros of Dhaka
 and Chattogram. Utilities and municipalities face considerable challenges in extending safe water supply and sanitation
 (WSS) services to the growing urban population.

 6.      Chattogram,9 the commercial capital of Bangladesh, has witnessed robust economic growth in recent years that
 requires increased investments in the WSS sector to meet the growing demand for improved services. Chattogram is
 the second largest city in Bangladesh and the busiest seaport in the region. Located in southeastern Bangladesh, the
 Chattogram Metropolitan Area10 is spread over 155 sq km. The population of the area under the Chattogram City

 2 Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh, National Preparedness and Response Plan for COVID-19, Bangladesh, Version 5, March 2020,

 Directorate General of Health Services Health Service Division, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
 3 Response to COVID-19 Outbreak through Water, Sanitation and Hygiene Interventions - Bangladesh Strategy Paper 2020–22.
 4 Germanwatch. 2020. Global Climate Risk Index 2020.
 5 UNFCCC. 2007. Climate Change Impacts, Vulnerabilities and Adaptation in Developing Countries. UNFCCC Secretariat. Bonn, Germany.
 6 World Bank. 2018. Groundswell: Preparing for Internal Climate Migration. Washington, DC.
 7 World Bank. 2018. Promising Progress: A Diagnostic of Water Supply, Sanitation, Hygiene, and Poverty in Bangladesh.

 https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/29450. License: CC BY 3.0 IGO.
 8 World Economic Forum. 2018. Global Competitiveness Report.
 9 Formerly known as Chittagong.
 10 https://www.ccc.org.bd/media_brief.



Jul 26, 2021                                                                                                                          Page 4 of 18
         The World Bank
         Chattogram Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation Project - II (P176429)


 Corporation (CCC) was 2.59 million in 2011, which is estimated to have increased to about 3.211 million as of 2020. Having
 evolved over a millennium, this old port city has grown as a commercial center that accounts for 12 percent of the
 country’s GDP. It produces 40 percent of Bangladesh’s industrial output, contributes 40 percent of the government’s
 revenues, and generates employment for 16 percent of the total employed labor force in the industrial sector.12 The city
 and its surrounding areas are home to a number of industries including garments, textiles, electric and electronic goods,
 footwear and leather, maritime and industrial parts, and so on. The city handles more than 75 percent of the country’s
 exports mainly comprising garments, jute products, tea, naphtha, and so on.13 The city has an iron and steel mill, a large
 oil refinery, and many manufacturing establishments in and around the city, including two export-processing zones.
 Chattogram houses a stock exchange and an upcoming trade center and is poised for growth with investments in defense
 and ship-building industries in the future. This growth powerhouse needs adequate supplies of water and proper
 management of its wastewater to deliver on its leading role as the country’s growth center. Investments in Chattogram’s
 WSS sector will be critical for a sustained recovery of Bangladesh’s economic growth post pandemic.

 7.      The Chattogram Water Supply and Sewerage Authority (CWASA) has been extending piped water supply
 services gradually but is yet to achieve full coverage of its service area. Chattogram has developed rapidly and often in
 an unplanned manner. While urban planning is the responsibility of the Chattogram Development Authority (CDA), the
 CWASA is responsible for providing WSS services for a limited region within the CDA boundary, referred to as the CWASA
 Service Area14 and covering approximately 155 km2. The CWASA assets include a range of water supply facilities, including
 four surface-water-based water treatment plants with a total production capacity of 500 million liters per day servicing
 the central region, along with 1,029 km of transmission and distribution networks (Figure 1). On-premises piped water
 supply is available however to only about two million people through 80,000 house connections, representing 65 percent
 of the population of Chattogram. Within city limits, only 37 out of 435 low-income communities (LICs, or slums) are served
 by localized small networks connected to CWASA transmission mains or through on-premises deep tube wells. The city
 does not have a sewerage system and is entirely dependent on on-site pits and tanks and informal de-sludging. Hence,
 apart from coverage, challenges remain in providing sustainable and resilient water services in Chattogram, including: (a)
 inadequate and deficient water supply services to LICs where a large proportion of Chattogram’s population lives; (b)
 inequities and quality deficiencies in water supply services; (c) low tariff recovery for water supply services challenging the
 financial sustainability of the CWASA; (d) huge infrastructure gap in achieving safe sanitation; and (e) low capacity to
 address climate hazard risks.




 11 Bangladesh Population and Housing Census 2011. The CCC population was recorded at 2.59 million as per population census 2011 and has been

 estimated to increase to 3.2 million by 2020. Household size is reported to be five members.
 12 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chittagong#cite_note-BBC-78.
 13 https://www.chittagongchamber.com/elc.php.
 14
    CWASA Service Area corresponds to the CCC Area.

Jul 26, 2021                                                                                                                       Page 5 of 18
         The World Bank
         Chattogram Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation Project - II (P176429)


                             Figure 1. Chattogram Metropolitan Area and CWASA Water Supply Facilities




 8.       The CWASA will require significant governance improvements and operational support to improve water supply
 services, and as it expands its role in providing sanitation services. The CWASA was created in 1963, formally gazetted in
 2008 under the Water and Sewerage Authority (WASA) Act of 1996, to provide water supply, sewerage, and drainage
 services in Chattogram. The WASA Act establishes the CWASA as a ‘body corporate’ and mandates that the CWASA “render
 its services as efficiently as possible and take all measures necessary to recover fully the costs of services.”15 The
 management of the CWASA is accountable to a Governing Board16 representing a range of stakeholders. The CWASA
 Board is responsible for appointing the Managing Director (MD) and the Deputy MD, whereas the MD is responsible for
 appointing all other officers and employees of the authority. The entity is organized along three business streams,

 15
    Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh, National Parliament of Bangladesh, “Water Supply and Sewerage Authority (WASA) Act
 (1996),” 17.6.
 16
    Governing Board of the CWASA comprises 13 members while the Board Chairman is appointed by the government. The MD acts as the Member
 Secretary of the Governing Board.

Jul 26, 2021                                                                                                                   Page 6 of 18
           The World Bank
           Chattogram Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation Project - II (P176429)


 engineering, finance, and administration, with the engineering wing responsible for service operations. However, given
 its remit, the existing institutional capacity of the CWASA is poor. At present, the CWASA has about 654 staff out of which
 only 58 are professional engineers. The rest of the staff comprise technicians, maintenance, or administrative personnel.
 The staff have experience in water supply operations but do not have capacities or experience in sanitation.17 As the
 CWASA enters a new sanitation service line in the medium term, recruitment and training of professionals are required to
 meet with the operational demands.

 9.       Chattogram fell far short of the MDG targets for sanitation services, but the CWASA has developed the strategy
 for addressing long-term challenges of sanitation. There is a large gap in achieving safe sanitation but the capacity to
 develop sanitation facilities is low. The city does not have a sewerage system and is totally dependent on on-site systems.
 Although the Chittagong Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation Project (CWSISP) has primarily focused on water
 supply services, it has begun addressing key foundational issues relating to sanitation and drainage through development
 of strategy and masterplans for medium- and long-term horizons covering the period up to 2065. The project supported
 clarifying the institutional framework for operations and maintenance (O&M) of sewerage and drainage systems for
 Chattogram City. The CWASA’s Sanitation Master Plan includes an investment plan of US$1.07 billion to construct and
 operate a sewerage system and improved on-site sanitation systems, including containment, collection, transport, and
 treatment of fecal sludge. Implementation of the master plan has commenced with funding from the GoB, which has
 committed BDT 3,808 crores (about US$476 million)18 for establishing a sewerage system in the Halishahar catchment.19
 For the effective management of the construction of sewerage infrastructure (treatment systems and sewer networks),
 FSM systems, and O&M, development of the organizational structure and capacities will be critical. This will be in addition
 to the support required for improving the overall governance and efficiency in operations.

 10.     The CWASA has begun to address services deficits and is planning to improve efficiency in water management
 with expansion of coverage. The World Bank and Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), along with the GoB,
 have financed the core water treatment, booster, and water supply distribution infrastructure over the last few decades
 (Figure 1). The Bank has financed three WSS services projects in Chattogram since the 1960s, including the recently closed
 CWSISP. Nevertheless, the city does not have equitable water supply over its entire service area yet, and the distribution
 network includes a high rate of leakage due to dilapidated pipelines, damages, and inadequate maintenance. The current
 Non-Revenue Water (NRW) is about 28 percent. In response, the CWASA has initiated the replacement of non-functional
 pipelines based on the District Metered Area (DMA) principle with financial assistance from JICA for the Karnaphuli Service
 Area (KSA), a part of its service area, with a target of servicing one million beneficiaries with improved water supply.
 Further, for reducing leakages and expanding the network in the non-KSA area, there’s a need to invest in the distribution
 network through rehabilitation and expansion to the remaining areas of the metropolitan serving about 1.5 million people.
 With the completion of all the envisaged rehabilitations and new connections, it is estimated that the CWASA will be able
 to provide improved on-premises piped water to an estimated 2.6 million beneficiaries, that is, 81 percent of the city
 population.

 11.    The CWASA is expanding water services to LICs through innovations and partnerships, but more efforts are
 needed for scaling up water supply to the majority of LICs in Chattogram. Up to 1.4 million people or more than a third



 17
      There is no waterborne sewerage systems in existence in Chattogram at present.
 18 Includes capital cost, road cutting charges, contingencies, and taxes.
 19 As a priority, the Halishahar catchment area is to be developed first, followed by Kalurghat, expected around 2030. The GoB-funded Halishahar

 sewerage development project includes construction of a sewerage treatment plant with 100 million litres per day capacity on a site owned by the
 CWASA, along with 200 kilometres of sewer lines targeting the sewerage coverage up to 2030 (phase 3). It also includes construction of a fecal
 sludge treatment plant with capacity of 300 cubic meters per day and FSM coverage up to 2023 (phase 2).

Jul 26, 2021                                                                                                                            Page 7 of 18
         The World Bank
         Chattogram Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation Project - II (P176429)


 of Chattogram’s population are estimated to be residing in about 435 LIC settlements20 spread across the 41 wards of the
 city corporation. Most of the households in these LICs suffer from lack of secure tenure, high density and crowding,
 temporary housing structures, poor lighting and road conditions, and poor services. Barriers to extending access to water
 supply to LICs include the lack of adequate water supply; lack of distribution pipelines in all areas; the households’ inability
 or unwillingness to pay; and most importantly, lack of legal tenure. Under the support of the WB CWSISP, the CWASA has
 expanded their water supply to selected LICs through localized small networks connected with the CWASA mains or
 through on-premises deep tube wells. The CWASA has also established partnerships with nongovernmental organizations
 (NGOs) and community-based organizations (CBOs) to address barriers and extend their services. With this effort, about
 12 percent of LIC households21 now have access to “basic”22 water supply.23 The remaining majority of households in the
 LICs continue to be dependent on shared water points that make fetching water a time-consuming exercise, a drudgery
 for women and girls. In addition, households report paying much more than CWASA water rates. Responding to the
 challenges requires larger-scale investment in water infrastructure to the LICs and enabling provisions to extend water
 supply access.

 12.      For the CWASA to sustain financially, greater investments need to be accompanied with improved financial
 management. With increased water sales and regular increase in water tariffs (average 9 percent increase annually), the
 CWASA maintained operational level profitability during 2010–2019. However, in the recent year, income before
 depreciation and interest was in a deficit of about BDT 111 million (US$ 1.3 million). This was mainly due to a drop in the
 collection to 84 percent from an average of 94 percent since the COVID-19 pandemic. The income after depreciation and
 finance charges has declined over the period and is in recurring deficit. Long-term liabilities have increased significantly in
 the past seven years due to project investments. Therefore, in parallel with tariff revision and operational performance
 improvement, servicing its debt with a rigorous debt restructuring plan is critical for the CWASA to sustain financially.

 13.      The CWASA has improved on utility maturity level and is poised to join the Bank’s Utility of the Future (UoF)
 initiative. The CWASA has accorded priority to strengthening its organizational structure, staffing, and systems that are
 inadequate to discharge its mandates. Since 2015, the CWASA has been implementing a comprehensive organizational
 strengthening exercise using the WB-promoted Water Utility Maturity Model (WUM)24 that involved diagnostics and utility
 strengthening exercises.25 The CWASA is the first utility in Bangladesh that received the ISO 9001:2015 Certificate for
 quality management in water production which indicates its achievement in improved reliability in delivery of water
 services. A 2019 assessment by the WB showed that in four years, the CWASA had reached the Water Utility Maturity
 level 3—signifying tremendous progress on the degree to which business processes and management systems are
 structured and institutionalized in the utility. This positions the CWASA well to join in the Bank-promoted new paradigm,




 20 BBS Slum Census 2014 enumerated 1,771 slums; a Centre for Urban Studies survey in 2011, for an Urban Poverty project (UPPR- UNDP) counted

 5,778 micro settlements of poor; and recent surveys estimated about 435 slums (PMID-WSUP, 2019).
 21
    piped water is being supplied to the LICs via 689 hydrant points and 37 LICs are being covered by CWASA.
 22 “Basic” water supply is defined as “Drinking water from an improved source, provided collection time is not more than 30 minutes for a

 roundtrip including queuing; and “Limited” means “Drinking water from an improved source for which collection time exceeds 30 minutes for a
 roundtrip including queuing” (WHO-UNICEF Joint Monitoring Program (JMP): https://washdata.org/monitoring/drinking-water)
 23 Baseline Report of WASH4UrbanPoor Project, HDRC, Sept 2018. WaterAID .
 24 Kayaga, Sam Mbaziira; Kingdom,William D.; Mugabi, Josses. 2013. Evaluating the institutional sustainability of an urban water utility:

 a conceptual framework and research directions. World Bank Group.
 http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/347591528467259449/Evaluating-the-institutional-sustainability-of-an-urban-water-utility-a-
 conceptual-framework-and-research-directions
 25 including Standard Operating Procedures, plans and training in maintenance management, commercial management, management information

 systems (MISs), personnel development, energy management, customer services improvement, and support to the strategic plan and preparations
 for ISO certification

Jul 26, 2021                                                                                                                       Page 8 of 18
         The World Bank
         Chattogram Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation Project - II (P176429)


 the UoF26 Program, that is, becoming a future-ready utility providing reliable, safe, inclusive, transparent, and customer-
 oriented WSS services through best-fit practices in an efficient, resilient, and sustainable manner.

 14.      Chattogram is vulnerable to disaster and climate hazard risks and is cautioned to promote resilience to these
 risks. Chattogram is characterized with low-lying coastal areas, beaches, estuaries, and lakes, as well as hills. While these
 geographic features create opportunities for different types of economic activities, they also expose the city to a range of
 hazards, including cyclones and tidal surges (primary risks), as well as waterlogging, saltwater intrusion, flash floods, and
 so on.27 Due to the lack of flood control infrastructures and effective drainage systems,28 more than two-thirds of the city
 is affected by waterlogging from the River Karnaphuli29 during the monsoon season (Bangladesh Public Works Department
 [PWD]).30 The current water supply system is vulnerable to climate change-related hazards. While there is a need to build
 resilience for the CWASA to respond to these challenges in providing reliable water services during the monsoon season,
 adaptation measures for flood control and adaptation measures are also needed across relevant agencies including the
 CCC. These include the development of operating procedures, improved management capacity of the drainage canals,
 strengthening cooperation among the responsible agencies, among others.

 15.      The CWASA has proposed the Chittagong Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation Project Phase II (CWSISP-
 II) to further improve water supply services that are resilient to disasters and to enhance the CWASA’s capacity in
 sanitation service provision in the Chattogram service area. Through investment in the further expansion of the water
 distribution network, rehabilitation, operational re-organization, and institutional and financial strengthening, the
 proposed project will build upon previous investments to improve efficiencies and sustainability of water supply services
 while establishing robust frameworks for promoting resilience to climate change, disasters, and public health risks. Water
 is underpriced at present, and this has led to its under-valuation and over-consumption. The project will help rationalize
 CWASA tariffs and help signal the value of water as a precious resource while promoting financial sustainability. Efficient
 and equitable water distribution through the adoption of DMAs, commercial strengthening, better operations equipment
 and management, improved procurement, customer orientation, and information technology will help improve efficiency,
 sustainability, and resilience. The project will further extend water supply services to LICs and also enhance the utility’s
 capacity to develop and operate safe sanitation services city-wide.

 16.     The proposed project is aligned with the objectives of the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 (BDP). The BDP, approved
 in 2018, presents a long-term, integrated, economic plan that integrates all water-related sector plans and policies aimed
 at securing the future of water resources and mitigating the likely effects of climate change and natural disasters. The
 implementation of the BDP is currently the key development agenda which aims to enable the country to reach middle-
 income status by 2030. Priority areas for the investment includes: (a) flood and erosion control, coastal and river
 management; (b) urban water supply, sanitation, waste management, and drainage in major cities; and (c) rural water
 supply and waste management. The proposed project will not only invest in water supply efficiency improvement, but
 also help to develop the capacity for sanitation and drainage services. It is linked with the second BDP priority area which
 allocates at least 25 percent of all delta investments to address WASH and drainage in major cities.



 26 The Utilities of the Future Initiative (https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/water/publication/utility-of-the-future) provides a methodology to

 help utilities to improve performance and provide high-quality services in a highly efficient manner while also strengthening resilience and
 innovation, and being inclusive and market- and customer-oriented.
 27 The National Adaptation Program of Action: https://unfccc.int/resource/docs/napa/ban01.pdf.
 28 Within the city, a number of tidal canals serve as the main drainage channels. The water flow of 23 city canals merges into the Karnaphuli River

 and three canals converge into the Halda River, while the flow of the remaining 14 canals goes into the Bay of Bengal.
 29 There is no flood control embankment.
 30 https://tbsnews.net/environment/climate-change/sea-threatens-devour-chattogram-140236.



Jul 26, 2021                                                                                                                               Page 9 of 18
         The World Bank
         Chattogram Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation Project - II (P176429)


  Relationship to CPF

 17.      The proposed project is fully aligned with the World Bank Group’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for
 Bangladesh 2016–20, discussed by the World Bank’s Board of Directors on April 5, 2016.31 The CPF (103723-BD)
 prioritizes three areas: growth and competitiveness, social inclusion, and climate and environmental management. The
 project contributes to all three focus areas:

          (i).   The proposed project enhances growth and competitiveness by improving access to water supply for
                 businesses and people in Chattogram. Since it takes a significant amount of funding and time to develop
                 new water supply projects, investment in network repair and rehabilitation is regarded as a practical option
                 to improve access to safe drinking water. In addition, by reducing water losses, the utility’s operational and
                 financial performance will be strengthened.

         (ii).   The proposed project contributes to social inclusion by extending access to piped water to more LICs in
                 Chattogram. The project will cover the majority of households in the LICs in the city and bring considerable
                 benefits to residents, especially women and girls in these communities.

        (iii).   The proposed project contributes to climate change mitigation through water and energy savings and
                 climate change adaptation by providing more reliable and sustainable water resources and building more
                 resilient water supply utilities against the future climate change risks and vulnerabilities. Water treatment
                 and distribution are highly energy-intensive processes (pumps, motors, and other equipment operate 24
                 hours a day, seven days a week). The water loss caused by a poorly maintained distribution network not
                 only represents a waste of water resources but also of the energy. The proposed project will finance
                 replacement and rehabilitation of water pipes, leak detection equipment, development and installation of
                 Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) systems, water meters, and capacity building toward
                 minimizing loss, improving energy, and operations efficiency. The proposed project also supports operations
                 optimization, asset management capacity building, and the preparedness and response plans for disasters
                 and disease outbreak. These activities will ultimately reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and
                 contribute to green, inclusive, and resilient investments.

        (iv).    The proposed project helps improve environmental management. The project will support the preparation
                 of investment plans for future improvements in sanitation services and strengthen capacity of the relevant
                 agencies to better manage drainage and reduce incidents of waterlogging. Lessons from sanitation projects
                 in different countries indicate that setting up adequate institutional capacity to carry out the sanitation
                 services delivery is one of the key elements for success. Building on World Bank’s global experience,
                 investments in institutional strengthening for managing sanitation infrastructure will contribute to
                 improved public health and environment and pave the way for future investments in sanitation.

  Proposed Development Objective(s)

 18.     The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) are to i) increase access to safe water supply and build capacity to
 execute sanitation plans; ii) strengthen the operational performance of CWASA; and iii) build resilience and preparedness
 to disasters.



 31 The CPF for FY16–20 has been extended to FY21.



Jul 26, 2021                                                                                                        Page 10 of 18
         The World Bank
         Chattogram Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation Project - II (P176429)


  Key Results (From PCN)

 19.       The proposed PDO results indicators for the project are:

           •   People provided with access to improved water sources (number)
           •   People provided with access to improved water sources–Female (percentage)
           •   Operating cost coverage ratio (percentage)
           •   Preparedness and response plan to address natural disasters and disease outbreaks prepared and approved
               (yes/no)
           •   Sanitation services circle established and staffed (yes/no)

  Concept Description

 20.     The proposed project will support the CWASA in implementing rehabilitation and strengthening of the water
 supply network under sector 1 - 5 of CWASA’s service area (Figure 2, the five sectors cover over 122 sq. km or 78 percent
 of the service area) to ensure equitable distribution and reduced leakage. The five sectors (sector 1 - 5, Figure 2) under
 the service area will be further subdivided into about 46 DMAs.32 The remainder of the KSA33 is being developed with JICA
 assistance under the Karnaphuli Water Supply Project, Phase II. The DMAs will also cover about 310 large to small LICs
 across the five sectors with CWASA mains supplying to LICs’ localized networks under the proposed project. The other 122
 informal settlements will be serviced under the KSA. By the end of the project period, the five water distribution sectors
 (sector 1 - 5, Figure 2) of Chattogram city are expected to be covered using a combination of different diameters of
 distribution pipelines (Figure 2), with robust distribution systems and leakage control.




 32
    A DMA is defined as a discrete area of a water distribution network created by closing boundary valves ensuring flexibility to changing demands.
 Water flowing into and out of the DMA is metered and flows are periodically analyzed to monitor the level of leakage.
 33
    The DMAs for KSA being developed under the Karnaphuli Water Supply Project, Phase II, are supported by JICA.

Jul 26, 2021                                                                                                                            Page 11 of 18
         The World Bank
         Chattogram Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation Project - II (P176429)


                 Figure 2. Division of the network of Chattogram into sectors and DMA boundaries of the CWASA




                         Source: DMA Design Report, CWSISP (2018)
                         Note: Distribution system network has been divided into five hydraulic sectors in addition to
                         Karnaphuli Service Area (KSA). In total, 46 DMAs form these five sectors.

 21.    The project will help the CWASA achieve the next set of critical milestones in becoming a UoF. The project will
 support the GoB in achieving SDG 6 and advancing the utility reforms adopted under the Water Utility Maturity
 Framework, using the UoF Program. The project will build on the achievements of the CWSISP that closed on December

Jul 26, 2021                                                                                                             Page 12 of 18
           The World Bank
           Chattogram Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation Project - II (P176429)


 31, 2020 by financing investment in infrastructure and by supporting institutional strengthening.34 The institutional
 support will also include assistance to set up a new organizational structure and operational systems to enable the utility
 to manage investments in sanitation infrastructure and to operate and maintain sanitation services. Capacity building will
 be an integral part of the Bank’s support and will include strengthening of technical, commercial, and financial
 management aspects.

 22.      The project will leverage the momentum created by earlier World Bank investments, including institutional set-
 ups and relationships, and build the foundation for developing future sanitation investment projects. The proposed
 project will include: (a) expansion of the water distribution system, following the DMA concept to allow for flexible and
 equitable supply to all potential customers within the utility’s service area, and especially promote water services to LICs;
 (b) technical assistance to reorganize the utility’s management structure and to strengthen its operational and financial
 performance, with financial improvement plan including debt restructuring and tariff roadmap, aimed in part at attracting
 private sector participation in O&M management, services delivery, and financing; and (c) support for investment planning
 for the sanitation service chain, including network and non-network sanitation systems.

 23.      The project will support the sequencing and prioritization of sanitation interventions with detailed feasibility
 assessments consistently with the sanitation master plan. It will support the CWASA in developing investment plans
 along with design reports for a sequence of phased interventions with a focus on addressing sanitation challenges in the
 city. The Sanitation Master Plan divides Chattogram into six catchments. The first phase, being financed by the GoB,
 includes a wastewater treatment plant in Halishahar catchment, along with interceptors, collection network, and
 investments for transportation and treatment of fecal sludge for areas where sewerage cannot be extended. The sewage
 treatment plant being developed for Halishahar catchment will have the option to treat sewage from Patenga and North
 Kattoli catchments by augmenting the treatment capacity. The master plan’s preliminary investment plan also prioritizes
 improving sanitation services in the Kalurghat and Fatehabad catchments and ranks the sewerage investments according
 to projected population and difficulties in land acquisition and sewerage construction. The detailed engineering exercise
 will appraise the feasibility of priority interventions, catchment by catchment, using a set of defined criteria and will
 produce investment proposals for series of phases. By 2030, a selection of two or three catchments of Chattogram is
 expected to be substantially covered using a combination of sewers and FSM systems (see Figure 3).




 34
      CWSISP (P103999), IDA US$170 million.

Jul 26, 2021                                                                                                       Page 13 of 18
         The World Bank
         Chattogram Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation Project - II (P176429)


               Figure 3. Chattogram Metropolitan Area Sanitation and Drainage Improvement Strategy and Master Plan




                     Source: Sanitation and Drainage Improvement Strategy and Master Plan for Chittagong, CWSISP (2017).

 24.      The proposed project will adopt an integrated approach that supports the key agencies in Chattogram involved
 with water, sanitation, and drainage services. It will help to strengthen the institutional capacities of the CWASA and the
 CCC. It will also support the development of mechanisms to enhance the coordination between the CWASA, the CCC, and
 the CDA on drainage aspects.

 25.      Overall financial sustainability of the CWASA must be improved to progress its autonomy as an independent
 utility company. It is unlikely that the CWASA can fully service the current long-term debt by collected fees in the near
 future due to its high level of debt repayment obligations and its low level of equity. Therefore, debt restructuring is a
 priority, potentially through debt-to-equity conversion. Such debt restructuring will need to be done together with the
 tariff revision and strengthening of operational and financial performance. To plan a tariff revision roadmap, a study will
 be conducted during project preparation to investigate fees from tariffs against cost recovery levels; level of tariffs against
 consumers’ affordability and willingness to pay for services; and tariffs against consumers’ own costs of imperfect service


Jul 26, 2021                                                                                                               Page 14 of 18
         The World Bank
         Chattogram Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation Project - II (P176429)


 delivery. From a commercial point of view, NRW reduction and management will need to be explored that can lead to the
 CWASA’s revenue improvements as well as contribute to a more sustainable and resilient transformation. The World
 Bank’s UoF Program will provide a framework for the transformation toward a higher degree of financial and operational
 sustainability.

 26.      The project will support the CWASA in developing resilience plans aimed at reducing risks, promoting readiness,
 and mitigating the impacts of natural disasters and disease outbreaks. The disaster preparedness and response plans
 will involve, among others: (a) assessment of hazard risks and vulnerability assessments for the CWASA’s existing assets
 and services; (b) incorporation of resilience in planning and design of water supply assets and systems (including
 treatment, conveyance, and distribution); (c) development of O&M and service provision guidelines for emergency
 response during disasters; (d) vulnerability assessment and resilience planning for drainage and sanitation assets and
 systems; and (e) development of protocols for public health outbreaks like COVID-19, in line with the GoB’s WASH Strategy
 and the WBG’s COVID-19 Crisis Response Framework. The assessment of utility hazard risks will be for both adaptation
 and mitigation aspects (for example, water and wastewater treatment). The plan will include measures including
 establishing financial reserves for short-term expenses and raising community awareness of hygiene behavior to limit the
 spread of disease. Improved coordination among the key responsible agencies (for example, CCC, CWASA, and Bangladesh
 Water Development Board [BWDB]) will be critical for the above. The CWASA’s Build Back Better (BBB) plans shall be
 developed following the IDA principles of green, resilient, and inclusive development (GRID).

 Project Components

 27.       The project comprises five components. These are:

           •   Component 1: Water Supply Improvement (estimated US$345 million of which IDA US$250 million). This
               component will support the rehabilitation and expansion of distribution networks following the DMA concept
               and the expansion of water supply services to LICs. This component will also support the installation and
               maintenance of WASH facilities (such as handwashing stands, drainage systems, and so on) in key public areas
               to enhance hygiene management.35 This activity contributes to the implementation of the recommendations
               of the GoB’s COVID-19 WASH Strategy Paper.

           ▪   Component 2: Investment Planning and Project Preparation for Sanitation (estimated US$10 million of which
               IDA US$10 million). This component will support technical assistance for the CWASA to prepare investment
               proposals for sanitation facilities in one or more catchments of Greater Chattogram, following the
               recommendations of the Sanitation Master Plan. It will also support the establishment and capacity building
               of new organizational unit/s in the CWASA for managing capital investments and for O&M of sanitation
               services.

           ▪   Component 3: Institutional Capacity Development (estimated US$30 million of which IDA US$30 million). This
               component will support activities to: (a) strengthen the utility’s operational efficiency and financial
               sustainability, including: (i) install and provide training on the SCADA system; (ii) strengthen citizen
               engagement; (iii) strengthen MIS; (iv) implement a tariff roadmap for sustainability; (v) improve commercial
               management; and (vi) assess feasibility of public-private partnerships and (b) finance capacity building and
               plans for enhanced resilience to disasters and disease outbreaks. These activities will build upon the utility


 35
   Appropriate management models will be developed for ensuring the sustainability of handwashing facilities and their regular supply of soap,
 sufficient running water with functioning taps, and adequate drainage installed in public places.

Jul 26, 2021                                                                                                                          Page 15 of 18
         The World Bank
         Chattogram Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation Project - II (P176429)


               modernization initiatives carried out under the CWSISP. For critical institutional reforms, mechanisms to
               incentivize achievement of results will be explored during design.

           •   Component 4: Project Implementation and Management Support (estimated US$12 million of which IDA
               US$ 10 million). This component will finance general operating costs of the CWASA to coordinate and execute
               the project. It will support: (a) the recruitment of multi-disciplinary project management consultants
               (including specialists in procurement, financial management, environmental and social safeguards, and
               monitoring and evaluation) to support the Project Management Unit (PMU); (b) supervision services to
               oversee construction of major works; and (c) financial audits.

           •   Component 5: Contingent Emergency Response (estimated US$0 million of which IDA US$0 million). A
               provisional zero amount component is included, which will allow for rapid allocation of loan proceeds from
               other project components during an emergency, under streamlined procurement and disbursement
               procedures. The contingent component may also serve as a conduit for additional funds to be channelled to
               the project in such circumstances. The conditions for accessing funds under this component will be described
               in the Project Implementation Manual.

 Table 1. Project costs and IDA financing by component (in US$, millions)
                    Project components                             Project cost with              IDA financing           Counterpart funding
                                                                    contingencies
  1. Water Supply Improvement                                               345                           250                         95
  2. Investment Planning and Project Preparation for                         10                            10                          0
  Sanitation
  3. Institutional Capacity Development                                        30                          30                           0
  4. Project Implementation and Management                                     12                          10                           2
  Support
  5. Contingent emergency response                                             0                            0                          0
  Total                                                                      397                          300                         97

 28.     The project is expected to comply with the regional criteria for readiness for implementation by the appraisal
 stage. The preliminary design of the distribution network of non-KSA service area (80 percent of 155 sq. km of the CWASA
 service area)36 and the Sanitation Master Plan for Greater Chattogram have provided vital knowledge of the existing
 system and helped in articulating the proposed project architecture. The CWASA has developed a conceptual design of
 the DMA under the CWSISP, which needs to be validated in the field and necessary adjustments need to be made based
 on ground characteristics. A project preparation advance, which the GoB has requested, will be used to prepare (a) key
 documents for water supply investments and (b) a terms of reference for technical assistance for the preparation of
 sanitation projects. The following activities are expected to be completed by appraisal:

           •   Technical feasibility studies and bidding documents ready for DMAs and associated water distribution works.
           •   Water and sewerage tariff roadmap.
           •   CWASA’s performance assessment capturing and analyzing information about the utility’s financial situation,
               current operating performance, the level of access and quality of service provided, and the maturity of its
               management systems.

 36
    Water supply infrastructure is being developed in the KSA with financial support from JICA and that in the non-KSA area is proposed to be with
 financial support from the World Bank.

Jul 26, 2021                                                                                                                            Page 16 of 18
           The World Bank
           Chattogram Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation Project - II (P176429)


            •   Baseline studies to inform the development of a strategy and action plan for a preparedness and response
                plan for COVID-19 and other disease outbreaks for the CWASA and other key institutions in the Greater
                Chattogram area.


     Legal Operational Policies                                                        Triggered?
     Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                       No
     Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60                                                No

     Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
     .

 Based on the existing scope of works, the project is expected to extend moderate and quite receptible environmental risks
 and impacts such as noise and dust pollution, traffic congestion, as well as concerns for health and safety of workers and
 local communities. In addition, construction activities are also expected to induce economic displacement involving errand
 traders and vendors and restrict access to homes and businesses. Prior to appraisal, an ESMF will be drafted to offer
 guidance for environmental and social risks screening and management. Based on experiences of phase I of the project,
 CWASA will consult with the local population and ensure that construction works are planned and phased in to avoid or
 minimize disruption and displacement of income generating activities. Where displacements are unavoidable, CWASA will
 plan and implement a resettlement plan with adequate compensatory measures before works commence.

 .
     CONTACT POINT


     World Bank
     Arif Ahamed, Yukiko Inoue
     Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist


     Borrower/Client/Recipient
     People's Republic of Bangladesh




     Implementing Agencies

     Chattogram Water Supply and Sewerage Authority
     AKM Fazlullah
     Managing Director
     mdcwasa@gmail.com




Jul 26, 2021                                                                                                   Page 17 of 18
         The World Bank
         Chattogram Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation Project - II (P176429)


  FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
  The World Bank
  1818 H Street, NW
  Washington, D.C. 20433
  Telephone: (202) 473-1000
  Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects



   APPROVAL

   Task Team Leader(s):                    Arif Ahamed, Yukiko Inoue

  Approved By
  APPROVALTBL
   Practice Manager/Manager:

   Country Director:                       Dandan Chen                           13-Aug-2021




Jul 26, 2021                                                                                   Page 18 of 18
