Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Project (P176619)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                            Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                     (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 05/16/2023 | Report No: ESRSA02683




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               May 16, 2023                                                                         Page 1 of 17
                               The World Bank
                               Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Project (P176619)



                     BASIC INFORMATION

                     A. Basic Project Data

                     Country                       Region                           Project ID                     Parent Project ID (if any)

                     Jordan                        MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH            P176619
                                                   AFRICA

                     Project Name                  Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Project

                     Practice Area (Lead)          Financing Instrument             Estimated Appraisal Date       Estimated Board Date

                     Water                         Investment Project               3/31/2023                      6/15/2023
                                                   Financing

                     Borrower(s)                   Implementing Agency(ies)

                     Ministry of Planning and   Ministry of Water and
                     International Cooperation, Irrigation, Hashemite
                     Hashemite Kingdom of       Kingdom of Jordan
                     Jordan




Public Disclosure
                     Proposed Development Objective
                     The project development objective (PDO) is to improve the efficiency of water services in Jordan


                     Financing (in USD Million)                                                                                          Amount

                      Total Project Cost                                                                                                     300.00



                     B. Is the project being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project [including overview of Country, Sectoral & Institutional Contexts and
                     Relationship to CPF]
                     The proposed Series of Projects (SOP) provides the investment support and long-term approach needed for full
                     implementation of the Water Sector Financial Sector Roadmap and to improve the efficiency and resilience of the
                     water sector. Through the SOP, multiple projects financed by the World Bank contribute to the Government’s
                     objectives to improve efficiency, service delivery and financial sustainability of the water sector. The SOP is expected
                     to be implemented between 2023 and 2032, through three proposed investments beginning with the proposed
                     project, followed by two further investments in sector efficiency. The program is aligned with, and will contribute to,

                    May 16, 2023                                                                                                        Page 2 of 17
                              The World Bank
                              Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Project (P176619)



                     the Economic Modernization Vision 2033, Government’s National Strategy for the Water Sector, and Non-Revenue
                     Water Reduction and Energy Efficiency Strategies.

                     The first project in the series, (SOP1) will focus on improving water sector efficiency. Proposed interventions are
                     grouped around five components:

                     •        Component 1. Sustainable non-revenue water reduction. Aims to improve efficiency by reducing waste of the
                     available water resources (financial and commercial) and overall improvement in operational systems in the water
                     sector, in support of adaptation to climate change impacts on water availability. This component would strengthen
                     NRW systems in the country to improve planning, operationalization, and help sustain NRW reduction over time.

                     •       Component 2. Increased energy efficiency and reduced energy supply costs. The water sector in Jordan
                     requires significant energy for operation - energy costs represent over half of the water utilities' operational costs -
                     due largely to pumping costs associated with the extraction of deep groundwater, and conveyance of water from the
                     source to population centers. This component would improve the efficiency of the water sector by reducing energy
                     used, costs, and GHG emissions.

                     •        Component 3. Water security measures to underpin efficiency measures. Given Jordan’s extreme water
                     scarcity and frequent and intense droughts, improved water allocation will support different mechanisms, to enable
                     efficient and fair management of water shortages. This component will strengthen drought management with aims
                     to apply a comprehensive drought risk management approach to increase capacity to monitor, forecast, plan for, and




Public Disclosure
                     respond to droughts in the water sector. This component will also support preparation of studies for rehabilitation
                     water storage systems.

                     •     Component 4. Project management and implementation support. This Component would focus on project
                     management required to implement this Project and to strengthen systems for the planned SOP.

                     •        Component 5. Contingency Emergency Response. A Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC)
                     with zero allocation would be created and made implementation-ready to allow the GoJ to respond quickly in case of
                     an eligible emergency. The mechanism will be defined in a specific CERC Operational Manual that will clearly outline
                     the triggers, eligible expenditures, procurement thresholds, and procedures for using part of IBRD resources of the
                     project to respond quickly in the event of an eligible emergency.




                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1. Detailed project location(s) and salient physical characteristics relevant to the E&S assessment [geographic,
                     environmental, social]




                    May 16, 2023                                                                                                      Page 3 of 17
                              The World Bank
                              Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Project (P176619)



                     Jordan has a total area of 89,342 km2, of which 88,802 km2 is land and 540 km2 is water, including a 27 km long
                     coastline. With a population of 10 million, it is the eleventh-most populous Arab country. The topography of the
                     country is highly contrasting terrain from more than 400 meter below sea level at the Dead Sea to mountainous
                     areas. Jordan is one of the most water-scarce countries in the world, which poses severe constraints on the country’s
                     economic and human development. Water resources are concentrated in the northern highlands and the Jordan
                     River Valley, with over 92% of the land in Jordan classified as semi-arid or arid, and receiving less than 200 mm of
                     rainfall per year. Across the Middle East and in Jordan, many of the effects of climate change on the water cycle are
                     already observed and are expected to worsen in the future. The detrimental effects of climate change will reduce the
                     overall water availability by 30 percent by 2040. The National Water Strategy 2016-2025 estimated that water
                     demand would exceed available water resources by more than 26 percent by 2025.

                     Jordan has seen its population grow through a combination of organic growth and refugee influxes from 2 million in
                     1975 to around 11 million in 2021– reducing the amount of water available per person. While more than 99 percent
                     of people have access to improved water sources, around half receive water for less than 24 hours per week and the
                     other half are receiving water for 24-48 hours per week due to limited water availability. During periods of water
                     scarcity, such as the drought in 2021 and 2022, water rationing reduces service provision to as low as 70 L/person/day
                     (compare with 50-100 L/person/day required to the basic minimum daily human requirement and typical high-
                     income country water provision standards of 350-400 L/person/day). 63% of the urban and rural areas are
                     connected to the sewerage system (2014), and the rest of the population have access to improved sanitation use on-
                     site sanitation solutions such as septic tanks (Jordan National Water Strategy 2016-2025). Surface and groundwater
                     resources are used for municipal supply and agriculture, and a system of water conveyance infrastructure is used to




Public Disclosure
                     transport water from rivers and perennial streams (Jordan River, primarily) and aquifers (multiple across the country,
                     including Disi aquifer) to the point of use. Jordan manages its water resources using dams and open storage areas
                     that are considered manmade habitats that support waterfowls and migratory birds that are identified as Important
                     Bird Areas. Women comprise only 11 percent of water sector employees, and only 17.5 percent of leadership and
                     supervision positions within these entities, where major barriers to gender equity in employment in the sector are
                     related to barriers to retention and advancement of women (Reference: The Status of Women in Jordan’s Water
                     Sector (2018). USAID Water Management Initiative).

                     This project (SOP-1) is aimed at improving efficiency, service delivery, and financial sustainability of the water sector.
                     It is the first project in a proposed Series of Projects (SOP) that provides the investment support and long-term
                     approach needed to support the improvement in the quality and equity of service delivery, to the Jordanian
                     population and the refugees, including through private sector solutions. Project activities will take place throughout
                     the Kingdom of Jordan. The project will not entail new water resources, wastewater treatment or treated wastewater
                     reuse projects.

                     The Project’s interventions to reduce technical and commercial losses (non-revenue water) under Component 1 will
                     be focused within urban environments. Energy efficiency initiatives under Component 2 will entail replacing pumps at
                     existing pumping stations that are located throughout Jordan. Reductions in GHG emissions of 46,440 tCO2 equiv. per
                     year, or 775,548 tCO2 equiv. over the economic life of the Project is estimated.

                     D. 2. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity
                     The project implementation arrangements are aligned with the current institutional architecture of the water sector
                     in Jordan led by the Ministry of Water and Irrigation (MWI), supported by the Water Authority of Jordan (WAJ)
                    May 16, 2023                                                                                                       Page 4 of 17
                              The World Bank
                              Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Project (P176619)



                     Project Management Department (PMD), the Jordan Valley authority and the municipal water supply services
                     providers: (i) Miyahuna Water Company (MWC) for the central areas, including greater Amman; (ii) Yarmouk Water
                     Company (YWC) in the north; and (iii) Aqaba Water Company (AWC) in the south. The project will be overseen by a
                     steering committee that will provide strategic guidance during the implementation.

                     The existing Environmental and Social Standards Directorate (ESSD) within (ESSD) WAJ will support the PMD and is
                     assigned responsibility for the overall management of environmental and social risks and impacts (including health
                     and safety) for the project, including oversight of activities undertaken by all implementing agencies. Currently the
                     ESSD consists of two staff: Head of ESSD, and the Head of the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)
                     department. It is proposed that the ESSD will be supplemented by additional staffing dedicated to project
                     implementation support to be recruited under the project, namely: one Environmental Specialist (ES), and one Social
                     Specialist (SS), with Terms of Reference (ToR) acceptable to the Bank.

                     To support the water companies (MWC, AWC, and YWC) implementing Components 1 and 2, it is proposed that each
                     company will establish a PIU that will be responsible for project implementation of their respective activities,
                     including compliance with the environmental and social requirements. The proposed project design envisions that
                     each water company PIU will assign or recruit one EHS Focal Point, and one Social/Community Outreach Focal Point
                     with relevant qualifications such as knowledge of the national environmental laws and regulations, and experience
                     managing environmental, health and safety and social risks, with ToR acceptable to the Bank.

                     It is proposed that additional environmental and social expertise will be provided to the project through Technical




Public Disclosure
                     Assistance aiming to strengthen the implementing agencies' capacity, and to respond to specific needs during
                     implementation. Technical assistance under the project will also support the IA’s in preparing the E&S documents and
                     incorporation of E&S requirements into bidding documents consistent with ESF.

                     In addition to the institutional resource enhancements described above, the project is proposed to provide technical
                     assistance for training and capacity building for the IA’s related teams in areas such as environmental and social
                     management, waste management, hazardous waste management, labor management, stakeholder engagement and
                     information dissemination, and SEA/SH, where relevant. The Bank team will continue to provide implementation
                     support including coaching, dialogue, and holding workshops and training events on implementing the Environmental
                     and Social Framework (ESF) and E&S instruments throughout the project cycle.


                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                     Substantial


                     Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                  Substantial
                     The project is expected to have positive impacts including improving the efficiency of water services and water
                     availability (Component 1), improving resource use efficiency by improving energy efficiency and reducing GHG
                     emissions in the water systems (Component 2), strengthening the institutional capacity to enable efficient
                     management during water shortage (Component 3), and enhancing the sector E&S sustainability (Component 4). The
                     Project components leverage PBCs are expected to be a low environmental risk. The project interventions/sub-

                    May 16, 2023                                                                                                   Page 5 of 17
                              The World Bank
                              Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Project (P176619)



                     projects exact geographical location and the scale will be defined during project implementation using a framework
                     approach and will be agreed on as part of an annual work planning process according to selection criteria. The
                     environmental risks related to the construction and rehabilitation of the bulk, transmission, and distribution water
                     include: air pollution due to excavation, exhaust emission during transport of material, noise pollution related to use
                     of construction machinery and vehicles, occupational health and safety risk to construction workers related to
                     construction hazards identified under ESS2, generation and improper management of non-hazardous waste
                     (construction & demolition, and domestic), and hazardous waste (replaced pumps, mechanical equipment, damaged
                     PV cells, leakage of oils and lubricants from vehicles). In addition, risk on environment and workers’ health related to
                     potential chance uncovering of old asbestos pipes during water network rehabilitation, although the project does not
                     foresee rehabilitation or replacement of functional Asbestos Contained Material given that WAJ plans to replace the
                     remaining functional asbestos pipes though support from other development partners. the rehabilitation of water
                     networks is not expected to have significant increase in the wastewater production (assessed under ESS3). The
                     rehabilitation of groundwater wells under components 1 and 2 is associated with occupational health and safety risks,
                     in addition to use of chemicals, generation of hazardous waste risk during the rehabilitation, cleaning and the
                     disinfection activities, air and noise pollution. Low potential increase in water extraction affecting the aquifers' safe
                     yield during operation is assessed under ESS3. The potential risk of impacting biodiversity conservation is expected to
                     be low during rehabilitation/restructuring of the water networks (components 1 and 2) given that most of these
                     works will be carried out in urban areas that do not have high biodiversity conservation value and no ecosystem
                     services are likely to be impacted. Component 3 is proposed to support feasibility and technical assessment studies to
                     advance dam rehabilitation, and where the risk of impacting on biodiversity conservation according to the mitigation
                     hierarchy will be assessed under the relevant E&S assessment studies financed under component 3. The project will




Public Disclosure
                     not finance wastewater treatment or reuse activities. However, the drought and water allocation contingency
                     planning under component 3 is expected to be associated with the reuse of treated wastewater as an alternative
                     irrigation water source, currently practiced in the lower Jordan Valley. If treatment is not conducted properly, there is
                     a potential risk of pollution and health risk for farmers using the treated wastewater for irrigation purposes is
                     assessed under ESS3. No significant impact on cultural heritage resources is expected, as most of civil works
                     envisioned will be implemented within the right of way. The environmental risk is rated Substantial based on the
                     above identified risks and the experience of implementing agencies of delivering similar projects according to
                     environmental and social requirements of international donors and financial institutions, where a strong
                     environmental and social organizational structure as capacity building on the ESF is needed across six implementing
                     agencies.
                     Social Risk Rating                                                                                            Moderate
                     The Project has a variety of social risks and is rated Moderate. The main social risks are related to small to moderate-
                     scale civil works proposed under Component 1, across the large geographic scope of the Project, including
                     relaying/rehabilitating existing distribution pipes and household water connections, as well as for enhancing in-
                     network water storage (e.g., above ground, and/or elevated in-network storage-tanks). Component 2 will also include
                     works to replace water pumps within existing water pumping stations. Temporary and limited community health and
                     safety risks associated with these types of small to moderate works could include road safety and traffic, noise, and
                     dust as well as worker health and safety and labor and working conditions. These proposed physical works also have
                     the potential to cause socio-economic and hygiene impacts from water service disruption, especially if the works are
                     not properly coordinated amongst municipalities and utilities. In addition, rehabilitating household connections have
                     the potential to create low/moderate social tensions or exclusions if areas or neighborhoods are not selected in an
                     equitable and transparent manner. Works will take place within existing Rights of Way and sites. However small

                    May 16, 2023                                                                                                      Page 6 of 17
                              The World Bank
                              Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Project (P176619)



                     parcels of land may be required under Components 1 and 2, to be determined when detailed designs are developed
                     during implementation. Component 3 proposes to support technical assistance for drought management and water
                     allocation and studies for rehabilitaiton of water storage systems. These studies have potential implications for future
                     social risks such as risks related to distributional equity of water allocations, and safety risks for affected communities
                     related to rehabilitation of water storage. The risk rating considers the experience of implementing agencies of
                     delivering similar projects according to environmental and social requirements of international donors and financial
                     institutions, although a strong environmental and social organizational structure across six implementing agencies, as
                     well as capacity building on the ESF, is needed.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESSs) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1. General Assessment

                     ESS1 Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     Overview of the relevance of the Standard for the Project:
                     This standard is relevant to SOP-1 owing to the range of environmental and social risks and impacts across the various
                     components, and throughout the project life cycle. The project is also expected to have positive impacts including
                     improving the efficiency of water services (Component 1), improving water availability, sustainable management and
                     improvement of efficiency of the water sector by reducing GHG emissions (Component 2), strengthening the
                     institutional capacity to enable efficient management of water shortage (Component 3), and enhancing the sector
                     E&S sustainability (Component 4).



Public Disclosure
                     The main environmental and social risks are related to small to moderate-scale civil works that are part of non-
                     revenue water (NRW) interventions proposed under Component 1 and improving energy efficiency proposed under
                     Component 2 across several governates. Identification of sub-projects will follow a framework approach, where
                     categories of investment and criteria for investment support will be selected and agreed as part of an annual work
                     planning process, after appraisal and after the Capital Investment Master Plan is finalized.
                     The Project components leverage Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs) for activities that require a focus on
                     institutional reform and strengthening to ensure water efficiency aspects at national level, all selected PBCs are
                     expected to enhance the water system sustainability and are expected to be a low environmental risk.

                     NRW interventions proposed under Component 1 include relaying/rehabilitating existing water distribution pipes
                     (bulk to tertiary systems) and household water connections, enhancing in-network water storage (e.g., above-ground
                     and elevated in-network storage-tanks), rehabilitating groundwater wells, and installing meters and monitoring
                     systems. Activities will be predominantly within existing right-of-way and existing sites. However, small parcels of
                     land may be required on a temporary or permanent basis, depending on the specific rehabilitation needs. Temporary
                     community health and safety risks associated with these types of small to moderate works include road safety and
                     traffic, noise, and dust. Potential environmental risks include air pollution, noise, workers’ health and safety, risk of
                     water contamination and impact on water quality related to improper management of waste generated, and
                     hazardous waste generation (potentially including old asbestos pipes) Rehabilitation of groundwater wells is
                     associated with occupational health and safety, generation of hazardous waste risk during rehabilitation, cleaning,
                     disinfection activities, and operation of the well. Interventions under Component 1 also have the potential to cause
                     socio-economic and hygiene impacts from water service disruption, especially if the works are not properly

                    May 16, 2023                                                                                                        Page 7 of 17
                              The World Bank
                              Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Project (P176619)



                     coordinated amongst municipalities and utilities. In addition, moderate social tensions or exclusions may arise, if
                     areas or neighborhoods are not selected in an equitable and transparent manner Component 1 of the project will
                     also contribute to preparation of a Performance Based-Contract, jointly developed with IFC and GOJ to reduce
                     commercial and technical water losses.

                     Component 2 proposes works to replace water pumps within existing water pumping stations within bulk water
                     networks and no land acquisition is envisioned. Environmental risks for this component are of moderate scale
                     additional types of hazardous waste may be anticipated (i.e. replaced pumps, damaged PV cells) and addressed under
                     ESS3. The project proposes to finance the preparation of the environmental and social assessments for Component 1
                     and 2 and the ESCP specifies that these assessments are to be prepared in accordance with ESF requirements.
                     No significant impact on cultural heritage resources is expected, as most of civil works envisioned under Components
                     1 and 2 will be implemented within the right of way in urban and rural areas, however, the potential Chance Find of
                     cultural heritage resources during excavation activities especially within areas of cultural heritage value.

                     There are no civil works proposed under Component 3 and 4. Component 3’s proposed design consists of technical
                     assistance aimed at improving information and governance systems for drought management and water allocations,
                     and assessments of rehabilitation needs for water storage systems and dams. SOP-1 may finance the detailed
                     assessments and prepare the necessary designs and tender documents, as well as environmental and social impact
                     assessments, for rehabilitation of existing water storage reservoirs and dams, that could be potentially supported
                     under SOP-2. Dam safety considerations are treated under ESS4, and biodiversity conservation are addressed under
                     ESS6, terms of reference of those studies shall be in accordance with the ESS’s and agreed with the Bank.




Public Disclosure
                     The ESCP incorporates the required measures for the CERC component 5, where the client shall adopt any
                     environmental and social (E&S) instruments which may be required for activities under CERC component of the
                     Project once activated, in accordance with a CERC Manual that should include a description of the ESHS assessment
                     and management arrangements including, if applicable, ESMF Addendum that will be included or referred to in the
                     CERC Manual for the implementation of CERC component, in accordance with the ESF.

                     To manage the environmental and social impacts for a series of interventions and sub-projects with designs and
                     locations that are yet to be identified and agreed, a draft Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF),
                     Resettlement Framework (RF), Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), and Labor Management Procedures (LMP) have
                     been prepared, covering all project components. These draft instruments have been prepared and will be cleared,
                     disclosed and consulted prior to project appraisal. An Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) has also
                     been prepared and will be cleared by the Bank, and publicly disclosed by project appraisal. The ESCP will be included
                     in the legal agreement between the Bank and the Government of Jordan.

                     The ESMF sets out the principles, rules, guidelines and procedures to assess environmental and social risks and
                     impacts for all project components and the measures and plans to mitigate adverse impacts in accordance with the
                     ES Guidelines and EHS Guidelines for Water and Sanitation. It also sets out the institutional arrangements, roles, and
                     responsibilities, monitoring and reporting, capacity building needs and budgeting. The ESMF also sets out the
                     screening methodology address the relevant ESS’s, particularly ESS1, ESS2, ESS3, ESS4, ESS5, ESS6, ESS8 and an
                     exclusion list to be applied to the annual workplan of activities and guides the process to prepare the appropriate
                     mitigation measures and instruments for the various sub-projects (e.g. ESIA/ESMP, ESMP, and contractual E&S


                    May 16, 2023                                                                                                    Page 8 of 17
                              The World Bank
                              Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Project (P176619)



                     clauses for bidding documents, RP), as well as the review and clearance process for such instruments. Templates
                     and Terms of Reference for these instruments are also included. The ESMF includes measures for non-hazardous
                     waste management, and plan for managing hazardous waste (asbestos/ACM, e-waste, etc.) in accordance with the
                     World Bank’s General EHS Guidelines and EHS Guidelines for Water and Sanitation.

                     The ESCP requires all sub-project E&S risk management instruments to be consulted, cleared and disclosed prior to
                     implementation and incorporated into bidding packages. All technical studies, including feasibility studies,
                     assessment studies, consultancies and environmental and social impact assessments, shall be carried out in
                     accordance with terms of reference consistent with the ESSs and acceptable to the World Bank, thereafter the
                     outputs of such activities comply with the terms of reference as set out in the ESCP.



                     ESS10 Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure
                     A draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) for the project has been developed and will be disclosed and consulted
                     before appraisal. The SEP outlines (i) identifies the project stakeholders (ii) summarizes stakeholder engagement
                     activities during project preparation and how issues raised were taken into account (iii) describes how and when
                     stakeholders will be engaged throughout the project cycle ; (iv) information disclosure that will take place
                     throughout the project cycle; (d) how feedback will be solicited, recorded and monitored over the project; (iv) who
                     will be charged/responsible for this engagement; (v) timeline and budgeting mechanisms.
                     The project’s primary affected parties are mainly the project’s direct and indirect beneficiaries which comprise i)




Public Disclosure
                     residents of the service areas who will benefit directly from efficiency improvements to the water supply and the
                     reduction in water losses, and improvements in system efficiency, through improved water reliability and availability;
                     (ii) residents of the areas managed by the three water companies in Jordan will indirectly benefit from energy
                     efficiency and reduced supply costs (iii) farmers and agribusinesses will directly benefit from improved water
                     allocation planning and capacity to prepare and respond to varying water availability and drought risks reducing
                     potential drought impacts (iv) citizens and farmers through active engagement and consultation for development of
                     drought vulnerability maps and by convening citizens groups to inform development of drought contingency plans,
                     (v) women receiving training through the Women’s Plumbers Initiative, with the goal of training women in household
                     plumber functions, thereby empowering women to reduce household water consumption to better meet their
                     family’s needs as well as increasing their overall awareness and participation in water demand control efforts.
                     Other primary affected parties are the communities, neighborhoods households and businesses potentially affected
                     by adverse environmental and social impacts including service disruption. The draft SEP considers vulnerable groups
                     who might be disproportionately affected from health and socioeconomic impacts during possible water service
                     disruptions; from possible exposure to the health and safety impacts from construction hazards or SEA/SH risks
                     associated with construction; or because of possible exclusion from benefits if there is inequitable prioritization of
                     activities’ locations (neighborhoods). These include the urban poor, women, elderly, children, refugees, the disabled.

                     Other Interested Parties include government agencies such as Ministry of Environment (MoEnv.), Ministry of Energy
                     and Mineral Resources (MEMR), Ministry of Health (MoH), Ministry of Labor (MoL) involved in aspects of projects
                     authorizations and assessment; private sector (contractors, consultants, water tankers operators, EE&RE firms,
                     suppliers of water meters and other equipment, etc.); water users associations (WUAs) in the Jordan Valley; civil



                    May 16, 2023                                                                                                   Page 9 of 17
                              The World Bank
                              Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Project (P176619)



                     society organizations (local and national level NGOs and CBOs); and development partners (USAID, KFW/GIZ, AFD,
                     Netherlands, JICA, EIB, EU, etc.).

                     During early stages of project preparation, several meetings and consultation sessions were held with the key
                     agencies and water utilities in the sector; municipal authorities/ decentralization committees, and other service
                     utilities, Water Users Associations (WUAs) members, civil society development partners active in the water sector in
                     Jordan, and women groups. Meetings and consultation sessions were conducted either in person, and virtually and
                     took place between February- December 2022. The environmental and social risks and benefits were consulted
                     during project preparation including with municipalities and decentralization committees in several governorates;
                     women’s organizations, and; development partners active in the water sector. Stakeholders highlighted a range of
                     issues including the need to strengthen capacity of water sector institutions for environmental and social risk
                     management, the need for better coordination and engagement during design and implementation of the sub-
                     projects; health and safety and working conditions for workers; and employment and empowerment opportunities
                     for women in the sector. The draft SEP summarizes how these issues have been taken into consideration in project
                     design and preparation of E&S instruments.

                     The SEP sets out systematic information disclosure and stakeholder engagement processes for stakeholders
                     throughout the project cycle. During implementation, as part of subproject ESIAs/ESMPs and consistent with the SEP
                     and ESMF, consultations will take place at the subproject level with affected and other interested parties, including
                     vulnerable groups. A number of additional engagement methods such as community meetings, door to door visits
                     (for vulnerable groups who may not be able to attend community meetings, and awareness presentations in schools




Public Disclosure
                     and mosques will also be employed. The type of information to be disclosed and disseminated include construction
                     schedules, information about the grievance mechanism, employment opportunities and specific mitigation and
                     support measures for water supply interruption and safe access to homes. Sub-project ESIAs/ESMPs will be
                     disclosed in English and Arabic. All environmental and social assessments and instruments under the project during
                     implementation, will assess the differentiated impacts on vulnerable groups.
                     The draft SEP describes the project’s grievance mechanism (GM). The GM builds on existing systems that are already
                     operational in the water sector with several uptake channels to submit grievances. The water sector operates a
                     central call center, which receives thousands of complaints and enquiries on a daily basis. The call center, owned by
                     WAJ and situated in Amman. The established GM is managed through a set of documented procedures (Service
                     Recipient GM Handling Procedures). All three water companies are connected to the system and WAJ monitors their
                     performance in relation to complaints handling (time of response, resolution, unresolved complaints, etc.).
                     Maintenance teams are dispatched for emergency repairs. Other uptake channels include phone, walk-ins, email, At
                     Your Service Platform, Water App, complaints box, grievances received through contractors at site. The system can
                     receive anonymous complaints. The other implementing agencies also have their own grievance mechanism that
                     falls under one or several responsible departments. The SEP outlines the project’s procedures and institutional
                     responsibilities for tracking complaints, escalation and appeals, and monitoring and evaluation.



                     B.2. Specific Risks and Impacts

                     A brief description of the potential environmental and social risks and impacts relevant to the Project.
                     ESS2 Labor and Working Conditions

                    May 16, 2023                                                                                                 Page 10 of 17
                              The World Bank
                              Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Project (P176619)



                     ESS2 is relevant to the project. The project workforce will include direct workers, contracted workers, and primary
                     suppliers.

                     (i)     Direct workers of the project are those who work in the PMD, the PIUs and others within MWI/WAJ/JVA and
                     water companies) that are performing project functions. These staff are expected to be qualified professionals
                     working mainly in an office environment and conducting field visits as necessary. They may include expert
                     consultants on full or part-time basis, hired with project resources. Several staff may be civil servants who will
                     remain subject to the terms and conditions of their public service contracts, excepting the provisions outlined in the
                     LMP for health and safety.

                     ii) Contracted workers: Throughout the project life cycle, there will be a significant number of contracted workers
                     including unskilled, semi-skilled and skilled labor of engineering, procurement and construction contractor firms, sub-
                     contractors, and supervision engineering firms. Sub-project timing and duration will vary and be spread out over the
                     project life cycle, and the number of contracted workers at any one sub-project location, or period of time, will be
                     small to moderate (e.g. less than 50 at any one time with a single work crew at each sub-project site). Labor influx is
                     not considered a significant risk since most labor is readily sourced locally. During operations and maintenance
                     phase, small work crews are assigned to maintenance activities upon need. Contracted workers also include workers
                     of firms providing technical assistance under the project.

                     (ii)    Primary Supply Workers: during construction and rehabilitation works, contractors will require materials on
                     an on-going basis for civil works (e.g. cement, sand) that will be sourced locally, as well as equipment and parts (e.g.




Public Disclosure
                     pipes, house connections (water meters), that may be sourced locally or internationally. Primary supply workers are
                     workers of these primary suppliers.

                     The most significant project labor risks are related to the various civil works. Proposed project activities that involve
                     physical works such as rehabilitation of water networks, pumps and groundwater wells, have associated occupational
                     health and safety (OHS) risks. For example, exposure to physical hazards such as cave-ins; falls; working in confined
                     spaces, and electrocution; and chemical hazards such as contaminated water, exposure to chemicals, or asbestos.
                     Works may take place in roadways and involve moving equipment and vehicles, and workers may be exposed to
                     potential traffic accidents. While the Jordanian labor law governing health and safety and terms and conditions of
                     employment is generally consistent with ESS2, poor working conditions in the construction sector is considered a risk
                     of the project. Key risks include lack of clear documented terms and conditions; excessive overtime; late, inequitable,
                     or non-payment of wages; and risks of child labor, particularly for migrants and refugees that are present in the
                     construction sector in significant numbers. Casual or day labor are not covered by national accident and injury
                     insurance. Enforcement by the Ministry of Labor is generally considered weak. To address these risks, the project
                     has prepared Labor Management Procedures (LMP) that lays out its approach to labor management consistent with
                     ESS2 including: contractor management; terms and conditions of employment; non-discrimination and equal
                     opportunity; protecting the labor force (i.e. the prohibition of child or forced labor and sexual exploitation and abuse
                     and harassment); protection of primary supply workers and migrant workers, and a grievance mechanism for all
                     project workers. The ESMF and LMP also specifies the requirements for contractors to prepare health and safety
                     plans proportionate to the risks, in accordance with the national law, ESS2 and the World Bank Group EHS Guidelines
                     (i.e. General EHS Guideline and Water and Sanitation Guideline). The LMP also included a description of the GM
                     available to project workers.


                    May 16, 2023                                                                                                     Page 11 of 17
                              The World Bank
                              Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Project (P176619)




                     Labor-related requirements specific to construction activities for each subproject will also be specified in the sub-
                     project ESIA or ESMP, as well as bidding documents, and will be supervised by construction supervision firms The
                     PMD has overall responsibility to implement the LMP and will monitor compliance in all subprojects.



                     ESS3 Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management
                     This standard is relevant. Overall, the proposed project has a positive impact on resources efficiency and
                     conservation, SOP-1 aims to improve water availability and revenues within the project areas, more sustainable
                     management of the water sector and planning of water allocation to manage through periods of more intense water
                     shortage in the country. Component 3 will assist in the preparation of preparedness and contingency plans that will
                     outline drought mitigation and response actions for the hydro system and irrigation system in pilot area based on
                     assessed vulnerabilities and on the different levels of drought intensity. Component 2 improves the efficiency of the
                     water sector by reducing energy use, costs, and greenhouse emissions (GHG). With regards to resources efficiency, a
                     GHG analysis was carried out on SOP-1’s increased energy efficiency and NRW improvements. The increased energy
                     efficiency actions and improvement in NRW will lead to energy savings of 90 GWh/yr, where reduction in GHG
                     emissions of 46,440 tCO2 equiv. per year is expected under the Project.

                     Proposed rehabilitation of water wells under Component 1 and 2 might be correlated to low potential increase in
                     water extraction, which is not expected to impact ground aquifer yield, therefore, no potential risk to water quality




Public Disclosure
                     through contaminant mobilization and/or saltwater intrusion is expected, Wells that will be selected under this
                     project should have the yield and water quality indicators monitored and reported.

                     On the other hand, the rehabilitation of the water network is not expected to have significant increase in the
                     wastewater production considering the limited water resources available to citizens, where also rural and urban
                     population have access to sanitation either connected to sewer or on-site sanitation (i.e septic tanks).

                     Impacts to household hygiene and health that may be caused by temporary suspension of water services during
                     construction leads to use of water tankers, therefore subproject ESIAs/ESMP’s should consider impacts related to
                     quality of water tankers used under the project which should be monitored by the water service providers to ensure
                     reducing hygiene impact.

                     The proposed Project will not finance wastewater treatment or reuse activities, however, drought and water
                     allocation contingency planning under component 3is expected to be associated with the reuse of treated
                     wastewater as an alternative irrigation water source –currently practiced in the lower Jordan Valley. If wastewater
                     treatment is not conducted properly, there is a potential risk of pollution and health risk for farmers using the treated
                     wastewater for irrigation purposes. Water allocation planning parameters that may affect water quality of treated
                     wastewater will be monitored.

                     The ESMF excludes activities that will cause adverse significant degradation or pollution of the water resource. The
                     proposed Project activities (technical studies and feasibility studies) under Components 3 shall be carried out in
                     accordance with terms of reference acceptable to the World Bank and consistent with the ESS3 resources efficiency


                    May 16, 2023                                                                                                     Page 12 of 17
                              The World Bank
                              Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Project (P176619)



                     and pollution prevention, and the wells rehabilitation studies under Component 1 or 2 shall be screened and assessed
                     in accordance with ESS3.

                     The different construction/rehabilitation activities envisioned under Components 1 and 2 are expected to generate
                     non-hazardous waste (construction and demolition waste, packaging, excavation), where measures for safe handling
                     and disposal of waste into landfills is coordinated with the respective municipalities in accordance with the national
                     environmental regulations. The project activities are also expected to generate hazardous waste (replaced pumps
                     and other mechanical equipment, potential damage of PV cells, leakage of oils and lubricants from vehicles, and
                     chemicals handling, and disposal related to the rehabilitation of wells). In addition, rehabilitation works may
                     potentially accidentally uncover or damage old asbestos containing material (ACM). The government of Jordan has
                     confirmed that most of ACM pipe were safely handled and disposed to Swaqa Hazardous Waste Landfill in
                     accordance with the Jordanian environmental regulations, or buried in most of the areas in Jordan, and that WAJ
                     plans to replace the remaining functional asbestos pipes though support from other development partners in
                     accordance with the national environmental regulations.

                     The ESMF has identified the risk and mitigation requirements for proper handling, management, and disposal of all
                     types of wastes including: (i) measures for safe handling and disposal of non-hazardous waste under the site-specific
                     ESIA’s/ESMPs, (ii) Hazardous Waste Management plan template aiming for safe handling, storage, and reuse or/and
                     disposal of other types of hazardous waste in accordance with the national regulations, (iii) asbestos and asbestos
                     containing material (ACM) management plan in accordance with the World Bank Group General EHS Guidelines , EHS
                     Guideline and Water and Sanitation , and in compliance with national environmental regulations. This plan will be




Public Disclosure
                     implemented and monitored in full coordination with the Ministry of Environment, the responsible entity for the
                     management of the hazardous waste in Jordan. Additionally, the ESMF excluded activities that include excavation in
                     areas identified to have functional asbestos pipes.



                     ESS4 Community Health and Safety
                     This standard is relevant. The project is expected to have significant positive community health impacts from
                     improved reliability of delivery of treated water to beneficiaries. The various project activities may expose
                     communities to minor health and safety risks, especially if there are communities that are immediately close to the
                     construction sites and activities.

                     During construction activities, community health and safety risks relate to road safety risks associated with traffic
                     diversions; disruption of water services; temporary lack of access and movement; falls and accidents due to digging
                     and excavation, and indiscriminate dumping of supplies or waste. These risks will need to be assessed at a site-
                     specific level, and site-specific Traffic Management Plans developed as necessary as part of sub-project/site-specific
                     ESMPs. Interventions proposed under Component 1 also have the potential to cause hygiene impacts from water
                     service disruption, especially if the works are not properly coordinated amongst municipalities and utilities and water
                     users resort to other sources of water such as private tankers, or bottled water, that may lack quality monitoring and
                     price controls.




                    May 16, 2023                                                                                                   Page 13 of 17
                              The World Bank
                              Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Project (P176619)



                     The project has prepared a draft ESMF which identifies and lays out generic measures to minimize community risks
                     from these and other issues, while site-specific ESIAs and/or ESMPs will further assess and confirm relevant site-
                     specific issues and include mitigation measures. The draft ESMF also specifies that subproject ESIAs should consider
                     impacts to household hygiene and health that may be caused by temporary suspension of water services during
                     construction, and include recommendations to address these issues, such as minimizing water supply disruptions and
                     community outreach promoting hygiene practices.

                     During construction activities, works may introduce risks of sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA) and sexual
                     harassment (SH) owing to negative interactions between workers and community members. However, overall the
                     SEA/SH risks are assessed as low given the small to moderate scale of proposed sub-project works, contained to a
                     specific area or sub-projectsite (e.g. segment of pipe, or within a sub-station). Most labor will be sourced locally so
                     labor influx is not expected. However, the dispersed locations of sub-projects across the country, and taking place
                     within populated urban neighborhoods where women, girls, and minors are residing and frequenting nearby
                     institutions such as schools and universities, contributes risks that need to be mitigated. The ESMF has further
                     assessed the SEA/SH risks and risks of other communicable diseases (HIV, COVID) from interactions of work crews
                     with the public, and set out mitigation measures, including the requirement for the project to adopt a Code of
                     Conduct and incorporate it into the bidding documents for all works contracts. The ESCP sets out a requirement to
                     adapt the project’s grievance mechanism to receive and handle SEA/SH related complaints, before the start of works.
                     Technical Assistance will provide training for stakeholders on SEA/SH.

                     The E&S instruments determined under ESS1 will take into account climate change considerations as appropriate,




Public Disclosure
                     including extreme weather events, and stakeholders’ views on potential positive or negative impacts on livelihoods,
                     the inclusion of local communities, access to services, and community health and safety.

                     Dam safety is identified under the technical assistance studies including the existing dams rehabilitation assessment
                     studies and dam design studies proposed under component 3, where the terms of reference for all rehabilitation
                     studies for existing dams shall include dam safety assessment, and measures designed by qualified engineers in
                     accordance with Good International Industry Practices (GIIP) according to ESS4 Annex 1 is addressed under the ESCP.




                     ESS5 Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement
                     ESS5 is considered relevant to the project. No significant land acquisition is expected under the project. Activities
                     under Component 1 and 2 will be predominantly within existing right-of-way and boundaries of existing sites. To
                     manage potential small scale temporary or permanent land acquisition and land-related impacts, as a precautionary
                     approach, a draft Resettlement Framework (RF) has been prepared, consistent with ESS5, considering that the site
                     locations and affected people will only be known once the detailed sub-project designs are known. There are no
                     physical activities or land acquisition under Component 3 and 4 however studies supported under the project for
                     water storage rehabilitation, may have land impacts that need to be assessed in accordance with ESS5.
                     The RF provides procedures and guidance to avoid, minimize, mitigate and compensate land-related impacts of the
                     project’s interventions, consistent with ESS5. The RF describes the sub-project and activity screening procedure to
                     identify land and displacement -related impacts and the requirements for preparing site-specific Resettlement Plans,


                    May 16, 2023                                                                                                   Page 14 of 17
                              The World Bank
                              Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Project (P176619)



                     when needed. The RF assesses potential impacts of economic and physical displacement and describes the national
                     regulatory requirements, as well as WAJ and JVA’s current procedures for land acquisition, and presents measures to
                     resolve gaps with ESS5. The RF outlines the eligibility for compensation; the valuation process for different types of
                     assets; procedures for census surveys; institutional arrangements for land acquisition at the different implementing
                     agencies under the project; gender mainstreaming into the resettlement process, and public consultation and
                     disclosure. Project activities that will cause physical and/or economic displacement will not commence until such
                     specific plans have been consulted, approved by the bank and implemented.


                     ESS6 Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources
                     This standard is relevant. Project activities proposed under components 1 and 2 are expected to be implemented
                     within the right of way of public roads (RoW), within the water companies’ premises or within residential urban and
                     rural areas that do not have high biodiversity conservation value and no ecosystem services are likely to be impacted.
                     Activities that are expected to be implemented in areas close to natural landscape areas may have potential effect on
                     biodiversity through creating disturbance during construction phase, however, no habitats fragmentation or
                     ecosystem services related impacts are expected due to relatively small land required to construct those facilities.

                     Drought Management plans proposed under Component 3 are expected to be used as management tool for
                     monitoring drought hazards, including surface water and groundwater wells, and will therefore provide data on
                     potential impacts of drought on environmental ecosystems and natural resources.




Public Disclosure
                     The proposed project is expected to support technical assistance incuding feasibility studies, rehabilitation of wells,
                     assessment studies for rehabilitation of water storage (dam rehabilitation assessment studies), where the dams and
                     open storage areas in Jordan are conisdered manmade habitats that support waterfowls and migratory birds that are
                     identified as Important Bird Areas. Those studies will be prepared in conjunction with envrionmetnal and social
                     impact assessment studies, where the ESCP has identified that the client shall ensure the technical studies are carried
                     out in accordance with terms of reference acceptable to the World Bank and consistent with the ESF,
                     includingconsistency with ESS 6 includes applyingof the mitigation hierarchy to identify biodiversity-related risks and
                     recommend on biodiversity conservation and restoration mitigation measures under the environmental and social
                     assessment studies, in addtion to assessing cumulative impact of activities included within the ESIA/ESMP.

                     The ESMF addresses consistency with ESS6 requirement including: (i) an exclusion criteria of activities that may cause
                     significant risk on biodiversity conservation, (ii) identificaton the impact on biodiversity conservation, and applying
                     the mitigation hierarchy and specific measures under the ESIAs/ESMPs. The ESMF identified potential mitigation
                     measures to manage the risk of impacting biodiversity under the ESIA/ESMP, or ESMP’s.




                     ESS7 Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional Local Communities

                     This standard is not relevant to the proposed project. There are no Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan Historically
                     Underserved Traditional Local Communities identified in project areas.


                    May 16, 2023                                                                                                   Page 15 of 17
                              The World Bank
                              Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Project (P176619)




                     ESS8 Cultural Heritage
                     This standard is considered relevant given the national scope of the project activities, while the towns/cities
                     masterplans identify the location of the physical cultural resource designated by the Ministry of Tourism and
                     Antiquities (MoTA), the masterplans do not identify uncovered resources and nontangible resources. The screening
                     process under ESMF will exclude any activity that may cause significant impacts on tangible or intangible cultural
                     heritage resources. Furthermore, the ESMF document identify the Chance Find approach as a mitigation measure for
                     potential findings, where the Chance Find Procedures will be part of the specific ESIA/ESMP or ESMP for all sub-
                     project works contracts that involve excavation, movement of earth, or changes to the physical environment
                     activities.


                     ESS9 Financial Intermediaries
                     This standard is not relevant as there are no financial intermediaries involved in this project.


                     C. Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                     OP 7.50 Projects on International Waterways                                                                        Yes
                     The Project triggers OP 7.50. An exception to the riparian notification requirement was granted by MENA RVP on



Public Disclosure
                     March 30, 2023 based on 7 (a) and 7 (b).
                     OP 7.60 Projects in Disputed Areas                                                                                 No




                    B.3. Reliance on Borrower’s policy, legal and institutional framework, relevant to the Project risks and impacts

                     Is this project being prepared for use of Borrower Framework?                                                      No


                     Areas where “Use of Borrower Framework” is being considered:
                     Use of the Borrower Framework is not being considered for this project.


                     IV. CONTACT POINTS

                     World Bank
                     Contact:             Jacqueline Marie Tront                 Title:             Senior Water Resources Management
                                                                                                    Specialist

                     Telephone No:        +1-202-473-7029                        Email:             jtront@worldbank.org



                    May 16, 2023                                                                                                  Page 16 of 17
                              The World Bank
                              Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Project (P176619)



                     Contact:             Sally Zgheib                           Title:             Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                    Specialist

                     Telephone No:        5367+3363 / 1-202-7391285              Email:             szgheib@worldbank.org

                     Borrower/Client/Recipient
                     Borrower:              Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation, Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan

                     Implementing Agency(ies)
                     Implementing Agency: Ministry of Water and Irrigation, Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan



                     V. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     VI. APPROVAL




Public Disclosure
                     Task Team Leader(s):                    Jacqueline Marie Tront, Sally Zgheib

                     Practice Manager (ENR/Social)           Senait Nigiru Assefa Cleared on 16-May-2023 at 06:22:30 EDT




                    May 16, 2023                                                                                                   Page 17 of 17
