Public Disclosure Authorized                                               FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
                                                                                                                               Report No: PAD5172

                                                               INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

                                                                      PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                                      ON A

                                       PROPOSED SHORTER MATURITY LOAN CREDIT FROM THE SCALE-UP WINDOW (SUW-SML)
                                             IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR105.20 MILLION (US$140 MILLION EQUIVALENT)

                                                                             AND A
                                                   PROPOSED CREDIT FROM THE REGULAR SCALE-UP WINDOW (SUW)
                                                 IN THE AMOUNT OF JPY21.345 BILLION (US$140 MILLION EQUIVALENT)




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                                    TO THE

                                                                    PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF BANGLADESH

                                                                                     FOR A

                                                         CHATTOGRAM WATER SUPPLY IMPROVEMENT PROJECT


                                                     AS PHASE 1 OF THE MULTI-PHASE PROGRAMMATIC APPROACH




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       BANGLADESH WATER SECURITY AND WATER SUPPLY AND SANITATION (WSS) PROGRAM

                                              WITH AN OVERALL FINANCING ENVELOPE OF US$900 MILLION EQUIVALENT
                                                                     November 25, 2024


                                Water Global Practice
                                South Asia Region


                               This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official
                               duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.
                      CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

             (Exchange Rate Effective October 31, 2024)

               Currency Unit = Bangladeshi Taka (BDT)
                  BDT 119.5 = US$1
                       US$ 1 = JPY 152

                              FISCAL YEAR
                            July 1 – June 30




Regional Vice President: Martin Raiser
     Regional Director: Dina Umali-Deininger
      Country Director: Abdoulaye Seck
     Practice Manager: Sumila Gulyani
    Task Team Leaders: Arif Ahamed, Harsh Goyal
               ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

CBO      Community-based Organization
CCC      Chattogram City Corporation
CWASA    Chattogram Water Supply and Sewerage Authority
CWSISP   Chittagong Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation Project
D‒B      Design‒Build
DMA      District Metered Area
DEWATS   Decentralized Wastewater Treatment System
EEP      Eligible Expenditure Program
e-GP     Electronic Government Procurement
E&S      Environmental and Social
FSM      Fecal Sludge Management
FY       Fiscal Year
GCP      Global Challenge Program
GDP      Gross Domestic Product
GHG      Greenhouse Gas
GIS      Geographic Information System
GoB      Government of Bangladesh
GRM      Grievance Redress Mechanism
GRS      Grievance Redress Service
HR       Human Resources
IDA      International Development Association
IPF      Investment Project Financing
IUFR     Interim Unaudited Financial Reports
IVA      Independent Verification Agency
LIC      Low-income Community
MIS      Management Information System
M&E      Monitoring and Evaluation
MPA      Multiphase Programmatic Approach
NGO      Nongovernmental Organization
NRW      Nonrevenue Water
O&M      Operations and Maintenance
PBC      Performance-Based Condition
PDO      Project Development Objective
PforR    Program for Results
PMU      Project Management Unit
PPP      Public-private Partnership
PPSD     Project Procurement Strategy for Development
PSC      Project Steering Committee
SEA/SH   Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment
STEP     Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement
SUW      Scale-up Window
TA       Technical Assistance
UoF      Utility of the Future
WASA     Water Supply and Sewerage Authority
WASH     Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene
WSS      Water Supply and Sanitation
          The World Bank
          Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)



                                                            TABLE OF CONTENTS

DATASHEET ........................................................................................................................... ii
I.    STRATEGIC CONTEXT ...................................................................................................... 1
      A. Country Context ................................................................................................................................ 1
      B. Sectoral and Institutional Context .................................................................................................... 1
      C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives ............................................................................................... 5
      D. Multiphase Programmatic Approach................................................................................................ 6
II.   PROJECT DESCRIPTION.................................................................................................. 10
      A. Project Development Objective (PDO) ........................................................................................... 10
      B. Project Components ....................................................................................................................... 11
      C. Project Beneficiaries ....................................................................................................................... 16
      D. Rationale for Bank Involvement and Role of Partners ................................................................... 16
      E. Lessons Learned .............................................................................................................................. 16
III. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS ............................................................................ 17
      A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements ........................................................................... 17
      B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements ......................................................................... 17
      C. Sustainability ................................................................................................................................... 18
IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY ................................................................................... 18
      A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis ................................................................................... 18
      B. Fiduciary .......................................................................................................................................... 20
      C. Legal Operational Policies ............................................................................................................... 21
      D. Environmental and Social ............................................................................................................... 22
VI. GRIEVANCE REDRESS SERVICES ..................................................................................... 24
VII. KEY RISKS...................................................................................................................... 24
VIII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING ................................................................... 26
ANNEX 1: Implementation Arrangements and Support Plan ................................................. 36




                                                                                                                                                                   i
      The World Bank
      Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padbasicinformation#doctemplate
DATASHEET


BASIC INFORMATION


Project
                         Operation Name
Beneficiary(ies)
Bangladesh               Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project
                                                      Environmental and Social Risk
Operation ID             Financing Instrument
                                                      Classification
                         Investment Project
P176429                                               Substantial
                         Financing (IPF)

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padmpaprocessing#doctemplate
Financing & Implementation Modalities
[✓] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA)                      [✓] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)
[ ] Series of Projects (SOP)                                    [ ] Fragile State(s)

[✓] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs)                         [ ] Small State(s)
[ ] Financial Intermediaries (FI)                               [ ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country
[ ] Project-Based Guarantee                                     [ ] Conflict
[ ] Deferred Drawdown                                           [ ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster
[ ] Alternative Procurement Arrangements (APA)                  [ ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS)


Expected Approval Date                  Expected Closing Date                    Expected Program Closing Date
19-Dec-2024                             31-Dec-2030                              30-Jun-2033
Bank/IFC Collaboration
No


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padmpa#doctemplate
MPA Program Development Objective
To (i) improve access to safely-managed water supply and sanitation services, (ii) reduce pollution in rivers and canals,
and (iii) enhance resilience to flood risks in selected urban areas.

MPA FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

MPA Program Financing Envelope                                                    1,950.00

                                                                                                                            ii
      The World Bank
      Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)




Components
 Component Name                                                                           Cost (US$)
 Improving Efficiency, Quality and Coverage of Water Supply Services                  287,000,000.00
 Improving Water Supply and Non-network Sanitation Management Services
                                                                                       12,000,000.00
 for LICs
 Developing Utility Systems and Capacities                                             20,000,000.00
 Project Implementation and Management Support                                         14,000,000.00
 Contingent Emergency Response                                                                  0.00


Organizations
Borrower:                        People's Republic of Bangladesh
Implementing Agency:             Chattogram Water Supply and Sewerage Authority


MPA FINANCING DETAILS (US$, Millions)


MPA Program Financing Envelope:                                            1,950.00

     of which Bank Financing (IBRD):                                       0.00

     of which Bank Financing (IDA):                                        900.00

     of which Other Financing sources:                                     1,050.00


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padfinancingsummary#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   Yes

Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             No

SUMMARY

  Total Operation Cost                                                                       333.00

  Total Financing                                                                            333.00
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                               280.00

  Financing Gap                                                                                0.00

                                                                                                   iii
        The World Bank
        Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)



DETAILS

 World Bank Group Financing
   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                 280.00

        IDA Credit                                                                                             140.00

        IDA Shorter Maturity Loan (SML)                                                                        140.00

 Non-World Bank Group Financing
   Counterpart Funding                                                                                          53.00

        Borrower/Recipient                                                                                      53.00


IDA Resources (US$, Millions)

                                                                                           Guarantee
                             Credit Amount        Grant Amount        SML Amount                         Total Amount
                                                                                             Amount

Scale-Up Window
                                    140.00                0.00              140.00                0.00          280.00
(SUW)

Total                               140.00                0.00              140.00                0.00          280.00


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@paddisbursementprojection#doctemplate
Expected Disbursements (US$, Millions)
WB Fiscal
Year                    2025              2026             2027               2028             2029           2030

Annual                  4.00              10.00            40.00              74.00            76.00          76.00
Cumulative              4.00              14.00            54.00             128.00            204.00        280.00


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padclimatechange#doctemplate
PRACTICE AREA(S)


Practice Area (Lead)                                             Contributing Practice Areas
                                                                 Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy;
Water
                                                                 Urban, Resilience and Land

CLIMATE

                                                                                                                      iv
      The World Bank
      Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)




Climate Change and Disaster Screening
Yes, it has been screened and the results are discussed in the Operation Document


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padrisk#doctemplate
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK- RATING TOOL (SORT)


Risk Category                                                               Rating
1. Political and Governance                                                 ⚫ Substantial
2. Macroeconomic                                                            ⚫ Substantial
3. Sector Strategies and Policies                                           ⚫ Substantial
4. Technical Design of Project or Program                                   ⚫ Moderate
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability             ⚫ Moderate
6. Fiduciary
No Fiduciary risk rating under Preparation Phase has been completed in
Financial Management System to date.                                        ⚫ Substantial
No Procurement rating under Preparation Phase has been completed in
PRAMS to date.
7. Environment and Social
Environment Risk rating from Specialist:
⚫Moderate as of 02-Nov-2024                                                 ⚫ Substantial
Social Risk rating from Specialist:
⚫Substantial as of 02-Nov-2024
8. Stakeholders                                                             ⚫ Substantial
9. Overall                                                                  ⚫ Substantial
Overall MPA Program Risk                                                    ⚫ Substantial


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padcompliance#doctemplate
POLICY COMPLIANCE


Policy
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects?
[ ] Yes      [✓] No

Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?
[ ] Yes [✓] No


                                                                                            v
      The World Bank
      Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)




ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL


Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal
E & S Standards                                                                     Relevance
ESS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and
                                                                                    Relevant
Impacts
ESS 10: Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                           Relevant
ESS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                                                 Relevant
ESS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                  Relevant
ESS 4: Community Health and Safety                                                  Relevant
ESS 5: Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement      Relevant
ESS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural
                                                                                    Relevant
Resources
ESS 7: Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved
                                                                                    Not Currently Relevant
Traditional Local Communities
ESS 8: Cultural Heritage                                                            Relevant
ESS 9: Financial Intermediaries                                                     Not Currently Relevant
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review
Summary (ESRS).

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalcovenants#doctemplate
LEGAL
Legal Covenants
Sections and Description
Section I.A.1, Schedule 2 of the FA: The Recipient shall cause the Project Implementing Entity to establish within three
(3) months of the Effective Date and maintain throughout the period of implementation of the Project, the Project
Management Unit (PMU) with the composition, mandate, functions, staffing and resources satisfactory to the
Association.
Section I.A.2, Schedule 2 of the FA: The Recipient shall cause the Project Implementing Entity to establish within three
(3) months of the Effective Date and maintain throughout the period of implementation of the Project, the Project
Steering Committee (PSC), with the composition, mandate, functions, staffing and resources satisfactory to the
Association.
Section I.A.3, Schedule 2 of the FA: The Recipient shall cause the Project Implementing Entity to establish within three
(3) months of the Effective Date and maintain throughout the period of implementation of the Project, the Project
Implementation Committee (PIC), with the composition, mandate, functions, staffing and resources satisfactory to the
Association.

                                                                                                                       vi
       The World Bank
       Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)


Section I.B.1, Schedule 2 of the FA: To facilitate the carrying out of the Project, the Recipient shall make the proceeds of
the Financing available to the Project Implementing Entity under a subsidiary agreement between the Recipient and the
Project Implementing Entity, under terms and conditions satisfactory to the Association (“Subsidiary Agreement”).
Section I.C.1, Schedule 2 of the FA: The Recipient shall and shall cause the Project Implementing Entity to ensure that
the Project is carried out in accordance with the arrangements and procedures set out in the Project Operational
Manual (POM), satisfactory to the Association.
Section I.E.1, Schedule 2 of the FA: In order to ensure the proper implementation of contingent emergency response
activities under Part 5 of the Project (“Contingent Emergency Response Part”), the Recipient shall and shall cause the
Project Implementing Entity to ensure that: (a) a manual (“CERC Manual”) is prepared and adopted in form and
substance acceptable to the Association, which shall set forth detailed implementation arrangements for the
Contingent Emergency Response Part; (b) the Emergency Action Plan is prepared and adopted in form and substance
acceptable to the Association; and (c) the Continent Emergency Response Part is carried out in accordance with the
CERC Manual and the Emergency Action Plan.
Section I.A.4, Schedule 2 of the FA: The Recipient shall cause the Project Implementing Entity to execute within six (6)
months of the Effective Date a memorandum of understanding for fecal sludge management in Chattogram, in form
and substance satisfactory to the Association, with Chattogram City Corporation and the Chattogram Development
Authority.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padconditions#doctemplate
Conditions
Type                           Citation                        Description                     Financing Source
                                                               No withdrawal shall be
                                                               made: (a) for payments
                                                               made prior to the Signature
                                                               Date. (b) for Emergency
                                                               Expenditures under
                                                               Category (5), unless and
                                                               until all of the following
                                                               conditions have been met
                                                               in respect of said
                                                               expenditures: (i) (A) the
                                                               Recipient has determined
Disbursement                   Condition-1                     that an Eligible Crisis or      IBRD/IDA
                                                               Emergency has occurred,
                                                               and has furnished to the
                                                               Association a request to
                                                               withdraw Financing
                                                               amounts under Category
                                                               (5); and (B) the Association
                                                               has agreed with such
                                                               determination, accepted
                                                               said request and notified
                                                               the Recipient thereof; and
                                                               (ii) the Recipient has
                                                                                                                        vii
     The World Bank
     Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)


                                                       caused the Project
                                                       Implementing Entity to
                                                       adopted the CERC Manual
                                                       and Emergency Action
                                                       Plan, in form and substance
                                                       acceptable to the
                                                       Association.
                                                       Article VII, Section 7.01 of
                                                       the FA: The Additional
                                                       Conditions of Effectiveness
                                                       consist of the following,
Effectiveness              Condition-2                 namely that the Subsidiary     IBRD/IDA
                                                       Agreement has been
                                                       executed on behalf of the
                                                       Recipient and the Project
                                                       Implementing Entity.




                                                                                                 viii
        The World Bank
        Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)


 I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT
 A. Country Context
1. Bangladesh experienced rapid economic and social progress in recent decades, reaching lower middle-income
status in 2015. Stable macroeconomic conditions underpinned an average annual real GDP growth of 6.4 percent between
2010 and 2023, and poverty rate declined. However, the pace of GDP growth and poverty reduction moderated in the
last few years. An interim government was sworn in August 8, 2024, after the former Prime Minister resigned and left the
country amid a mass uprising. Economic activities have been gradually normalizing since the transition, but significant
downside risks and uncertainty remain.
2. Real GDP grew by 5.0 percent in FY24, declining from 5.8 percent in FY23. On the supply side, GDP growth was
primarily driven by industry and the services sectors. Industry sector expanded by 5.3 percent, but the growth rate
remained below the decade’s historical average of 9.5 percent due to energy shortages, import restrictions, and monetary
tightening, Services growth grew by 5.4 percent. Inflation remained elevated, reaching 9.9 percent in September 2024.
Monetary policy has remained tight to bring down inflation. The financial sector remains vulnerable to high nonperforming
loans and weak governance, which has prompted corrective actions by the government.
3. The current account and fiscal balance have improved. After The current account deficit narrowed in FY24 and in
FY25 Q1, it, as remittance inflows grew following the depreciation of the currency. Yet, foreign reserves continued to
decline in FY24, reaching US$19.8 billion (3.2 months of import coverage) as of October 2024. The fiscal deficit is estimated
to have narrowed to 3.7 percent of GDP in FY24 from 4.6 percent in FY23, primarily due to a reduction in expenditure
despite weak revenue collection. Public debt stood at 36.8 percent of GDP in FY24.
4. Real GDP growth is projected to decline to 4.1 percent in FY25 but could range between 3.2 and 5.2 percent. The
wide range of the projection reflects significant uncertainties around the outlook due to the lingering economic impact of
the recent political transition. These uncertainties are expected to keep investment and industrial growth subdued in the
short term. Growth is expected to rise gradually, benefiting from critical reforms. In the medium term, reform priorities
include improving business environment, diversifying exports, investing in human capital, expanding infrastructure,
stabilizing and deepening the financial sector, and attracting private investment.
5. Bangladesh faces a high level of vulnerability to climate and disaster hazard risks. The Global Climate Risk Index
ranked Bangladesh as the seventh most affected country by weather-related loss events in the 2000-2019 period,1 with
high vulnerability to cyclones, floods, and storm surges. Recurring flooding in Bangladesh affects a greater population than
any other natural hazard, impacting more than 1 million people annually. Addressing these climate risks will reduce
disruptions to economic growth and prevent vulnerable populations from being left behind.

 B. Sectoral and Institutional Context
6. Bangladesh’s transition to an upper-middle-income country is supported by rapid economic transformation and
urbanization. Bangladesh is one of the world’s most densely populated countries (1,084 people per km),2 with a
population that is projected to grow from 170 million to 265 million by 2050. Over this period, the urban population is
projected to increase from 38 percent to 60 percent. Along with other regional urban centers, the major cities of Dhaka
and Chattogram are hubs of economic growth, industry, and export activities, contributing significantly to Bangladesh’s
employment and GDP. With 22 million people, the Dhaka metropolitan region accounts for one-third of the country’s
urban population, generates half of the country’s formal employment, and contributes 35 percent to national GDP.
Chattogram—the second largest city with a population of 3.23 million—is growing rapidly and projected to reach 6.39
million by 2030.2 As the country’s main port city and export powerhouse, Chattogram produces 40 percent of Bangladesh’s

1 Global Climate Risk Index 2021. Germanwatch 2021.
2 Current population as per the Bangladesh Population and Housing Census 2020-21. 2030 projection from UN World Population Prospects 2022.


                                                                                                                                      Page 1
         The World Bank
         Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)


industrial output, handles more than 75 percent of exports, contributes 40 percent to the government revenues, and
generates employment for 16 percent of the total employed labor force in the country’s industrial sector. Other major
cities such as Comilla, Sylhet, Mymensingh, and Barisal are evolving rapidly as regional growth centers and can contribute
to more balanced inter-regional economic development.
7. Bangladesh is endowed with substantial water resources, yet rapid urbanization and economic development are
leading to a sharp rise in water demand. As the world’s largest delta country, Bangladesh has a network of more than
430 rivers and canals that provide substantial fresh surface water and groundwater resources to meet drinking water
needs and demand from agriculture, industries, fisheries, and other economic sectors. However, demands for water have
increased and will continue to increase sharply across all major consumption sectors (residential, industrial, and
agriculture) due to the country’s ongoing structural and economic transformation. More than 57 percent of jobs in
Bangladesh are in water-dependent sectors such as textiles, manufacturing, and services. Water demand from domestic
sector is expected to increase by 200 percent by 2050, driven primarily by urbanization.
8. Bangladesh’s urban water security is threatened by declining freshwater availability, severe pollution, and flooding.
    a. Freshwater availability is declining due to excessive and unregulated groundwater abstraction. Unsustainable
       groundwater abstraction for industrial, irrigation, and domestic purposes is adversely impacting groundwater
       levels within the country, with average declines ranging from 2.3 meters to 11.5 meters over the last 30 years.
    b. Large industrial clusters in and around major cities (such as Dhaka and Chattogram) are polluting waterways
       through the discharge of untreated sewage and industrial effluents containing hazardous chemicals and heavy
       metals. Almost 1,500 million liters per day of untreated urban sewage and 2,400 million liters per day of untreated
       industrial effluent is discharged into rivers and canals in and around the Dhaka metropolitan region. Between 50
       and 70 percent of total municipal solid waste generated in the Dhaka metropolitan region (about 10,000 tons per
       day) is dumped in rivers and canals directly or in adjacent dumpsites. The economic cost of pollution in Dhaka’s
       rivers is estimated to be about US$2.5 billion per year. As a result of widespread water pollution, 80 percent of
       private piped water taps across Bangladesh have E. coli bacteria present. About 25 percent of “improved” drinking
       water sources (primarily shallow tube wells) in the country have arsenic levels that exceed thresholds specified in
       the World Health Organization’s safe water guidelines (10 parts per billion).3
    c. Combined with discharge of untreated domestic sewage and dumping of household solid waste, unplanned
       urbanization is also contributing to the pollution of rivers and water bodies around Dhaka and other major cities.
       Rivers and canals now suffer from reduced flows, sedimentation, encroachment, impaired navigability, and
       massive pollution that have destroyed their natural ecology and rendered the water unfit for drinking, irrigation,
       and industry without extensive treatment.
    d. Water services are increasingly affected by climate change. Climate events, such as intense rainfall over short
       periods, are causing increased flooding, land erosion, and storm surges in multiple parts of the country (20‒67
       percent of the country’s area), affecting some of the major cities and coastal areas. Flooding is widespread and
       compounded by inadequate stormwater drainage, reduced water flows in rivers and canals due to poor solid
       waste management and pollution, encroachment, and siltation. Uncontrolled property development in river
       corridors has destroyed almost 50 percent of wetlands and drainage canals in Dhaka, adversely affecting natural
       systems for flood storage and attenuation. In terms of impact area and depth, Chattogram will likely experience
       a significant increase in flood risk due to sea temperature and sea level rise.4 Chattogram, along with other coastal
       cities, is facing increasing salinity intrusion that threatens fresh water supplies, especially during the dry season,


3 Ravenscroft, P. and L. Lytton 2022. Seeing the Invisible: A Strategic Report on Groundwater Quality. World Bank Group.
4 Think Hazard classifies Chattogram as having a high hazard level in terms of river flooding, urban flooding, and coastal flooding, indicating that

potentially damaging river flooding, urban flooding, and waves are expected to flood the coast at least once in the next 10 years.

                                                                                                                                             Page 2
           The World Bank
           Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)


            thus necessitating additional treatment and monitoring to ensure that water quality standards are met. These
            recurring disasters can trigger outbreaks of waterborne diseases, damage water supply and sanitation (WSS)
            facilities, lead to service disruptions, and compromise water quality, leading to adverse health impacts.
9. The two major gaps in urban WSS service delivery are limited coverage and poor quality. Of the 67 million urban
residents of Bangladesh, about 31 million people (46 percent) lack access to safely managed water supply and 48 million
people (71 percent) lack access to safely managed sanitation. Only a small proportion (33 percent) of the urban population
has access to piped water supply and sewerage services. Gaps in service access and quality are exacerbated by rapid
urbanization and increasing demand.
       a. Water supply: Only 10‒15 percent of urban households have access to piped water supply, which typically lasts
          for less than 10 hours per day. There are significant spatial disparities in access to water supply services in cities:
          while Dhaka city has 70 percent piped water supply network coverage, the adjacent cities (Gazipur, Narayanganj,
          and Savar) have less than 25 percent coverage. Chattogram has 66 percent piped water supply coverage and high-
          water losses. Many households in Chattogram still depend on water from private tube-wells with quality issues
          such as high iron content and salinity. The piped network coverage for water supply is almost nonexistent in the
          other emerging cities, and high dependency on contaminated groundwater is a major concern for water supply.
       b. Sanitation: Most of the cities lack functional sewerage or on-site sanitation systems. Dhaka city’s piped sewerage
          system currently covers only 20 percent of the population, with an additional 2 percent of households having
          access to a functional fecal sludge management (FSM) system. At present, Chattogram lacks a sewerage system,
          with households and establishments dependent on on-site sanitation systems. About 65 percent of Chattogram
          households have toilets with septic tanks, 23 percent have toilets with pits, and 11 percent have insanitary toilets.
          Both Dhaka city and Chattogram are currently in the process of establishing or expanding piped sewerage and
          sewage treatment plants. Access to safely managed sanitation services is very low in all the other cities.
10. There are disparities in access to WSS services, with women, girls, and the poor being disproportionately affected.
In Bangladesh, women and girls are responsible for 90 percent of the water collection, and apart from the drudgery are
also exposed to higher risk of gender-based violence when walking long distances to fetch water. Access to WSS services
is significantly worse in low-income communities (LICs) in urban areas. Almost all LIC settlements in Chattogram depend
on shared water points,5 which makes fetching water a time-consuming exercise, especially for women and girls. Similarly,
LICs in the Dhaka metropolitan region suffer from inequitable and poor access to WSS services.
11. Governance challenges in the water sector include fragmentation, capacity constraints, and weak service and
regulatory institutions.
       a. The water sector governance framework is fragmented. This adversely affects efforts to implement integrated
          water resources management and coordinate planning, infrastructure development, asset management, service
          delivery, and monitoring. For instance, interinstitutional coordination issues in Dhaka metropolitan region
          between the Dhaka Water and Sewerage Authority (DWASA) and city corporations for Dhaka North and Dhaka
          South are adversely affecting planning and delivery of safely managed sanitation services, particularly for FSM.
          Weak accountability and misaligned incentives compound the situation, particularly at the subnational level, as
          municipalities and utilities are not often held accountable or incentivized to deliver adequate and improved
          service performance in their jurisdictions. Furthermore, the institutional framework and accountability for
          delivery of certain water services such as storm water management and canal rehabilitation remain unclear.
       b. Utilities and municipalities are facing significant institutional capacity constraints, including human resource (HR)
          capacity, lack of customer and service delivery orientation, and inadequate planning and monitoring. They also


5
    Only 46 out of the 2,106 LICs in Chattogram are served with localized, small water networks.

                                                                                                                           Page 3
          The World Bank
          Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)


           have a weak revenue base and inadequate systems for management of assets, operations, and finances. These
           collectively lead to suboptimal operational performance and inefficiencies (such as high levels of water and
           revenue losses). For instance, the Chattogram Water Supply and Sewerage Authority (CWASA) only has 54 trained
           engineers and 6 female managers/engineers among 564 employees. Lack of institutional capacity to plan, design,
           and implement projects in the local governments of the Dhaka metropolitan region is a fundamental reason
           behind severe pollution in Dhaka rivers as they struggle to provide adequate wastewater and solid waste
           management services. Municipalities in emerging cities face similar capacity constraints, thus leading to
           suboptimal service delivery, water losses, discharge of untreated wastewater, and suboptimal capacity utilization
           of treatment facilities.
      c. Regulatory enforcement of pollution and service delivery standards remains weak. The key challenges include lack
         of a real-time digital monitoring system, weak institutional capacity in the regulatory agency to monitor
         compliance (especially for industries), and weak enforcement of punitive measures available under the
         regulations. Many industries either do not have effluent treatment plants or they are not operating effectively to
         meet treatment standards. Encroachments in wetlands and river corridors have severely impacted water flow
         capacity in the Dhaka metropolitan region. Strict regulatory enforcement to ensure zero untreated industrial
         effluent discharge is a critical priority to reduce river pollution. The country lacks an urban WSS regulatory
         mechanism, thus hindering accountability, WSS service standards enforcement, service performance monitoring,
         tariff setting, and environmental compliance. Last, policy frameworks for tariff setting and pricing, service
         performance, operations and maintenance (O&M) contracts, and other issues have not been implemented
         uniformly across the country alongside the infrastructure investments. Overall, policy and regulatory frameworks
         need to be strengthened, and enforcement must be prioritized to address pollution, encroachment, service
         delivery, and sustainability issues.
12. Low tariffs and weak financial management systems threaten the financial viability of water utilities and
municipalities. To enable expanded access and improved service quality, utilities and municipalities need to improve their
financial sustainability in an incremental manner by undertaking tariff and municipal finance reforms and by strengthening
financial management systems. Both CWASA and DWASA currently generate cash operating surpluses on an annual basis,6
but they have yet to achieve full cost recovery (current full cost recovery level of DWASA and CWASA is 78 percent and 58
percent, respectively).7 The average tariffs for urban water supply remain low at around US$0.15 per cubic meter for
domestic connections.8 CWASA’s net income has declined over the period 2017‒21. Long-term liabilities also increased
for both CWASA and DWASA in the past years due to substantial capital investments—CWASA’s debt stands at about
US$530 million and DWASA’s debt stands at about US$1.3 billion, representing 90 percent and 75 percent of their capital,
respectively. In recent years, both utilities have not fulfilled their debt service obligations agreed with the government.
There is an urgent need for these utilities to improve financial performance by generating revenues, managing debt
sustainably, and creating fiscal space for funding future investments. Municipalities and city corporations are further
behind on financial sustainability agenda and need to adopt tariff frameworks with the objective of levying and collecting
water tariffs to, at the very least, cover recurring operational expenditures. Municipalities and city corporations also need
to explore other sources of revenue generation to enhance their financial health and fiscal performance. Lack of financial
sustainability in utilities and municipalities has increased their dependence on grants for capital and operational
expenditures. Without addressing financial sustainability and the creditworthiness of utilities and municipalities, it will be
difficult to attract private capital at scale to address the growing water sector financing gap, especially in cities.
Accordingly, future capital investments must be accompanied by improved financial and debt management, tariff reform,


6 Calculated as operational revenue minus cash operational expenses.
7 Includes recovery of O&M expenses, interest charges, and depreciation.
8
    DWASA: Tk 16.7/m3; CWASA: Tk 18/m3

                                                                                                                        Page 4
       The World Bank
       Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)


and revenue generation to strengthen financial sustainability while ensuring that services are affordable for poor
households.
13. The Government of Bangladesh (GoB) has formally adopted the Sector Development Plan 2011–2025 for WSS and
the National Strategy for Water Supply and Sanitation for 2021, both of which are aligned with the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100. The Sector Development Plan target for piped water
supply coverage is 90 percent in large municipalities and 85 percent in small municipalities by 2025. The strategy addresses
integrated resources management, water quality, FSM, rapid urbanization, and disaster and climate risks. However,
implementation is very slow due to the foregoing reasons. More recently, the GoB also adopted the Umbrella Investment
Program for the Restoration of Dhaka Rivers, which was developed with technical assistance from the World Bank and
outlines a multisector roadmap for investments and reforms to mitigate river pollution, improve water flows, enhance
flood resilience, and improve services in the Dhaka metropolitan region. Implementation of the Umbrella Investment
Program requires dedicated resources, improved institutional and governance framework, and a results-oriented
approach.
14. Addressing water sector challenges in Bangladesh requires the GoB to transition from an infrastructure
development-oriented model to a comprehensive service delivery model. A comprehensive and programmatic approach
comprising a package of priority investments and policy, governance, and financial reforms is required for transition. More
specifically, the GoB needs to (i) restructure fiscal incentive mechanisms to enhance accountability and motivation in the
utilities and municipalities to improve WSS service delivery (coverage, quality, and efficiency) and climate resilience; (ii)
implement policy and regulatory reforms to enforce service delivery standards and address pollution and encroachment
issues; (iii) strengthen institutional capacity, including utility systems, municipal planning, implementation, infrastructure
asset management, operations, and monitoring; and (iv) implement reforms at the utility and municipal level to enable
cost recovery, financial sustainability, and overall creditworthiness. The proposed Multiphase Programmatic Approach
(MPA) responds to these pressing water security challenges and priorities in major cities in Bangladesh and will contribute
to enhancing livability and resilience. The MPA will focus on (i) expanding access to safely managed WSS services for
households and businesses, (ii) reducing pollution in rivers and canals, and (iii) enhancing flood resilience.

 C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives
15. The MPA is part of a World Bank South Asia regional initiative or “program of programs” to provide water,
sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) services to about 100 million people across the South Asia region by 2035. The proposed
Pakistan WASH MPA and the Bangladesh Water Security and WSS MPA are the first in the program. These may be followed
by a WASH MPA for India in FY26 and MPAs or a series of projects for Nepal and Sri Lanka depending on client demand.
16. The program is consistent with the World Bank’s Country Partnership Framework FY23-27 discussed by the World
Bank Board of Executive Directors on April 27, 2023 (Report No. 181003-BD). The program will support the Country
Partnership Framework’s aim to contribute to “improved socioeconomic inclusion” and “enhanced climate resilience”
through energy efficiency and resilient water supply services. It also supports the Country and Climate Development
Report which highlights the inadequacy of WSS in the country and the need for improved sanitation as an adaptation
measure for urban flooding. Lastly, the Program supports the World Bank’s mission of ending extreme poverty and
boosting shared prosperity on a livable planet. Specifically, the program will enhance gender equality and empowerment
and hence contribute to improved socioeconomic inclusion by reducing water-related costs such as collection time, which
now fall disproportionally on women and girls.
17. The program is aligned with Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 and will improve the enabling environment for private
sector participation per the Bank’s Maximizing Finance for Development approach. The program’s investments are
aligned with the Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100 priorities, which prescribe that at least 25 percent of all delta investments
be directed toward WASH and drainage in major cities. In collaboration with the International Finance Corporation and


                                                                                                                        Page 5
         The World Bank
         Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)


Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency, the program will also support the development of public-private partnerships
(PPPs) to leverage private capital.
18. The program is consistent with Bangladesh’s National Adaptation Plan 2023‒50. The program supports Goal 3 of the
National Adaptation Plan to “develop climate-smart cities for improved urban environment and well-being.” Increased
access to WSS services in cities will reduce exposure to flooding and waterborne diseases during extreme weather events.
The program supports the greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reduction targets of the updated Nationally Determined
Contribution9 by improving sanitation systems for households and effluent treatment facilities for industries. The program
will tackle flood and saltwater intrusion by upgrading flood channels (canals) and creating climate-smart WASH facilities
for marginalized communities. It will also enhance septage management to reduce water contamination.
19. Phase I of the MPA satisfies the eligibility criteria for the Scale-Up Window (SUW). Phase I includes a US$140 million
International Development Association (IDA) credit from the SUW Shorter-term Maturity Loan (SML). Bangladesh is
eligible to receive regular SUW and SUW-SML financing resources in FY25. Regular SUW financing is fully consistent with
the Bank’s Sustainable Development Finance Policy and the International Monetary Fund’s borrowing limitations. The
country’s “low” debt risk rating would not change with the SUW-SML financing. The program directly supports the IDA20
Special Theme on Jobs and Economic Transformation. Phase I is aligned with the SUW-SML objective.10

    D. Multiphase Programmatic Approach
20. Rationale for using the MPA: The MPA offers the following advantages as compared to stand-alone operations: (i) it
provides a platform for a strategic long-term partnership that affirms the Bank’s commitment to supporting the GoB’s
medium- to long-term goals of improving WSS service delivery and water security, finance, institutions, and systems; (ii)
it offers a systematic approach for capacity building, knowledge sharing, and learning across water utilities, city
corporations, and municipalities; and (iii) it establishes a platform to coordinate, crowd in, and leverage resources from
other potential cofinanciers (development partners and the private sector) to enable transformational impact at scale.
21. The MPA provides scalability and replicability by structuring interventions across multiple cities under a common
theory of change and framework of activities. The MPA design is based on a modular approach wherein a set of selected
interventions can be deployed rapidly, at scale, across participating cities, and tailored, as necessary, to the contextual
specificities and priorities. The MPA could be scaled up in the future for other secondary cities to join the program as and
when they are ready.
22. The MPA is fully aligned with the global framework of the Water Security and Climate Adaptation Global Challenge
Program (Water GCP), which has been selected as a regional priority program in the South Asia region. More specifically,
the MPA will contribute to achieving beneficiary targets under Water GCP Pillar 1 (achieving universal access to safely
managed WSS) and Pillar 3 (reducing the impacts of floods and droughts and managing water resources sustainably).11
The MPA in Bangladesh is envisaged as the first program in the South Asia region to implement the Water GCP and
enhance scale, speed, and impact.




9
  Bangladesh’s updated Nationally Determined Contribution sets a target of a 21.85 percent reduction (6.73 percent unconditional plus 15.12 percent
conditional) in GHG emissions relative to business as usual by 2030 and has added the GHG reduction target for solid waste and wastewater
management (2.21 percent unconditional, 2.97 percent conditional, and 2.74 percent combined).
10 The IDA20 concessional SUW-SML is designed to scale up IDA financing as per the criteria stipulated under the World Bank Group Global Crisis

Response Framework. The project is aligned with the SUW-SML criteria because it strengthens policies, institutions, and resilience by supporting the
CWASA to transition to a well-performing and financially sustainable utility and to enhance water security and climate resilience in the long-term.
The project will enable the CWASA to adopt an efficient, sustainable, and performance-driven service delivery approach by adopting sound utility
systems for planning, developing, and delivering safe, sustainable, and reliable WSS services to the population.
11
   The pillars are as defined in the approved Water GCP approach paper: https://documentsinternal.worldbank.org/Search/34400279.

                                                                                                                                             Page 6
         The World Bank
         Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)


                                                         Figure 1: Program Results Chain




Note: IRF = Institutional regulatory framework; MLD = million liters per day.

23. The program results chain is presented in Figure 1 above. To achieve the program’s objective of improved water
security—defined as improved access to safely managed WSS services, reduced water pollution, and improved flood
resilience—the program will support four groups of activities: (i) improving incentives and infrastructure systems for safely
managed WSS services and pollution management; (ii) improving flood resilience through canal rehabilitation and
stormwater network expansion; (iii) strengthening governance and institutional capacity in utilities and municipalities;
and (iv) enhancing financial sustainability and creditworthiness to facilitate private capital mobilization, among others.
These mutually reinforcing groups of activities will be customized across different phases of the MPA based on the baseline
scenario in specific cities.
24. MPA development objectives: The program development objectives are to: (i) improve access to safely managed
water supply and sanitation services, (ii) reduce pollution in rivers and canals, and (iii) enhance resilience to flood risks in
selected urban areas. The proposed program results indicators are:
   •    People provided with basic drinking water supply and WSS services of which percentage is safely managed*
   •    Beneficiaries with enhanced resilience to climate risks*
   •    Quantity (million liters per day) of wastewater or industrial effluent treated in compliance with national regulatory
        standards
       *World Bank scorecard aligned
25. Program framework: The MPA will comprise four phases spanning over nine years to support 15 cities with an
estimated 20 million beneficiaries in a phased manner starting with the largest and most important cities (Chattogram,
Dhaka) and then scaling up to other regional growth centers and strategic cities with the objective of enhancing urban
water security, service delivery, and resilience. The program framework includes three mutually reinforcing categories of
interventions: (i) strengthen institutions and policies for planning, service delivery, and regulations; (ii) improve
infrastructure and service delivery systems; and (iii) enhance financial sustainability and access to finance for capital and
operational expenditures. Phase 1 of the MPA will implement this framework by focusing on important activities across
all three categories in Chattogram and introducing the performance orientation in CWASA’s operations through
                                                                                                                          Page 7
           The World Bank
           Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)


performance-based conditions (PBCs) for accessing IDA resources. Subsequent phases in Dhaka and other important
secondary cities will scale up the implementation of this framework by focusing on a selective menu of strategic activities
across the three categories and strengthening the performance orientation through disbursement-linked indicators in a
Program for Results (PforR). The development objectives and results indicators for the individual phases of the MPA will
include enhanced operational efficiency, utility systems, and financial sustainability, in addition to PDO and program
results indicators. Last, the MPA design will also include mechanisms for cross learning among different phases and
strengthened capacity to implement the subsequent phases. Overall, the MPA will focus on delivering important results
at scale through improved service delivery systems, capacities, and resources and will contribute significantly to the Water
GCP goals.
                                                      Table 1: Program Framework
                                                                                   IDA         Other
                                                                                                           Estimated   Estimated
 Phase Operation          Sequential or                                IPF or      amount      amount
                                          Phase’s proposed DO*                                             approval    E&S risk
 #     ID                 simultaneous                                 PforR       (US$,       (US$,
                                                                                                           date        rating
                                                                                   millions)   millions)
                                          To (i) increase access to
                                          safely managed water
                                          supply in Chattogram; and                                        December
      1     P176429       Simultaneous                                 IPF-PBC        280.00      60.00                Substantial
                                          (ii) improve operational                                         19, 2024
                                          performance and financial
                                          sustainability of CWASA.
                                          To improve access to
                                          safely managed WSS           PforR
                                                                                                           December
      2     P506770       Simultaneous    services, reduce pollution   (Hybrid        330.00     700.00                Substantial
                                                                       )12                                 18, 2025
                                          and enhance resilience in
                                          Metro Dhaka.
                                          To improve access to
                                          wastewater management
      3     TBC           Simultaneous                                 IPF             40.00      40.00    TBC         High
                                          services and mobilize
                                          private capital.
                                          To improve access to
                                          safely managed WSS
      4     TBC           Simultaneous    services    and   flood      PforR          250.00     250.00    TBC         Substantial
                                          resilience    in  major
                                          secondary cities.

           Total                                                                     900.00    1,050.00


26. Phase 1: Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (US$280 million). Phase 1 of the MPA aims to (i) increase
access to safely managed water supply in Chattogram; and (ii) improve operational performance and financial
sustainability of Chattogram Water Supply and Sewerage Authority (CWASA). It is designed as investment project financing
(IPF) with PBCs and scheduled for Board delivery in FY25, as further described within this PAD.


12
     With an IPF TA component.

                                                                                                                              Page 8
           The World Bank
           Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)


27. Phase 2: Metro Dhaka Water Security and Resilience Program (US$330 million). Phase 2 of the MPA, planned as a
PforR Program with an IPF component for technical assistance (TA), for FY26 delivery. Phase 2 will improve access to safely
managed WSS services in the Dhaka metropolitan region, covering four city corporations and one municipality.13 In
addition to improving WSS services, it will also help reduce water pollution (through wastewater treatment and industrial
effluent management), enhance flood resilience, and strengthen the institutional capacity and financial sustainability of
the Dhaka utility as well as local government institutions. The program is expected to benefit approximately 11 million
people. This phase includes interventions across all three categories of the program framework.
28. Phase 3: Gazipur wastewater PPP (US$40 million). Phase 3 of the MPA, planned as an IPF for FY26 delivery, will
finance PPP investment for wastewater management in Gazipur and create a replicable model to be adopted in other
cities. This will be designed jointly by the International Finance Corporation and World Bank following the Hybrid Annuity
Model to leverage private capital and benefit 1.5 million people. The Gazipur wastewater PPP project is well integrated in
the Dhaka Water Security and Services Program (Phase 2) but is proposed as a separate phase to finance this high value
PPP contract.14 This phase includes interventions under categories 2 and 3 of the program framework.
29. Phase 4: National Urban Water Security and Sanitation Program (US$250 million). The final phase of the MPA,
planned as PforR with a potential delivery in FY27, will aim to increase access to safely managed WSS services and flood
resilience in 10 secondary cities that are regional economic hubs. These cities have high growth potential, and addressing
the severe lack of WSS services will facilitate more balanced territorial development. This phase will also focus on
enhancing utility systems for operational performance and financial sustainability. It will benefit around 8 million people.15
This phase includes interventions across all three categories of the program framework.
30. Policy agenda: The MPA will support the GoB in implementing key policy and regulatory reforms needed to improve
water security in cities in a structured manner. The focus would be on (i) strengthening the institutional and governance
framework for WSS service delivery, including the mandate, capacity, and accountability of water supply and sewerage
authorities (WASAs) and the municipalities, as well as modalities to engage the private sector for operations and asset
management; (ii) strengthening the regulatory framework for WSS and pollution management with a focus on
enforcement; (iii) rolling out a uniform tariff policy framework to enhance the financial sustainability of WSS service
providers; and (iv) creating an enabling policy environment for mobilizing private capital, including revision of the viability
gap funding policy for the water sector.
31. The MPA design will also support the GoB in adopting a programmatic approach to mobilize private capital for
water sector investments related to water supply, wastewater management, and industrial effluent treatment by
deploying innovative financing instruments including viability gap funding, credit enhancement support, and incentives in
the form of matching grants. This platform will be jointly supported by the World Bank and International Finance
Corporation and will prioritize concrete investment opportunities as identified under the ongoing Water Sector
Assessment Program (WaterSAP).
32. The GoB has requested the Bank to support the establishment of a Project Preparation Facility (PPF) starting with
a focus on water sector projects. This PPF will seek to address a key bottleneck that impedes infrastructure
development—that is, a lack of adequate preparation and readiness of projects included in high-priority national
programs, including those funded by the Bank, other development partners, and the private sector. The proposed PPF
project (to be designed as a stand-alone IPF with a US$50 million IDA credit in parallel to this MPA) will complement the
subsequent MPA phases by improving project preparation and implementation readiness. The PPF may in due course also
support other infrastructure sectors for high-quality and timely preparation.


13
     Dhaka North and South city corporations, Gazipur city corporation, Narayanganj city corporation, and the Savar municipality.
14 As per Operations Policy and Country Services guidance, PPP contract cannot be financed under a PforR. A separate IPF is proposed as Phase 3.
15 The GoB has initiated feasibility studies for priority investments in secondary cities under the ongoing Bangladesh Municipal WSS Project (P161227).


                                                                                                                                                Page 9
         The World Bank
         Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)


33. Learning agenda: The MPA provides a systematic approach for knowledge sharing and crosslearning among utilities
and municipalities within the country and with other water service providers within the South Asia region and globally.
     a. As the leading water utilities in Bangladesh, CWASA and DWASA have valuable expertise and good practices to
        be shared with the smaller and newer WASAs in other big cities (Rajshahi, Khulna, and Sylhet). Further, Phase 1
        of the MPA – Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (CWSIP) has been informed by the assessments and
        action plans based on the Bank’s globally adopted Utility of the Future (UoF) framework.16 Such learnings will be
        rolled out systematically across other utilities and municipalities in subsequent phases, thus enabling water
        utilities and municipalities to benchmark their current performance and climb the utility performance ladder in
        key areas such as improved services, utility management, and financial performance. The MPA structure facilitates
        the capture and feedback loop of early learnings from implementation to influence the design of later phases.
     b. Experience gained in rolling out WSS systems in 30 municipalities under the ongoing World Bank-financed
        Bangladesh Municipal Water Supply and Sanitation Project will be shared and scaled up across other important
        secondary cities (Phases 2 and 4). This will include private sector engagement models for O&M contracts, tariff
        framework adoption, local bylaws for WSS services, business models for FSM, and incentive mechanisms to
        expand the coverage of household connections in small and medium-size cities. Last, city corporations and
        municipalities will acquire knowledge and experience from the planned PPP in Gazipur and leverage lessons from
        it to inform further private sector engagement in the water sector.
     c. The knowledge and learning agenda will be implemented through stakeholder engagement and peer-to-peer
        learning platforms. First, the MPA will support GoB in augmenting the capacity and resources of local institutions,
        such as International Training Network Center at Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology, to expand
        access to training, knowledge sharing, and learning opportunities for water sector institutions in a structured
        manner. Second, the MPA will leverage the network of utilities under the World Bank’s South Asia Water Utility
        Hub17 and Singapore Water Center18 to bring in global best practices and knowledge, including from the Public
        Utilities Board of Singapore and other top-performing utilities worldwide. These platforms will enhance
        knowledge sharing and learning on water security, service delivery, tariff policies, pro-poor services, NRW
        reduction, and financing mechanisms for river clean-up programs. Last, the MPA will leverage the TA and
        stakeholder dialogue facilitated by Water Resources Group 2030, especially as it relates to water pollution and
        the Private Capital Mobilization (PCM) agenda.
34. Partnerships and collaboration: The MPA will leverage partnerships with bilateral and multilateral development
partners such as the government of the Netherlands, Asian Development Bank, Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank,
New Development Bank, and Agence Française de Développment to bring in global knowledge and financing resources to
support the water security and WSS service delivery improvement agenda in Bangladesh.

 II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION
 A. Project Development Objective (PDO)
       (i) PDO Statement
 35. The PDOs are to (i) increase access to safely managed water supply in Chattogram; and (ii) improve operational
 performance and financial sustainability of Chattogram Water Supply and Sewerage Authority (CWASA).


16
   The UoF program supports WSS utilities through in-depth analysis and user-friendly tools to guide the transformation and mprovement process.
17
   The South Asia Water Utility Hub is currently supporting utility modernization programs in 10 utilities across India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Nepal,
and Sri Lanka. From Bangladesh, CWASA is currently included in this program, and more utilities and municipalities will be added moving forward.
18
   The Singapore Water Center was jointly set up by the government of Singapore and the World Bank to provide training and policy support to water
service providers. DWASA and CWASA attended the first water utility leadership program organized by Singapore Water Center in June 2024.

                                                                                                                                             Page 10
         The World Bank
         Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)


        (ii) PDO level indicators
36. The achievements of the PDO will be measured using the following indicators:
    •    Beneficiaries provided with safely managed drinking water services through new or rehabilitated functional water
         supply connections in project areas, of which (number) female19
    •    Smart District Metered Areas (DMAs) made operational with reduced NRW (number)
    •    CWASA achieves and maintains improved financial performance with minimum 5 percent annual tariff increase
         to achieve O&M cost recovery of at least 120 percent (percent)20
 B. Project Components
 37. CWASA has made good progress to improve piped water supply services but is still facing challenges related to
 operational inefficiencies and service coverage expansion. CWASA is responsible for providing water supply, sewerage,
 and drainage services to Chattogram city, which covers 155 square kilometers. CWASA has invested significantly in
 water supply infrastructure over the last few decades, including surface-water-based water treatment plants,
 transmission, and distribution networks. On-premises piped water supply is available to about 2.2 million people
 (around 68 percent of city population), through 85,000 household connections.21 However, five out of six distribution
 areas suffer from intermittent supply. Furthermore, only about 46 out of 2,100 LIC settlements22 in Chattogram have
 access to basic water supply through the communal standpipes supplied by the CWASA network.23 Current NRW is
 estimated at about 30 percent24 due to the high level of leakage in the water distribution network, metering
 inaccuracies, and illegal connections. Reducing water losses is critical for enhancing the overall operational and financial
 efficiency of water supply services. CWASA can reduce the water losses by establishing DMAs (ringfenced water
 distribution networks created by separating the distribution pipelines of adjacent networks for reliable and continuous
 water supply and effective monitoring of water inflow, pressure, and other parameters). Therefore, the proposed
 project will finance priority investments to expand access to water supply and reduce leakages. This will involve
 rehabilitation and expansion of the existing network, along with performance improvements and smart DMA
 management systems.
                                  Table 2: CWASA Key Indicators from Management Information System Report

                                                                                            Year to date (as of      Annual target (variance
                   Selected key indicators                      Previous year actual
                                                                                               April 2024)               from target)
    Nonrevenue water (%)                                                 31                         30                      28 (-8%)
    Revenue collection efficiency (%)                                    87                         86                    116 (-31%)
    Permanent employees per 1,000 connections (#)                        6.4                        5.8                    7.1 (18%)
    Operating ratio                                                     0.66                       0.72                   0.57 (-27%)
    Functioning meter rate (%)                                           92                         90                    100 (-10%)
    Average tariff (Tk/m3)                                              18.14                     18.97                   17.45 (11%)

 38. CWASA is implementing investments to improve access to sanitation services, but LICs remain unserved. The city
 has neither a piped sewerage system nor a proper FSM system. Many households have connected their toilets directly
 to drains and canals, and more than two-thirds of households in LICs lack sanitary toilets or have toilets with no

19 ‘Safely managed refer to the definition of SDG indicator 6.1.1 i.e., improved drinking water source located on premises, available when needed

and free from faecal (E. coli or thermotolerant coliforms) and priority chemical contamination (from arsenic and fluoride). (UN water). Typically
means that water is available on the premises at least 12 hours per day, particularly in areas transitioning to more reliable infrastructure.
20 O&M Cost Recovery for WSS is expressed as percentage of revenue from WSS tariff to the total cost of WSS operations.
21 Utility of the Future Chattogram Final Report, July 2022.
22 About 18 percent of Chattogram’s population (about 0.57 million) resides in 2,106 LIC settlements in the city.
23 Joint Monitoring Programme definition of “basic”: Drinking water from an improved source with collection time more than 30 minutes for a

roundtrip, including queuing.
24 CWASA 2021‒22 MIS report.


                                                                                                                                              Page 11
         The World Bank
         Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)


 containment.25 CWASA is currently developing sewerage systems in two of the five catchments with government
 resources and support from development partners, and investments in the other three are also being planned.
 However, many unserved LIC areas are not included in ongoing or planned investments. In this context, the proposed
 non-network sanitation interventions through the Citywide Inclusive Sanitation26 approach will provide access to safely
 managed sanitation services in LICs and contribute to reduced water pollution.
 39. The Chittagong Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation Project (CWSISP) (P103999; 2010‒20) successfully
 supported CWASA in achieving critical outcomes for improving the coverage of WSS services and institutional
 capacity. CWSISP demonstrated notable outcomes, including: (i) expansion of infrastructure capacity for bulk water
 treatment, transmission, and distribution; (ii) piloting water supply to selected LICs through localized small networks,
 partnering with nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and community-based organizations (CBOs) for local service
 delivery27 (including water distribution and tariff collection); (iii) utility modernization activities covering policies and
 processes for the O&M of WSS systems;28 (iv) improved cost recovery of O&M expenses; and (v) long-term sanitation
 and drainage infrastructure planning and strategic planning. CWSIP will leverage past investment to improve the
 performance, efficiency, sustainability, and resilience of water supply services by financing priority investments to
 improve and expand the existing distribution network, including household connections, operational reorganization for
 efficient management, non-network sanitation for LICs, institution-strengthening, and improved cost recovery for
 financial sustainability. It will support CWASA in continuing its transition to a well-performing and financially sustainable
 utility that enhances the city’s water security and climate resilience in the long term.
 40. The project comprises five components as listed below. The project’s first three components have a strong
 mutually reinforcing relationship in terms of bringing together a comprehensive package of priority WSS investments,
 policy reforms, and institutional systems that will lead to a step change in CWASA’s performance and support the shift
 to a comprehensive service delivery approach.
 41. The project is designed as an IPF with PBCs.29 The project introduces a performance orientation in CWASA through
 five PBCs with a total allocation of US$85 million (about 29 percent of total IDA financing). Over the medium- to long-
 term, this comprehensive, results-based approach for utility transformation and service improvements can be scaled
 up to support WASAs in other big cities in Bangladesh. The PBCs are detailed in Table 2.
 42. The proposed project is aligned with the Maximizing Finance for Development approach. Component 1 takes a
 Design‒Build (D‒B) approach to pave the way for a build-operate-transfer PPP approach and later attracting private
 financing in WSS. Component 2 provides capacity building and market development activities to enable private sector
 agencies to participate in construction contracts and operate WSS facilities in LICs. The TAs provided under Component
 3 for strengthening the utilities’ operational and financial efficiency—supported by institutionalization of the tariff
 framework and associated cost recovery targets—are expected to improve the creditworthiness of the utilities and
 enhance the potential for private capital mobilization.
 Component 1: Improving the Efficiency, Quality, and Coverage of Water Supply Services (total financing: US$287
 million; IDA financing: US$238 million; GoB financing: US$49 million)
 43. Component 1 will help CWASA provide safe and reliable water supply services (in terms of quantity, quality,

25 Assessments indicate that less than half of the generated fecal sludge is contained, and only 0.5 percent of fecal sludge is treated.
26 Citywide Inclusive Sanitation means developing and operating safe sanitation services for all city residents. It addresses the entire urban sanitation

service chain (from toilet to fecal waste treatment and reuse) through sewered and non-sewered services.
27 NGOs and CBOs receive treated water from CWASA through wholesale supply points.
28 Since 2015, the CWASA has been implementing a comprehensive organizational strengthening exercise using the Bank-supported Water Utility

Maturity Model. It achieved level 3 in 2019.
29 Disbursements will be triggered by the documented execution of eligible expenditures and verification of achievement of PBCs, which will provide

incentives for achieving results.

                                                                                                                                                 Page 12
            The World Bank
            Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)


 timing, and duration) and enhance the service delivery system’s operational efficiency. Under this component,
 measures will be undertaken to enhance the duration and pressure (hence, the quantity and reliability) of the water
 supply services, following the DMA approach, and to address a changing climate scenario. The project activities will be
 aligned with the current interventions in the Karnaphuli Service Area for water supply and NRW reduction and will
 extend these measures to the remaining five hydraulic sectors. The rehabilitation of the water supply system will be
 designed to improve flood resilience and reduce service disruptions during floods. The component includes the
 following activities:
        •    Replacement, rehabilitation and expansion of water distribution pipelines, and service lines for reduction of
             NRW to increase water availability and improve the infrastructure’s resilience to floods.
        •    Installation of new water meters and DMA establishment for improved quality and reliability of supply, leak
             detection, and real-time tracking of water consumption.
        •    Upgrading of existing groundwater extraction facilities with improved treatment processes, installation of
             Variable Frequency Drive controlled local booster pumps, and construction of new pumping stations and
             reservoirs.
        •    Purchase of machinery and equipment for monitoring, demand management, and operational sustainability.30
        •    Provision of new connections in unserved areas.
        •    Advisory support and training for CWASA’s technical capacity improvement in the areas of NRW reduction,
             energy efficiency activities, public awareness program on demand management, and storage and inventory
             management.
 44. The project will adopt a Design-Build approach for leveraging private contractors and planned upon project
 implementation, aiming to pave the way for build-operate-transfer arrangements and later attract private financing.
 Capacity building and standard operating procedures for DMA operations will be integrated as part of the D‒B
 contractor’s responsibility, so that CWASA personnel and other CWASA contractors can fully take over and operate the
 assets at the end of the contract period.
 Component 2: Improving Water Supply and Non-network Sanitation Management Services for LICs (total financing:
 US$12 million, fully financed by IDA)
 45. Component 2 focuses on providing both water supply and non-network sanitation options for selected LICs. It
 includes two subcomponents: subcomponent 2.1 will support the implementation of sustainable management models
 for water services in the LICs, building on the experience from pilots tested under the CWSISP; and subcomponent 2.2
 will support innovative investments for sanitation services in LICs, including non-network sanitation, given that
 sewerage systems are not feasible in these locations. Both water supply and non-network sanitation options for LICs
 would rely on private operators to be deployed by CWASA under service contract arrangements. The project would
 enable services involving septage emptying, transport, and treatment, including leasing of emptying and transport
 equipment to private operators. Private sector agencies would benefit from capacity-building and market development
 activities supported by the project. Initial market assessments carried out during preparation of this project confirmed
 the private sector’s interest in construction contracts and undertaking operations of WSS facilities in LICs. This effort
 will build on the experience from previous World Bank water projects in Chattogram in which private sector
 participation was successfully tested.
 46. Subcomponent 2.1: Water Supply for LICs will finance expanded coverage of water supply services to selected
 urban LICs in Chattogram through the extension of the water distribution system. Women will be trained and employed
 to operate water pumps and collect bills as part of these efforts. Formalizing the piped water supply system in these


30
     A supervisory control and data acquisition system to reduce water losses and energy use is proposed to manage the water supply system.

                                                                                                                                              Page 13
          The World Bank
          Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)


 LICs will give their residents access to a safely managed water supply even during extreme weather events, reduce
 negative public health outcomes and the time spent by women fetching water, and increase resilience to floods.
 47. Subcomponent 2.2: Non-network Sanitation Options for LICs will finance: (i) new and improved toilets, where
 needed, including shared toilets that are common in LICs;31 (ii) containment improvement in the form of community
 septic tanks (connected to a group of households) or decentralized wastewater treatment systems (DEWATSs);32 (iii)
 design of a management information system (MIS) for the city’s FSM, integrated with CWASA’s organization-wide MIS
 and geographic information system (GIS); and (iv) communications. The communications program will target behavioral
 change in households to encourage them to connect to the system and minimize untreated septage discharges to the
 environment, along with improving tank management practices to achieve effective FSM for the city. This would also
 enhance resilience to climate impacts by reducing pollution and enhancing the efficiency of wastewater management
 systems. To implement the scheduled emptying of toilet pits/tanks and disposal of sludge at designated fecal sludge
 treatment plants, the project will support the development of GIS-enabled MIS of households that will enable CWASA
 to monitor and track FSM services for the entire city. Proper sanitation through improved toilets and DEWATSs will help
 manage wastewater effectively and, thereby, reduce health risks from waterborne diseases, especially during floods.
 An MIS integrated with GIS would enable better planning and decision-making in response to climate events.
 Component 3: Developing Utility Systems and Capacities (total financing: US$20 million, fully financed by IDA)
 48. Component 3 will provide TA to CWASA to enhance the utility’s systems, financial performance and
 creditworthiness, and climate resilience. This component will enhance CWASA’s capacity to effectively address the
 city’s water security challenges. The TA covers the five core domains and crosscutting dimensions of the Bank’s UoF
 framework and is informed by CWASA’s performance improvement plan. Key activities include:
      •    Development of a citywide water supply master plan, business plan, capital investment plan with financing
           strategy, and debt management plan.
      •    Implementation of a revised tariff framework to adopt two-part tariff structure (fixed and variable)—a
           differential tariff structure reflective of consumption levels.
      •    Development of digital transformation strategy and implementation of integrated data management system
           for financial management (FM) and MIS functions.
      •    Strengthening of CWASA’s asset management practices and implementing a GIS-enabled asset management
           system.
      •    Development of a customer relationship management system, including a customer engagement and
           communication strategy, GIS-enabled customer database, and regular implementation of customer satisfaction
           surveys.
      •    Strengthening of the resilience and disaster preparedness of WSS services by conducting hazard assessments,
           developing standard operating procedures, and designing guidelines and emergency response plans.
      •    Delivery of periodic training for capacity building across various CWASA functions.
      •    TA to conduct gender assessment and recommend required update of CWASA’s HR policy.
      •    TA to help CWASA examine the feasibility of more advanced financing options to mobilize private capital
           investments and improve the efficiency of operations, such as build-operation-transfer arrangements.
 49. A tariff framework has been prepared by CWASA for rollout by the government during project implementation.
 It will strengthen CWASA’s financial sustainability and address the binding constraint in attracting private sector
 participation in the sector. The TA under the project will support piloting of PPP bulk water supply project that will pave



31 Depending on space availability, single or multiple toilet units will be provided.
32 Access to septage emptying trucks and space availability will guide the selection of sites for DEWATS installations.


                                                                                                                          Page 14
          The World Bank
          Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)


 the way for adoption in other WASAs.33 The project will also elevate the sector policy dialogue, including private capital
 enabling activities for WASAs, as informed by the foregoing project activities.
 Component 4: Project Implementation and Management Support (total financing: US$14 million; IDA financing:
 US$10 million; GoB financing: US$4 million).
 50. Component 4 will finance the operations of the project management unit (PMU) in CWASA to support project
 management and implementation and ensure compliance with the Bank’s fiduciary procedures and the requirements
 of the Environmental and Social Framework. Key activities include:
      •    Creation of the PMU and recruitment of the specialists (for project management, procurement, FM, monitoring
           and evaluation (M&E), etc.).
      •    Provision of specialists and consulting services for environmental and social management, gender, and the
           Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM).
      •    Procurement of a consulting firm for design review and supervision services for major contracts.
      •    Provision of an independent verification agency (IVA) for PBCs.
      •    Purchase of office equipment and materials.
      •    Audits of internal project processes.
 Component 5: Contingent Emergency Response (total financing: US$0 million).
 51. A provisional zero amount component is included for rapid reallocation of loan proceeds from other project
 components during an emergency, under streamlined procurement and disbursement procedures. This component
 may also serve as a conduit for additional funds to be channeled to the project in the event of an emergency.
 52. Counterpart government funding will cover land acquisition, resettlement compensation, incremental operating
 costs, road cutting charges, customs duty and value added taxes on imports, vehicles, and workshop and sitting
 allowances.
 53. Approach and rationale for the PBCs. The PBCs reflect CWASA’s core priorities in terms of ensuring safely managed
 water supply services and provide incentives to secure the necessary governance and performance improvements over
 the project’s implementation period.
                                                    Table 3: Performance-Based Conditions

                          PBCs                                             Rationale                          Amount              Target
                                                                                                          allocated (US$)     achievement
                                                                                                                                timelines
   PBC 1. Beneficiaries provided with safely              Deliver safely managed water supply              30,000,000         Dec. 31, 2030
   managed drinking water services through new or         services to existing and new customers.
   rehabilitated    functional   water     supply         Ensure equitable water supply services.
   connections in project areas.
   PBC 2. Smart DMAs made operational with                Improve operational efficiency, reduce           20,000,000         Dec. 31, 2030
   reduced NRW.                                           NRW, and improve accounting of
                                                          physical losses.
   PBC 3. CWASA achieves and maintains improved           Enhance utility’s financial sustainability       20,000,000         Dec. 31, 2030
   financial performance with minimum 5 percent           through reducing NRW, efficient billing
   annual tariff increase to achieve O&M cost             and collection, increase tariffs, and
   recovery of at least 120 percent.                      reduction of arrears.



33 CWASA has been appointed by the government to undertake a PPP bulk water supply project with private capital investments in the Mirsarai

Economic Zone in Chattogram.

                                                                                                                                        Page 15
         The World Bank
         Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)


    PBC 4. CWASA’s tariff framework approved and              Adopt differential tariff structure and           5,000,000    Dec. 31, 2026
    adopted by the CWASA board.                               annual indexation for cost recovery.
    PBC 5. CWASA has disclosed at least two                   Operationalize MIS system for FSM                 10,000,000   Dec. 31, 2030
    consecutive quarterly FSM service delivery                service monitoring and reporting for
    monitoring reports from the MIS in one fiscal             regular citywide FSM service operation.
    year.
    Total Allocation                                                                                            85,000,000

 C. Project Beneficiaries
54. With the completion of all the project activities, CWASA will be able to provide on-premises piped water connections
and supply safely managed water to an estimated 1,040,000 people. In addition, the project will benefit 200,000 people
in LIC, delivering improved water supply34 to 100,000 people and improved sanitation services to an additional 100,000
people.

 D. Rationale for Bank Involvement and Role of Partners

55. The Bank is well positioned to support improvements in WSS service delivery in Chattogram and CWASA’s
operational and financial efficiency for the following reasons:
(i) Alignment with Water GCP. The proposed project is fully aligned with the global Water GCP framework and will
    contribute to achieving beneficiary targets under 1 (achieving universal access to safely managed WSS).
(ii) Continuity of an established partnership with CWASA. Building on the institutional development activities
     accomplished under CWSISP for modernizing CWASA’s operational systems and processes, the proposed CWSIP will
     implement key recommendations of the CWASA institutional action plan (prepared under CWSISP).
(iii) Leveraging global best practices in WSS utilities management and service provision. The forward-looking program
      for CWASA draws from the Bank’s global initiatives, such as the UoF and Citywide Inclusive Sanitation. Based on
      diagnostic assessments across several countries, the UoF initiative provides insights on how to improve WSS services
      so that these utilities become efficient, resilient, and accountable. The project will support detailing and implementing
      the key elements of the CWASA-developed Performance Improvement Action Plan using the UoF framework. The
      Bank’s global experience in sanitation, particularly the Citywide Inclusive Sanitation program, has informed the
      project’s non-network sanitation interventions.

 E. Lessons Learned
56. The PBCs under an IPF can work well, even in contexts with low-capacity governance systems, when supported by
focused TA.35 Performance-based financing can help address long-term institutional barriers and align sector incentives.
However, lessons drawn from experience to date highlight the importance of ensuring sufficient funding aligned with the
scope, along with complementary TA and capacity building to support achievement of results. The TA should also be
synchronized with project implementation.
57. Implementation readiness of investment subprojects must be ensured during preparation to avoid delays in project
execution. The CWSISP experienced problems relating to slow disbursement due to lack of preparedness at project entry,
leading to a longer-than-planned implementation period. Building on the lessons from this experience, investments to be
financed under Phase 1 (studies, designs, bidding documents, and environmental and social (E&S) documents) have been



34 With provision of at least 70 liters per capita per day as per the national water supply service standards
35 Key lessons drawn from the Results-based Rural WSS under the National Target Program (P127435), Sustainable Rural WSS Program (P163732),

Results-based Scaling Up Rural WSS Program (P152693), and other similar operations.

                                                                                                                                     Page 16
        The World Bank
        Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)


prepared utilizing a Project Preparation Advance; this will allow implementation to proceed as soon as the project
becomes effective.
58. Both operational and financial efficiency gains are vital to ensure sustainable and good quality services and targets
should be realistically ambitious. The previous project (CWSISP) set targets for key operational performance indicators
(including O&M cost coverage) at a level lower than the benchmark,36 which deterred implementation of needed reforms.
The CWSIP has been designed to focus on operational efficiency gains (including addressing NRW) together with key
financial improvement instruments (such as the new proposed tariff framework) with a goal of attaining a moderately
ambitious target on cost recovery—specifically, one that would allow CWASA to cover full O&M costs and, progressively,
part of debt service charges.

 III. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS
 A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
59. The MPA will be anchored within the Ministry of Local Government, Rural Development, and Cooperative at the
central level and advised by a project steering committee (PSC). The PSC will be chaired by the Secretary of the Ministry
of Local Government, Rural Development, and Cooperatives, will provide strategic guidance, will approve work plans, and
will facilitate collaboration between the different agencies involved in program implementation. Each phase will have its
own project implementation and management arrangements with a designated implementing agency and dedicated
implementation unit.
60. CWASA is the implementing agency for the CWSIP. It will be responsible for all project activities, including planning,
procurement, management, and monitoring, financial control and management, and citizen engagement (including the
GRM). CWASA will be responsible for achieving results under the project (including PBCs) and for documenting progress.
CWASA will have a dedicated PMU under the Managing Director, comprising of a full-time Project Director (not below the
rank of a Superintending Engineer), a full-time Deputy Project Director, and other personnel with specialization in requisite
disciplines (procurement, FM, project management, M&E, E&S, and audit) at CWASA headquarters, posted from within
CWASA or recruited from the open market. A third-party IVA will be appointed by CWASA to conduct the annual
independent verification of the PBCs achieved. Detailed implementation arrangements and the support plan are
presented in Annex 1.

 B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements
61. The implementation agencies will be primarily responsible for M&E in respective MPA phases and will report the
progress of the respective project activities and results indicators. M&E reports will be submitted as part of the regular
progress reports. In conjunction with World Bank implementation support missions, the entity PMUs will collect and
present data and reports for respective national institutions responsible for project implementation. A midterm review
will be conducted to evaluate implementation progress and identify potential issues that need to be addressed to ensure
achievement of the intended impact, including lessons learned that could help inform and strengthen the preparation of
future operations in the MPA.
62. Project monitoring and reporting will be conducted by the PMU. At CWASA, the PMU will implement the project’s
M&E system, which will be used to report progress on results, take corrective actions, improve coordination, and facilitate
learning. The PMU will develop the data collection and reporting systems required to monitor results and will collect
disaggregated service delivery data for various customer groups, specifically the poor and vulnerable. CWASA will



36
  The target for the PDO outcome indicator of CWASA achieving O&M cost coverage from direct water sales revenues was revised to 85 percent
through the project restructuring (compared to the industry standard of 100 percent cost coverage).

                                                                                                                                     Page 17
       The World Bank
       Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)


implement the customer database and monitoring systems and conduct regular customer surveys. The survey results,
citizen report cards, performance reviews/audits, and other information will be publicly disclosed.

 C. Sustainability
63. The project will enhance CWASA’s overall financial, service delivery, and operational sustainability by strengthening
the utility systems, institutional capacity, and financial performance. Activities under Component 1 will enhance service
delivery and operational sustainability by implementing priority investments to strengthen the water distribution system,
service performance monitoring systems, and NRW management and to expand household connections following sound
levels of service. Activities under Component 2 will enhance E&S sustainability by delivering WSS services in select LIC
settlements to improve living conditions, prevent public health concerns, and mitigate environmental pollution. Activities
under Component 3 will pave the way for CWASA’s overall organizational sustainability by strengthening utility systems
for improving business planning, financial planning (including debt management), and corporate governance and for
managing assets, operations, and customer accountability. Finally, financial sustainability will be enhanced through
improved tariff framework, cost recovery, and FM. Aligned with a longer-term sustainability pathway, the proposed
reforms will improve WSS planning, fiscal health, and the standards of WSS services provision by CWASA, further enabling
the creation of institutional settings for the regulation of services.

 IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY
 A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis
64. Technical analysis. A hydraulic model of the water distribution network has been developed to simulate current
pressure distributions and has been projected for two future scenarios in 2032 and 2052. In addition, a comprehensive
assessment encompassing primary and secondary water quality of sources, customer usage patterns, billing and tariff
structure, existing infrastructure, future investments plans, population growth and water usage projection, and NRW
across various city sectors informed the selection of civil works packages designed to improve water supply services in the
CWASA service area.
65. Based on the technical analysis, three broad categories of interventions are proposed: (i) activities for NRW reduction;
(ii) measures to enhance the water supply service levels; and (iii) support for increased consumer service connections.
Other measures for performance enhancement include the reorganization of the network into smart DMAs; supply
improvements by laying distribution pipelines (including replacing old leaky pipelines) and providing service connections;
construction of clear water storage reservoirs; installation and commissioning of the supervisory control and data
acquisition system; and retrofit of data loggers. The reduction in NRW and capacity enhancement of the existing sources
will enable CWASA to expand its service area and connect more customers to the network. The feasibility analysis showed
that by enhancing the operation of existing treatment plants (with the addition of 40 million liters per day from
groundwater sources), upgrading supply lines, and reducing NRW, the existing water supply will be sufficient to meet the
water demand of 2032 in all five geographical sectors of the city. Simulation shows that 24-hour water supply can be
achieved gradually once NRW is reduced to desired levels through the proposed investments.
66. Water supply investments will be procured based on Design‒Build contracts. The investments have been designed to
ensure that a single contractor will bear the DMA design and implementation responsibility of a hydraulically separated
system (Mohara Water Supply System (Package-1, Lot-1) and Sheikh Russel-Kalurghat Water Supply System (Package-1,
Lot-2)). The total estimate for DMA formation is approximately US$172 million (52 percent of project cost).
67. The DEWATSs proposed as the non-network sanitation option would use an anaerobic baffled reactor, which is an
improved septic tank with a series of baffles under which the wastewater is forced to flow. This technology is easily
adaptable and can be applied at the household level, in small neighborhoods, or even in bigger catchment areas. This is
also suitable for areas where land may be limited (for example, LICs) since the tank is commonly installed underground


                                                                                                                     Page 18
           The World Bank
           Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)


and requires a small area. However, a vacuum truck should be able to access the location to remove the sludge regularly
for transport to the FSTPs operated by CWASA and the Chattogram City Corporation (CCC).
68. Paris alignment. The operation is aligned with the goals of the Paris Agreement on climate mitigation and adaptation:
(i) Assessment and reduction of mitigation risks: The project is not at material risk of having a negative impact on the
    country’s low GHG emissions development pathways. All the project-financed activities are on the universally aligned
    list, including the rehabilitation of water supply systems, NRW reduction, energy efficiency, and non-network
    sanitation services improvement. The water supply improvement investments to be financed under the project will
    contribute to enhanced efficiency of water resources and energy consumption through NRW reduction, improved
    distribution network, and deployment of energy efficient pumping equipment. This will reduce CWASA’s overall
    energy consumption for water supply services as well as the diesel fuels used by water trucking. Supported by
    community behaviour change communications, actions to enhance access to sanitation solutions through new and
    improved toilets, containment management improvements, and decentralized wastewater treatment plants will help
    reduce methane and nitrous oxide emissions from untreated organic carbon in wastewater effluent. The net emissions
    from the project activities are estimated to be 107,622 tCO2-eq.
(ii) Assessment and reduction of adaptation risks: Chattogram is exposed to significant climate change risks including
     flooding, sea level rise, and salinity intrusion, which collectively pose significant risk to the city’s water security and
     sustainability. The project interventions related to water distribution network upgrade, NRW reduction, and energy
     and resource efficiency interventions in Component 1 will expand the availability of the safely managed drinking water
     supply for the city population. Flood resilience will also be promoted through improved sanitation and improved septic
     sludge containments in LICs to prevent ground and surface water pollution, thus reducing the incidence of waterborne
     diseases exacerbated by floodwaters and through new and rehabilitated functional water supply connections that
     ensure continuous supply. Water supply and non-network sanitation infrastructure installed by the project will include
     flood- and heat-resilient design to mitigate the inherent risks from these hazards in the project area. Component 3
     will also support CWASA in assessing climate risks related to sea level rise, salinity intrusion, and increased flooding;
     will incorporate climate-resilient design principles in WSS infrastructure and service delivery systems; and will
     establish disaster preparedness procedures to ensure service continuity. With such measures in place, the residual
     risks from climate change to the project are considered low.
69. Mobilizing Finance for Development. The project will support CWASA in implementing policy reforms and
strengthening systems for improved financial performance and creditworthiness. CWASA will adopt a revised tariff
framework to improve operational cost recovery by charging a higher tariff for higher water consumption. In addition, TA
will be provided to CWASA to strengthen expenditure and revenue management, investment and financial planning, and
sustainable debt management. Improved financial sustainability through tariff reforms, robust investment and financial
planning, and sustainable debt management will create fiscal space for future investments and O&M expenses, improve
its creditworthiness and enhance its ability to mobilize private and market finance.
70. Financial analysis. The financial analysis indicates that CWASA’s ongoing and planned capital investments to expand
the water supply and sewerage systems in the city over the period 2023‒28 will result in a steep rise in the annual O&M
costs—an increase of approximately 170 percent by 2030. However, the overall share of direct operating expenses in the
total costs are expected to fall,37 due primarily to the significant increase in nonoperating costs, including depreciation
and financial (interest) expenses. Depreciation expenses are expected to grow from 2023 as additional water supply and
sewerage assets are created through investments, according to the Capital Investment Plan. CWASA’s total operational
revenue is expected to increase by 140 percent over the same period, considering a 5 percent annual tariff increase along
with several project-supported efficiency improvement interventions. Overall, CWASA would be able to ensure financial


37
     Direct operating expenses represented nearly 30 percent in 2019 and are further expected to decrease to 25 percent in 2035.

                                                                                                                                   Page 19
         The World Bank
         Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)


sustainability of WSS operations and fund the rapid increase in O&M expenses by improving operational efficiency and
revenue performance, with the help of project activities. In a counterfactual scenario, the operational cost recovery ratio
is expected to decline from 114 percent in 2021 to 107 percent in 2030, but with the project support, CWASA will target a
stable operational cost recovery at or above 120 percent during this period.
71. CWASA will be adopting a revised tariff framework to implement a two-part tariff structure with the objective of
improving: (i) cost recovery, (ii) economic efficiency, (iii) equity, and (iv) affordability of WSS services. The proposed two-
part tariff structure (fixed and variable tariff)38 will enable CWASA to adopt a differential tariff structure that is reflective
of consumption levels.39 This tariff policy reform will enable CWASA to ensure long-term financial sustainability and
resource efficiency of WSS operations through improved revenues, higher economic efficiency, and more equitable and
affordable WSS service delivery. The project will incentivize the tariff policy reform through PBCs.
72. Economic analysis. The CWSIP is expected to bring sizable economic and social benefits to the people in Chattogram.
A cost-benefit analysis was carried out to assess the economic viability of the project investment. It primarily concentrated
on WSS services improvement interventions covered under Components 1 and 2, which account for more than 91 percent
of total project costs. Although the investments in institution-strengthening (Component 3) also bring benefits, these are
often challenging to quantify and consequently excluded from the cost-benefit analysis. For Component 1, the expected
benefits mainly include: 1) economic value of water reclamation through reduced NRW; 2) health cost savings from
improved water quality due to increased access to improved water sources (new connections) and technical upgrades of
existing connections following the establishment of DMAs and time cost savings from reduced sick leave; and 3) time cost
saved by bringing water sources closer to the households. For Component 2, the expected benefits mainly include: 1) time
cost saved by bringing water sources closer to the households in the LICs and 2) economic savings from health issues
avoided and time cost savings from reduced sick leave resulting from improved WSS services in the LICs. The economic
analysis is based on a comparison between the “without-the-project” and “with-the-project” scenarios. The lifetime of
the project investments is assumed at 30 years. The economic analysis indicates an economic internal rate of return of
16.45 percent generated with a net present value of around US$31.30 million (Tk 14.44 billion) (calculated at a discount
rate of 12 percent), thereby indicating the project investment is economically viable.

 B. Fiduciary
73. Financial management. CWASA has experience in implementing several projects with external aid, including Bank-
financed projects. CWASA has limited staff capacity in terms of FM. There is no integrated FM system at present. Based
on the FM assessment, the Bank found CWASA acceptable for the project subject to agreed-on mitigation measures. The
residual risk is assessed to be “Substantial.”
74. The project combines traditional transaction-based IPF and PBCs, with total financing of US$333 million, including
counterpart financing of U$53 million. An amount of US$85 million will be financed through PBCs. Eligible expenditure for
the PBCs will include work contracts to be financed under Component 1 at a ratio agreed on between IPF and IPF with
PBCs. If the PBCs are not met according to the agreed-on protocol, but project proceeds were used from the designated
accounts, the GoB will refund the amounts to the World Bank. Upon achievement and verification of the PBCs, CWASA
will adjust advances against PBCs based on the actual expenditures under this category. Traditional IPF will continue to
follow report-based disbursements wherein financing percentages for each category will be strictly followed. For the
project, an off-the-shelf accounting software will be purchased that will generate financial reports in the agreed-on format
of interim unaudited financial reports (IUFRs) directly from the system, and CWASA will submit the IUFRs on a quarterly
basis within 45 days from the end of each calendar quarter. CWASA agreed to strengthen its internal audit capacity by

38
   Fixed tariff rates for domestic connections were estimated for three categories of connections based on number of households per connection:
Tk 325 for 1‒4 households, Tk 975 per month for 5‒10 households, and TK 1,950 per month for >10 households. The variable tariff for domestic
connections is estimated at Tk 25 per kiloliter per month.
39
   Lifeline water requirements can be charged lower (to the benefit of the LICs). Consumption beyond lifeline requirements can be charged higher.

                                                                                                                                          Page 20
       The World Bank
       Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)


setting up a risk-based internal audit unit and modernizing financial and asset management systems. The capacity building
of internal audit will start with issuance of a model internal audit charter and risk-based internal audit manual under
Component 3.
75. There is a backlog of external audit of CWASA for FY23 and FY24, which will be completed by March 2025. An FM
expert and a qualified accountant will be hired as consultants to support the project until closing. In addition, accountants
will be deputed to the project from the entity for day-to-day FM operations. At present, there are no audit or financial
reports pending from the previous project under the implementing agency. Detailed FM arrangements for the project are
presented in Annex 1.
76. Procurement. Procurement under the project will be carried out in accordance with the World Bank Procurement
Regulations for IPF Borrowers, Fifth Edition, September 2023 (“Procurement Regulations”) and the provisions stipulated
in the Project Procurement Strategy for Development (PPSD) and the procurement plan. The project will be subject to the
World Bank’s Anticorruption Guidelines, dated October 15, 2006, and revised in January 2011 and July 2016. The project
will use the World Bank’s Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) system to plan, record, and track
procurement transactions.
77. Under the project, procurement will include goods, works, and consulting services with a few non-consulting services.
The total value of procurement will be approximately US$280 million. All the procurement activities will be carried out by
the PMU to be set up in CWASA. A detailed procurement capacity assessment has been carried out for CWASA, which
noted implementation capacity weaknesses including: i) lack of qualified procurement professionals; ii) limited knowledge
of World Bank’s new Procurement Regulations; and iii) lack of experience in procuring and managing D‒B contracts. Other
procurement risks include possible delays in procurement due to the lack of technical preparation, slow decision-making
and approval processes; and iv) the risk of fraud and corruption primarily due to weak internal control functions and
limited accountability. Additional mitigation measures have been established (see Annex 1).
78. A PPSD has been prepared by CWASA with assistance from the Bank and includes detailed risks and mitigation
measures. Residual procurement risk after mitigation measures is “Substantial.” The PPSD spells out the detailed
procurement arrangements for the project, including identification of risks and risk mitigation measures. Use of rated
criteria will be mandatory for all international procurements of goods, works, and non-consulting services.
79. Special measures for internationally advertised contracts. CWASA will create an evaluation committee to evaluate
proposals/applications/bids for large value international procurement, including a local procurement consultant and one
international procurement expert recruited by the project. CWASA will ensure strict confidentiality of the bid/proposal
evaluation process and timely completion of the evaluation. The World Bank’s no objection will be required for the
formation of the bid/proposal evaluation committee and for any change in its membership. The evaluation committee
members will sign an integrity pledge as per the format in the PPSD. The task team will conduct additional due diligence
of all PMU staff, bid evaluation committee members, and others who will be involved in project procurement and payment
during implementation support missions.
80. The World Bank’s procurement supervision will include prior and post review of the contracts. Procurement post
review by the Bank will be conducted at least on an annual basis or more frequently as needed.

 C. Legal Operational Policies

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalpolicy#doctemplate




                                                                                                                      Page 21
           The World Bank
           Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)


     Legal Operational Policies                                                                  Triggered?
     Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                                 Yes
     Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                           No




 81. OP 7.50 is applicable to this Project because the Project will finance activities that may use or risk polluting waters
 of the Karnaphuli and Halda rivers including groundwater connected to these rivers, which are considered international
 waterways. The exceptions to the riparian notification requirement under paragraphs 7(a), (b) and (c) of the policy
 apply. Activities are limited to rehabilitation, upgrading and modernization of water distribution networks which will
 not adversely change the quantity and quality of water flows to other riparian areas. The terms of reference for the
 proposed city-wide Master Plan for water supply will require the assessment of any riparian issues. Any new
 investments that use or risk polluting water of the international waterways are limited to water use from tributaries
 and aquifers that are exclusively located in Bangladesh which is the lowest downstream riparian country. The exception
 to the notification requirement was approved by the World Bank Regional Vice President (RVP) on May 16, 2024.
 D. Environmental and Social
82. While the project’s overall E&S impacts upon completion are likely to be largely positive, the project’s construction
and immediate post construction phase poses some environment risks which are rated as moderate and social risks which
are rated as substantial. The key environmental risks include noise and dust pollution, odor, disposal of excavated
materials, as well as concerns for worker occupational health and safety. These risks are temporary and expected to
materialize during the construction phase. Odor from the pumping, transporting, and final disposal of treated fecal waste
may also materialize in relation to the proposed toilets, communal septic tanks, and DEWATSs. The discharged water from
DEWATSs may contaminate water bodies if standards for discharge are not met. The key social risks of the project are: (i)
potential economic displacement and disruption of other livelihood activities that take place on or alongside pavements
and the right-of-way for water transmission and distribution lines (approximately 250 project-affected people); (ii) limited
in-situ displacement of informal settlers (+/-20 households) on parcels of land owned by CWASA or other government
departments that might be required for construction and operation of water reservoir facilities; and (iii) the restriction of
access to homes, businesses, and common property resources during construction. No new land acquisition is envisaged
for the project. Other social risks include occupational health and safety concerns, community health and safety concerns,
traffic safety, congestion, and exclusion of the poor and marginalized households from accessing project benefits due to
tariffs and affordability.
83. To address the E&S risks, the project has undertaken two E&S impact assessments—one for the water supply
subprojects and the other for the sanitation improvement subprojects. These have been finalized and will be disclosed as
per timelines committed in the E&S commitment plan.40 The E&S impact assessments also contain detailed E&S
management plans to help the project mitigate and manage the identified E&S risks. Costs related to implementation of
the E&S management plans will be included as a separate bill of quantities item in the bidding and contract documents.
The E&S impact assessment for the water supply subprojects also has a detailed resettlement policy framework that
provides guidance on preparing and implementing, as required, resettlement action and Livelihood Restoration Plans
based on the final design and alignments. Other instruments such as an E&S commitment plan, stakeholder engagement
plan, and labor management plan have been prepared and were disclosed in the country on November 7, 2024.41 If and

40
   The Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) and Environmental and Social Review Summary
(ESRS) were disclosed on World Bank website on November 2, 2024.
41
   https://ctg-wasa.org.bd/site/view/notices

                                                                                                                                  Page 22
           The World Bank
           Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)


as required, cultural heritage management plans and chance find procedures will be prepared and implemented to
address risks related to E&S Standard 8, should these risks become material during implementation. CWASA is committed
to putting in place the appropriate institutional arrangements to manage the project’s E&S risks and impacts, and these
have been described in detail in the E&S commitment plan. Through project implementation, the World Bank will provide
upfront technical support with a focus on understanding and operationalizing the requirements of the Bank’s E&S
standards relevant to this project so as to strengthen CWASA’s E&S risk management capacities.
84. Sexual exploitation and abuse/sexual harassment: A sexual exploitation and abuse and sexual harassment (SEA/SH)
screening of the project was performed based on the activities using the major civil works SEA/SH risk assessment tool
and the risk rating was determined to be low. Even though the project activities are in densely populated areas where
labor influx may potentially increase the risk of SEA/SH, the project is based in an urban area within the CCC that will be
easier to supervise over the project’s lifetime. The SEA/SH prevention measures will include integration of SEA/SH
awareness for project stakeholders. SEA/SH prevention and response measures will be incorporated into bidding
documents with mandates and requirements to institute and monitor the code of conduct for workers and provide
remedies for potential SEA/SH issues. CWASA will be receive awareness-raising training on SEA/SH, and CODES OF
CONDUCT with SEA/SH provisions will be developed for project stakeholders to follow. The GRM will also include
processes to administer SEA/SH complaints. An existing gender-based violence service provider mapping will be utilized,
and CWASA and other project stakeholders will also be made aware of gender-based violence service providers in the
project areas.
85. Citizen engagement and communications program. CWASA will implement a citizen engagement and communication
program to obtain feedback on the implementation of the project activities. CWASA will follow a protocol for regular
reporting and disclosure of performance to all stakeholders, especially the poor and vulnerable sections. CWASA will
implement a GRM, social outreach, annual customer satisfaction surveys, and citizen report cards. The project will engage
with customers, including at least two public consultations each year on performance data and citizen feedback. For this
purpose, CWASA will engage a professional agency to conduct direct outreach with citizens to identify and address
stakeholder concerns and facilitate behavior change in users that might be needed to optimize benefits from
uninterrupted water supply.
86. Gender. According to the findings of baseline socioeconomic survey, women are responsible for 69 percent, men and
women are responsible for 23 percent, and men are responsible for only 8 percent of the water collection in the proposed
LICs. By improving water supply in underserved areas, the project seeks to address the disproportionate amount of time
and effort spent in LICs on this task, particularly by women. Furthermore, under CWSISP, CWASA, in partnership with an
NGO and CBO, trained and employed women in LICs as water pump operators and bill collectors—roles normally
associated with men. This helped CWASA maintain a high collection efficiency rate and thus sustain and extend quality
service to more households. These interventions supported women’s engagement and employment in the WASH sector
and strengthened water supply service delivery in the LICs. Building on the success of the pilots, the project will support
women’s capacity building and employment in LICs, where they will be trained for operating water pumps and collecting
bills and employed as pump operators and bill collectors (where required), respectively. These efforts will be supported
with actions such as a communications campaign to publicize training and employment opportunities as well as specific
measures to maximize women's retention in the training program. Finally, women’s employment is low in Bangladesh,
and particularly low in the WASH sector, in which only 6 percent of the WASA workforce are women.42 Therefore, to
support women’s employment directly, the project will also explore the barriers to women’s employment, recruitment,
retention, and advancement in CWASA. The project will conduct an HR policy assessment that entails a) a survey to assess
the implications of existing HR policies on gender equality and social inclusion and b) recommendations to the CWASA
board to update the HR policy based on the findings of the survey.

42
     World Bank. 2019. “Women in Water Utilities: Breaking Barriers.” World Bank: Washington, DC.

                                                                                                                    Page 23
         The World Bank
         Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)


VI. GRIEVANCE REDRESS SERVICES
87. Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a project supported by the World Bank
may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance mechanisms or the Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS).
The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to address project-related concerns. Project
affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the Bank’s independent Accountability Mechanism
(AM). The AM houses the Inspection Panel, which determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, as a result of Bank
non-compliance with its policies and procedures, and the Dispute Resolution Service, which provides communities and
borrowers with the opportunity to address complaints through dispute resolution. Complaints may be submitted to the
AM at any time after concerns have been brought directly to the attention of Bank Management and after Management
has been given an opportunity to respond. For information on how to submit complaints to the Bank’s GRS, visit
http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For information on how to submit complaints to the Bank’s Accountability
Mechanism, visit https://accountability.worldbank.org.

88. Grievance redress. The stakeholder engagement plan that has been prepared and disclosed by CWASA outlines a GRM
for the project. The GRM is designed to receive, address, and report back to complainants on their complaints in a time-
bound manner and outlines a robust escalation process in case grievances are not addressed as per the timelines specified.
Any stakeholder will have access to this GRM. The project GRM is also equipped to receive SEA/SH-related complaints.
SEA/SH-related complaints received will be treated with utmost confidentiality, ensuring that a survivor-centric approach
is followed, and consent of the complainant is obtained for any redressal measure. Additionally, the project has developed
a separate GRM to receive and address grievances from project workers, contracted workers, and primary supply workers.
This is outlined in the labor management plan. The mechanism to redress grievances received from labor follows the basic
principles of the project GRM and is similarly sensitive to SEA/SH-related grievances.

 VII. KEY RISKS
89. The overall risk for the project is rated as substantial. The risks and measures to address the issues are given below.
90. The political and governance risk is rated as substantial. The interim government has prioritized law and order, but
safety and security concerns persist until law enforcement is fully operational. Through several commissions, the interim
government is identifying critical reforms (economic, institutional, and political) to be adopted prior to holding elections.
As requested by political parties, it will be important that the roadmap to elections is announced to avoid an increase of
political tensions. The political risks are partially mitigated by the continuous engagement between DPs and the GoB to
(a) follow up on the work of the reform commissions, (b) support the interim government to deliver priority reforms, such
as through the proposed Strengthening Governance and Institutional Resilience (SGIR) DPC,43 and (c) ensure that the
commission’s recommendations are followed by a roadmap of the critical reforms and a timetable for the elections.
91. The macroeconomic risk is rated as Substantial. Downside risks have increased, related to uncertainties in the political
process and the security situation which impact the recovery of economic activities. The financial sector remains
vulnerable with deviations from international regulatory and supervisory standards, and weak corporate governance.
Despite recent improvements, the Balance of Payment (BoP) remained in deficit and the foreign exchange reserves
remained under pressure. The macroeconomic risks are partially mitigated by the GoB’s reform program, supported by
the IMF arrangements, ongoing World Bank and other DPs policy lending.
92. The sector strategies and policies risk is rated as substantial. In Bangladesh, WSS services in the few larger cities are
delivered by WASAs that are governed by the WASA Act (1996). In practice, however, the line ministry is responsible for

43 The proposed SGIR DPC pursues reforms on the financial sector (e.g. on asset classification and non-performing loans), revenue generation (e.g.

strengthened tax policymaking) and expenditure (e.g. more transparent tax expenditures, e-GP for public procurement, and digitally authenticated
dynamic registry for social programs), and data production and dissemination (e.g. open-data policy and codifying the independence of BBS in
releasing unbiased data).

                                                                                                                                          Page 24
        The World Bank
        Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)


all major decisions in the sector organizations. The WASA Act precludes WASAs from revising tariff levels beyond 5 percent
of the ongoing rates annually unless formal approval is obtained from the line ministry. To mitigate the risk of delays in
executing justified economic tariff revisions, the project requires CWASA to approve a revised tariff framework. In
addition, the World Bank team will collaborate with the Asian Development Bank, Japan International Cooperation
Agency, and other donors to sustain the policy dialogue on tariffs with the local government division.
93. The fiduciary risk is rated as substantial. CWASA has limited staff capacity in procurement and FM. There is no
integrated FM system at present, and the budgeting and accounting system is fragmented. CWASA also has a lag in entity
audit reports. The large size and complexity of contracts under the project pose fiduciary risks. To mitigate these risks,
several measures will be undertaken, including hiring qualified procurement consultants (local and international), creating
bid/proposal evaluation committees with the necessary expertise and a separate bid/ proposal evaluation committee for
large-value internationally advertised contracts, and using the government’s electronic procurement (e-GP) system. The
PMU will also engage a part-time procurement advisor to ensure probity assurance during the procurement processes.
94. E&S risks are rated as substantial. The project’s key social risks are: (i) potential economic displacement and
disruption of livelihood activities that take place on or alongside pavements and the right-of-way for water transmission
and distribution lines (approximately 250 project-affected people); (ii) limited in-situ displacement of informal settlers (+/-
20 households) on parcels of land owned by CWASA or other government departments that might be required to build
and operate water reservoir facilities; and (iii) the restriction of access to homes, businesses, and common property
resources during construction. No new land acquisition is envisaged for the project. The main environmental risks are
expected to materialize during the construction phase and include noise and dust pollution, dumping and disposal of
excavated materials, traffic congestion, as well as concerns for the health and safety of workers and communities. To
address the E&S risks, the project has prepared two E&S impact assessments including detailed E&S management plans.
These have been finalized and disclosed. Other instruments (such as the stakeholder engagement plan and labor
management plan) have been prepared and disclosed.
95. Stakeholder risk is rated as substantial. The previously closed World Bank-supported CWSISP implemented by CWASA
suffered from the lack of coordination between CWASA, the CCC, and other utilities and stakeholders e.g. Roads and
Highways Department (RHD) responsible for infrastructure and services in Chattogram as laying new pipelines affected
other utility services and road pavements. To mitigate this risk, the Ministry of Local Government, Rural Development,
and Cooperatives will oversee coordination between the government entities through the PSC. A project implementation
committee will be set up by the CWASA to smoothen project implementation on ground. Project level monitoring and
evaluation system will track potential impacts on physical works on existing roads for early warnings and help in resolving
impacts with other utilities.




                                                                                                                        Page 25
         The World Bank
         Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project(P176429)



                                                            VIII.          RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padannexresultframework#doctemplate
PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes

   Baseline                  Period 1                Period 2                  Period 3                  Period 4                  Period 5                    Closing Period
   MPA PrDO: To (i) improve access to safely-managed water supply and sanitation services, (ii) reduce pollution in rivers and canals, and (iii) enhance resilience to flood risks in
   selected urban areas.
   MPA PrDO: People provided with safely managed water supply services (Number)
   Dec/2024                  Dec/2025                Dec/2026                  Dec/2027                  Dec/2028                  Dec/2029                    Dec/2030
   0.00                      0.00                    0.00                      130,000                   980,000                   1,600,000                   2,040,000
   Increase access to safely managed water supply in Chattogram
   Beneficiaries provided with safely managed drinking water services through new or rehabilitated functional water supply connections in project areas (Number) PBC
   Dec/2024                  Dec/2025                Dec/2026                  Dec/2027                  Dec/2028                  Dec/2029                    Dec/2030
   0.00                      0.00                    0.00                      130,000                   480,000                   900,000                     1,040,000
     ➢Beneficiaries provided with safely managed drinking water services through new or rehabilitated functional water supply connections in project areas ‒ Female (Number) PBC
   Dec/2024                  Dec/2025                Dec/2026                  Dec/2027                  Dec/2028                  Dec/2029                    Dec/2030
   0.00                      0.00                    0.00                      65,000                    240,000                   450,000                     520,000
   Improve operational performance and financial sustainability of CWASA
   Smart DMAs made operational with reduced NRW (Number) PBC
   Dec/2024                  Dec/2025                Dec/2026                  Dec/2027                  Dec/2028                  Dec/2029                    Dec/2030
   0.00                      0.00                    0.00                      0.00                      5.00                      25.00                       46.00
   CWASA achieves and maintains improved financial performance with minimum 5 percent annual tariff increase to achieve O&M cost recovery of at least 120 percent (Percentage)
   PBC

   Dec/2024                 Dec/2025                 Dec/2026                  Dec/2027                 Dec/2028                  Dec/2029                 Dec/2030
   120.00                   120.00                   120.00                    120.00                   120.00                    120.00                   120.00


Intermediate Indicators by Components

   Baseline                 Period 1                 Period 2               Period 3                 Period 4                     Period 5                 Closing Period
   Improving Efficiency, Quality and Coverage of Water Supply Services
   People provided with safely managed water supply through new functional connections in non-LIC areas (Number)



                                                                                                                                                                                 Page 26
     The World Bank
     Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project(P176429)


Dec/2024                  Dec/2025                 Dec/2026                 Dec/2027                 Dec/2028                Dec/2029       Dec/2030
0.00                      0.00                     0.00                     30,000.00                100,000.00              200,000.00     200,000.00
People provided with safely managed water supply through rehabilitated functional connections in non-LIC areas. (Number)
Dec/2024                  Dec/2025                 Dec/2026                 Dec/2027                 Dec/2028                Dec/2029       Dec/2030
0.00                      0.00                     0.00                     100,000.00               300,000.00              600,000.00     800,000.00
CWASA has established modernized and systemized NRW monitoring system (Text)
Dec/2024                  Dec/2025                 Dec/2026                 Dec/2027                 Dec/2028                Dec/2029       Dec/2030
No                        No                       No                       No                       Yes                     Yes            Yes
Time saved by women and girls in LICs to fetch water (Percentage)
Dec/2024                  Dec/2025                 Dec/2026                 Dec/2027                 Dec/2028                Dec/2029       Dec/2030
0.00                      0.00                     0.00                     0.00                     50.00                   50.00          50.00
Women who are trained in LICs as pump operators and bill collectors are employed in select project areas (Percentage)
Dec/2024                  Dec/2025                 Dec/2026                 Dec/2027                 Dec/2028                Dec/2029       Dec/2030
0.00                      0.00                     0.00                     0.00                     50.00                   50.00          50.00
Improving Water Supply and Non-network Sanitation Management Services for LICs
People provided with improved sanitation services in LICs (Number)
Dec/2024                  Dec/2025                 Dec/2026                 Dec/2027                 Dec/2028                Dec/2029       Dec/2030
0                         0                        0                        10,000                   25,000                  40,000         100,000
CWASA has disclosed at least two consecutive quarterly FSM service delivery monitoring reports from the MIS in one Fiscal Year (Text) PBC
Dec/2024                  Dec/2025                 Dec/2026                 Dec/2027                 Dec/2028                Dec/2029       Dec/2030
No                        No                       No                       No                       Yes                     Yes            Yes
People in LICs being delivered minimum 70 liters per capita per day of Bangladesh standard quality water (Number)
Dec/2024                  Dec/2025                 Dec/2026                 Dec/2027                 Dec/2028                Dec/2029       Dec/2030
0.00                      0.00                     0.00                     10,000.00                25,000.00               30,000.00      100,000
Developing Utility Systems and Capacities
CWASA’s tariff framework approved and adopted by the CWASA board (Text) PBC
Dec/2024                  Dec/2025                 Dec/2026                 Dec/2027                 Dec/2028                Dec/2029       Dec/2030
No                        No                       Yes                      Yes                      Yes                     Yes            Yes
Five-year business plan approved and adopted (Text)
Dec/2024                  Dec/2025                 Dec/2026                 Dec/2027                 Dec/2028                Dec/2029       Dec/2030
No                        No                       No                       Yes                      Yes                     Yes            Yes
Smart DMAs with GIS enabled water supply asset management system (Number)
Dec/2024                  Dec/2025                 Dec/2026                 Dec/2027                 Dec/2028                Dec/2029       Dec/2030
0.00                      0.00                     0.00                     0.00                     5.00                    25.00          46.00


                                                                                                                                                         Page 27
        The World Bank
        Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project(P176429)


   CWASA establishes integrated data management system for FM functions (Text)
   Dec/2024                Dec/2025                   Dec/2026                  Dec/2027                Dec/2028             Dec/2029                     Dec/2030
   No                      No                         No                        No                      Yes                  Yes                          Yes
   Gender assessment conducted on CWASA HR policy and recommendations presented to the CWASA governing board (Yes/No)
   Dec/2024                Dec/2025                   Dec/2026                  Dec/2027                Dec/2028             Dec/2029                     Dec/2030
   No                      No                         Yes                       Yes                     Yes                  Yes                          Yes
   CWASA prepares and formally adopts a climate-resilience plan for WSS service delivery after seeking board approval (Text)
   Dec/2024                Dec/2025                   Dec/2026                  Dec/2027                Dec/2028             Dec/2029                     Dec/2030
   Doesnt exist            Not done                   Not done                  Completed               Completed            Completed                    Completed
   Project Implementation and Management Support
   CWASA redresses at least 70% of WSS grievances within the specified period (Text)
   Dec/2024                Dec/2025                   Dec/2026                  Dec/2027                Dec/2028             Dec/2029                     Dec/2030
   No                      No                         No                        Yes                     Yes                  Yes                          Yes
   Beneficiary households expressing satisfaction with service provision (Percentage)
   Dec/2024                Dec/2025                   Dec/2026                  Dec/2027                Dec/2028             Dec/2029                     Dec/2030
   0.00                    0.00                       0.00                      40.00                   50.00                60.00                        70.00
   Contingent Emergency Response


Performance-based Conditions (PBC)

   Period                                                                                    Period Definition
   Period 1                                                                                  Year 1
   Period 2                                                                                  Year 2
   Period 3                                                                                  Year 3
   Period 4                                                                                  Year 4
   Period 5                                                                                  Year 5
   Period 6                                                                                  Year 6

   Baseline                 Period 1                 Period 2                 Period 3                 Period 4                  Period 5                  Period 6
   1:Beneficiaries provided with safely managed drinking water services through new or rehabilitated functional water supply connections in project areas (Number )
   0                        0                        0                        130,000                  480,000                   900,000                   1,040,000
   0.00                     0.00                     0.00                     3,750,000.00             10,096,154.00             12,115,384.00             4,038,462.00
   PBC allocation                                    30,000,000.00                                     As a % of Total PBC Allocation                      35.29%



                                                                                                                                                                          Page 28
     The World Bank
     Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project(P176429)


2:Smart DMAs made operational with reduced NRW (Number )
0                       0                        0                         0                        5.00                      25.00               46.00
0.00                    0.00                     0.00                      0.00                     2,173,913.00              8,695,653.00        9,130,434.00
PBC allocation                                   20,000,000.00                                      As a % of Total PBC Allocation                23.53%
3:CWASA achieves and maintains improved financial performance with minimum 5 percent annual tariff increase to achieve O&M cost recovery of at least 120 percent
(Percentage )
120.00                  120.00                   120.00                    120.00                   120.00                    120.00              120.00
0.00                    0.00                     4,000,000.00              4,000,000.00             4,000,000.00              4,000,000.00        4,000,000.00
PBC allocation                                   20,000,000.00                                      As a % of Total PBC Allocation                23.53%
4:CWASA’s tariff framework approved and adopted by the CWASA board (Text )
No                      No                       Yes                       Yes                      Yes                       Yes                 Yes
0.00                    0.00                     5,000,000.00              0.00                     0.00                      0.00                0.00
PBC allocation                                   5,000,000.00                                       As a % of Total PBC Allocation                5.88%
5:CWASA has disclosed at least two consecutive quarterly FSM service delivery monitoring reports from the MIS in one Fiscal Year (Text )
No                      No                       No                        No                       No                        Yes                 Yes
0.00                    0.00                     0.00                      0.00                     0.00                      5,000,000.00        5,000,000.00
PBC allocation                                   10,000,000.00                                      As a % of Total PBC Allocation                11.76%




                                                                                                                                                                   Page 29
        The World Bank
        Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)



Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes
Increase access to safely managed water supply in Chattogram
Beneficiaries provided with safely managed drinking water services through new or rehabilitated functional water supply connections in project
areas (number) PBC
                           This refers to the number of beneficiaries benefiting from safely managed water supply services. Safe water supply refers
Description                to water quality that meets Bangladeshi standards; test data on water quality to be regularly collected by CWASA.
                           Reliable water supply refers to predictable water supply of known quantity, timing, and number of hours of supply.
Frequency                  Quarterly, from Year 3 onwards.
Data source                Administrative data from CWASA.
                           CWASA will maintain the following records as a part of its M&E system and billing & collection system: (i) list of water
                           supply connections, including any new connections and discontinued connections on a monthly basis; (ii) data on hours
Methodology for data
                           of water supplied at predetermined measurement points in the network; (iii) number of non-LIC beneficiaries benefiting
collection
                           from safe and reliable water supply; and (iv) number of LIC beneficiaries benefiting from safe and reliable water supply.
                           Each water connection is assumed to benefit 26 LIC and non-LIC residents combined.
Responsibility for data    CWASA PMU.
collection
        ➢ Beneficiaries provided with safely managed drinking water services through new or rehabilitated functional water supply connections in
            project areas ‒ Female (number)
                           Disaggregates the total number of beneficiaries by gender who benefited from safely managed water supply services as a
Description
                           result of project interventions.
Frequency                  Quarterly, from Year 3 onwards.
Data source                Administrative data from CWASA.
Methodology for data       Household connection database maintained within the billing and collection system.
collection
Responsibility for data    CWASA PMU.
collection
Improve operational performance and financial sustainability of CWASA
Smart DMAs made operational with reduced NRW (number) PBC
                           This refers to the total number of DMAs that are operational as a result of project interventions. Operationalization
                           includes: (i) maintaining minimum water pressure of 0.8 bar at inlet point of the DMA; (ii) ensuring an average of 10
Description                hours of water supply per day at the DMA inlet point; (iii) achieving NRW of 15 percent or below at DMA level; (iv) 100
                           percent of existing billable customers are metered; and (v) functional real-time data acquisition and monitoring system at
                           DMA level.
Frequency                  Semiannually, from Year 4 onwards.
Data source                Operational data from the Maintenance, Operation, and Distribution Systems divisions of CWASA.
Methodology for data       Operational data collected and maintained by the D‒B contractors responsible for DMA installations.
collection
Responsibility for data    CWASA PMU.
collection
CWASA achieves and maintains improved financial performance with minimum 5 percent annual tariff increase to achieve O&M cost recovery of
at least 120 percent (percentage) PBC
                           Operational cost recovery is calculated by dividing operating income by operating expenses; it is the total annual
                           operational costs being covered by revenues. CWASA’s O&M cost for its assets include fixed costs (staff costs, salaries,
Description                overheads, etc.), electricity costs, chemicals and consumables, repair and maintenance, administrative expenses, etc.
                           CWASA’s revenue includes revenue from WSS services in the Chattogram metro area. CWASA will revise its combined
                           water supply and sewerage tariff by a minimum of 5% on annual basis in support of operational cost recovery.
Frequency                  Annually, from Year 1 onwards.
Data source                Administrative data from CWASA.
Methodology for data       Revenue and cost numbers from the accounting database maintained within CWASA's accounts division.
collection
Responsibility for data    CWASA PMU.
collection



                                                                                                                                            Page 30
        The World Bank
        Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)



Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: Intermediate Results Indicators by Components
Improving efficiency, quality, and coverage of water supply services
People provided with safely managed water supply through new functional connections in non-LIC areas (number)
                           This indicator will measure the total number of new water supply connections that are made operational. The number of
Description                beneficiaries benefiting will exclude LIC population. The functionality of installed new connections will be measured by
                           complete metering and meeting minimum service delivery standards.
Frequency                  Quarterly, from Year 3 onwards.
Data source                Administrative data from CWASA and contractors.
Methodology for data       Household connection database maintained within the billing collection system.
collection
Responsibility for data    CWASA PMU.
collection
People provided with safely managed water supply through rehabilitated functional connections in non-LIC areas (number)
                           This indicator will measure the total number of rehabilitated water supply connections that are made operational as a
                           result of project interventions. The number of beneficiaries benefiting will exclude the LIC population. The functionality
Description
                           of installed rehabilitated connections will be measured by complete metering and meeting minimum service delivery
                           standards.
Frequency                  Quarterly, from Year 3 onwards.
Data source                Administrative data from CWASA and contractors.
Methodology for data       Household connection database maintained within the billing collection system.
collection
Responsibility for data    CWASA PMU.
collection
CWASA has established a modernized and systemized NRW monitoring system (text)
                           This indicator measures CWASA's performance in improving NRW management systems to address real losses and
Description
                           unbilled consumption in priority areas.
Frequency                  Semiannually, from Year 4 onwards.
Data source                Reports from the water supply network monitoring system.
Methodology for data       CWASA will provide access to the quarterly water supply network performance reports.
collection
Responsibility for data    CWASA PMU.
collection
Time saved by women and girls in LICs to fetch water (percentage)
                           The project is expected to improve access to water for selected LIC households and would significantly reduce drudgery
Description
                           and time loss for the women and girls of the family who are tasked with organizing drinking water for the household.
Frequency                  Annually, from Year 3 onwards.
Data source                Citizen Report Card survey implemented by CWASA.
Methodology for data
                           Sample household surveys conducted by a third party as part of the citizen satisfaction survey.
collection
Responsibility for data
                           Third party appointed by PMU.
collection
Women who are trained in LICs as pump operators and bill collectors are employed in select project areas (percentage)
Description                LICs where women are responsible for various functions such as pump operation or bill collection, as deputed by CBOs.
Frequency                  Annually, from Year 3 onwards.
Data source                CWASA.
Methodology for data       Sample household surveys conducted by a third party as part of the citizen satisfaction survey.
collection
Responsibility for data    CWASA PMU.
collection
Improving water supply and non-network sanitation management services for LICs
People provided with improved sanitation services in LICs (number)
Description                This indicator will measure the total number of beneficiaries living in LICs that benefit from non-network sanitation


                                                                                                                                             Page 31
        The World Bank
        Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)


                           services as a result of project interventions.
Frequency                  Quarterly, from Year 3 onwards.
Data source                Administrative data from CWASA.
Methodology for data       Operational data from the Maintenance, Operation, and Distribution Systems divisions of CWASA.
collection
Responsibility for data    CWASA PMU.
collection
CWASA has disclosed at least two consecutive quarterly FSM service delivery monitoring reports from the MIS in one fiscal year (text) PBC
                           The MIS for FSM services will be qualified as operational when it can track and monitor emptied septic sludge reaching
                           the treatment plants and generate operational performance reports on FSM service delivery covering key parameters.
Description
                           Scheduled desludging with improved tracking and monitoring (MIS) will lead to effective capacity utilization and
                           improvements in service.
Frequency                  Quarterly, from Year 4 onwards.
Data source                CWASA MIS Unit to provide regular updates.
Methodology for data
                           Data from the CWASA MIS unit.
collection
Responsibility for data
                           CWASA PMU.
collection
People in LICs being delivered at a minimum of 70 liters per capita per day under the Bangladesh quality water standard (number)
                           This indicator will measure the total number of beneficiaries living in LICs that benefit from improved water supply
Description
                           services as a result of the project interventions.
Frequency                  Quarterly, from Year 3 onwards.
Data source                Administrative data from CWASA and contractors.
                           CWASA will maintain the following records as part of its M&E system: (i) number of water supply connections, including
Methodology for data
                           any new connections serving beneficiaries in LICs; and (ii) number of LIC residents having access to water supply services
collection
                           across all the targeted LICs.
Responsibility for data
                           CWASA PMU.
collection
Developing utility systems and capacities
CWASA’s tariff framework approved and adopted by the CWASA board (text) PBC
                           A tariff rationalization framework prepared by CWASA and targeted for rollout by the government during project
Description                implementation is envisaged to strengthen CWASA’s financial viability and address the binding constraint in attracting
                           private sector participation in the sector.
Frequency                  Once, in Year 2.
Data source                Documentation of CWASA governing board approval.
Methodology for data
                           CWASA will make documentation available of CWASA board approval.
collection
Responsibility for data
                           CWASA PMU.
collection
Five-year business plan approved and adopted (Text)
                           The five-year business plan comprises of the following: (i) service delivery improvement targets; (ii) operational efficiency
                           (energy efficiency and NRW control) targets; (iii) capital investment plan; (iv) organizational structure and annual staff
Description                plan; (v) revenue projections including yearly projected tariff and demand; (vi) cash flow projections with cost recovery
                           and subsidy requirements; (vii) systems for FM, customer grievance redressal and M&E; (viii) capacity building plan; and
                           (ix) commitments from stakeholders for financial support.
Frequency                  Once, in Year 3.
Data source                CWASA.
Methodology for data       CWASA will prepare a five-year business plan which will be approved and adopted by its governing board. The
collection                 CWASA will maintain the records of the board meeting on the business plan in the form of meeting minutes.
Responsibility for data
                           CWASA PMU.
collection
Smart DMAs with GIS-enabled water supply asset management system (number)
Description                Number of DMAs with improved asset management systems to enable inventory stocktaking, asset condition tracking,



                                                                                                                                               Page 32
        The World Bank
        Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)


                           asset performance and efficiency, asset maintenance needs of WSS services, mainstream preventive maintenance, and
                           capital budgeting for long-term sustainability of the assets.
Frequency                  Semiannually, from Year 4 onwards.
Data source                Digitized asset database of CWASA.
Methodology for data
                         CWASA will provide access to the digitized asset database.
collection
Responsibility for data
                         CWASA PMU.
collection
CWASA establishes integrated data management system for FM functions (text)
Description              This indicator measures CWASA’s overall FM performance.
Frequency                Annually
Data source              Integrated FM system generated complete CWASA balance sheet/annual accounts.
Methodology for data     CWASA will provide access to the integrated FM system. PMU-appointed consultants will assess the process of recording
collection               expenditure and revenue in the integrated FM system and generating annual accounts.
Responsibility for data
                         CWASA (Finance Department) with PMU assistance.
collection
Gender assessment conducted on CWASA HR policy and recommendations presented to the CWASA governing board (Yes/No)
                         CWASA will conduct an HR policy assessment to evaluate the implications of existing HR policies within CWASA on gender
Description              equality and social inclusion. The recommendations on updating the HR policy will be presented for CWASA governing
                         board's review and endorsement.
Frequency                Once, in Year 3.
Data source              Approved CWASA HR Policy.
Methodology for data
                         Review of approved CWASA HR policy.
collection
Responsibility for data
                         CWASA PMU.
collection
CWASA prepares and formally adopts a climate resilience plan for WSS service delivery after seeking board approval (text)
                         CWASA will prepare a comprehensive climate resilience plan and seek its board approval for formal adoption and
Description
                         implementation to ensure that WSS services in the city are climate-resilient.
Frequency                Once, in Year 3.
Data source              Resilience plan approved by the CWASA board.
Methodology for data
                         Review of the approved resilience plan.
collection
Responsibility for data
                         CWASA PMU.
collection
Project implementation and management support
CWASA redresses at least 70% of WSS grievances within the specified period (text)
                         The GRM will be part of the CWASA M&E system. It will include the time limit for redressal for various categories of
Description
                         grievances as per the citizen’s charter for CWASA.
Frequency                Quarterly, from Year 3 onwards.
Data source              CWASA to maintain records of grievance redressal in M&E system.
                         CWASA will maintain records of grievance redressal in its M&E system, including (a) time of grievance, (b) category of
Methodology for data
                         grievance, (c) time taken for redressal as per CWASA records, (d) time of confirmation of redressal by cross verification
collection
                         with a sample of customers, and (e) status of grievances outstanding or closed without redressal.
Responsibility for data
                          CWASA PMU.
collection
Beneficiary households expressing satisfaction with service provision (percentage)
                         Satisfaction score will be measured through a citizen feedback survey conducted by CWASA annually. The survey will
Description              focus on (a) access to water supply and sewerage services, (b) water quality and quantity, (c) reliability and affordability,
                         and (d) customer service related to WSS services. Citizen satisfaction would be measured based on a scale of 1‒10.
Frequency                Annually, from Year 3 onwards.
Data source              Satisfaction survey implemented by CWASA.
Methodology for data     Sample household surveys conducted by a third party. CWASA will publish the methodology for the citizen satisfaction


                                                                                                                                             Page 33
        The World Bank
        Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)


collection              survey and disclose the results publicly.
Responsibility for data
                        Third party appointed by PMU.
collection
Contingent emergency response

Verification Protocol: Performance Based Conditions

1: Beneficiaries provided with safely managed drinking water services through new or rehabilitated functional water supply connections in
project areas (number)
                           US$28.85 for each beneficiary with new and rehabilitated connections with safely managed water supply in project
Formula                    areas, subject to a maximum of US$30 million for a total target of 1,040,000 beneficiaries. Disbursement will be released
                           based on verification of the number of beneficiaries connected with metered safely managed water supply. Scalable.
                           Safe water supply refers to water quality complying with GoB standards; test data on water quality to be regularly
                           collected by CWASA. “Safely managed” refers to the definition of Sustainable Development Goal indicator 6.1.1, that is,
                           improved drinking water source located on premises, available when needed, and free from fecal (E. coli or
                           thermotolerant coliforms) and priority chemical contamination (arsenic and fluoride). This will also apply to new
Description
                           connections providing safely managed water supply. In the formula, "new access" refers to beneficiaries newly provided
                           with access to safely managed water supply while "rehabilitated access" refers to beneficiaries benefiting from
                           functional access to safely managed water supply from connections established prior to the project. The functionality of
                           installed connections will be measured by complete metering.
Data source/Agency         CWASA
Verification entity        IVA
                           CWASA will maintain the following records as a part of its M&E system:
                                 a. Number of connections serving beneficiaries in project areas.
                                 b. Number of beneficiaries benefiting from safely managed water supply.
                           CWASA will report the number of beneficiaries who have access to new or rehabilitated connections, which will be
Procedure                  verified quarterly. Each water connection is assumed to benefit 26 beneficiaries. IVA will review data from the M&E
                           system and the billing and collection system. Any shortfall or excess achievement can be adjusted in subsequent years
                           subject to the overall cap for the PBC. The cumulative disbursement in all years will not exceed the total disbursement
                           allocated for the PBC. CWASA will report the number of beneficiaries who have access to new or rehabilitated
                           connections, which will be verified quarterly.
2: Smart DMAs made operational with reduced NRW (number)
                           US$434,783 for each completed DMA made operational subject to a maximum of US$20 million for a total target of 46
Formula                    DMAs. Disbursement will be released based on verification of the number of new DMAs made operational with a proven
                           reduction in NRW. Scalable.
                           A DMA is defined as a discrete area of a water distribution network created by closing boundary valves, thus ensuring
                           flexibility to changing demands. Water flowing into and out of the DMA is metered and flows are periodically analyzed
                           to monitor the level of leakage. The project incentivizes operationalization of smart DMAs to ensure equitable supplies
                           and improved accounting of physical losses in a closed demarcated area with complete metering of household
Description
                           connections. Operationalization includes: (i) maintaining minimum water pressure of 0.8 bar at inlet point of the DMA;
                           (ii) ensuring an average of 10 hours of water supply per day at the DMA inlet point; (iii) achieving NRW of 15 percent or
                           below at DMA level; (iv) 100 percent of existing billable customers are metered; and (v) functional real-time data
                           acquisition and monitoring system at DMA level. Fund allocation expires at end of Year 6 if PBC is not achieved.
Data source/Agency         CWASA
Verification entity        IVA
                           CWASA will prepare implementation progress reports on the implementation of DMAs, processes used, and completion
                           and handing over status. CWASA will report the completed number of DMA, which will be verified semiannually. IVA to
Procedure
                           carry out physical inspection of a sample of no less than 20 percent of completed DMAs. CWASA will report the
                           completed number of DMAs, which will be verified semiannually.
3: CWASA achieves and maintains improved financial performance with minimum 5 percent annual tariff increase to achieve O&M cost recovery
of at least 120 percent (Percentage)
                           US$4,000,000 upon CWASA achieving the O&M cost revovery of 120 percent at the end of Year 1, and US$4,000,000 for
Formula
                           each subsequent year for maintaining the same recovery percentage of 120 percent. US$4,000,000.00 will be disbursed



                                                                                                                                            Page 34
        The World Bank
        Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)


                         every year upon verification that CWASA maintained O&M cost recovery at or above 120 percent, with a maximum of
                         US$20 million over the project period. O&M cost recovery in combined operation (water supply and sewerage) at or
                         above 120 percent is subject to a maximum of US$20 million over five years. Non-scalable.
                         O&M cost recovery for WSS is expressed as percentage of revenue from water and sewerage tariff to the O&M cost of
Description              combined WSS operations. CWASA’s O&M cost includes fixed costs (staff costs, salaries, overheads etc.), electricity
                         costs, chemicals and consumables, repair and maintenance, administrative expenses, etc.
Data source/Agency       CWASA
Verification entity      IVA
                         CWASA will update both cost and revenue data in the M&E system, on the basis of which O&M cost recovery will be
                         calculated. CWASA will consider shared costs between WSS services to arrive at the cost of combined operations (water
Procedure
                         and sewerage). Revenue for combined operations (WSS) will be obtained from M&E system. IVA will verify the O&M
                         cost recovery data recorded in the M&E system on annual basis
4: CWASA’s tariff framework approved and adopted by the CWASA board (text)
Formula                  US$5 million upon achievement. Non-scalable.
                         The tariff framework is expected to improve the operational cost and interest cost recovery and will be more
Description
                         economically efficient.
Data source/Agency       CWASA
Verification entity      IVA
                         The verification process will: (i) review the CWASA governing board minutes approving the tariff framework; (ii) obtain a
Procedure
                         copy of the approved tariff framework; and (iii) review the CWASA website for the published tariff framework.
5: CWASA has disclosed at least two consecutive quarterly FSM service delivery monitoring reports from the MIS in one fiscal year (text)
                         US$5,000,000 for each year in which at least two consecutive quarterly FSM service delivery monitoring reports from
Formula
                         the MIS are disclosed, up to US$10,000,000. Non-scalable.
                         At least two consecutive quarterly FSM service delivery monitoring reports disclosed in one year. Disbursements will be
Description
                         made for a maximum of two years. Fund allocation expires at end of Year 6 if PBC is not achieved.
Data source/Agency       CWASA
Verification entity      IVA
                         CWASA will carry out FSM service delivery performance monitoring utilizing the comprehensive MIS and publish
                         quarterly operational performance reports. The reporting requirements—including monitoring parameters (for example,
                         status of containments, locations of containments that must be emptied, status of emptying requests, total containment
Procedure
                         emptied, revenue collection, etc.)—will be detailed in the project operational manual. The IVA will verify the reports
                         published for compliance with the verification protocol (reporting on key operational parameters, analysis, and follow-
                         up actions).




                                                                                                                                          Page 35
        The World Bank
        Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)



                               ANNEX 1: Implementation Arrangements and Support Plan

                                       COUNTRY: People's Republic of Bangladesh
                                     Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project

1. CWASA will be the nodal entity responsible for project implementation. CWASA will also be responsible for institution-
strengthening, including the establishment of institutional, governance, and financial systems that are affecting its
operational efficiency and financial sustainability, and capacity strengthening for WSS service delivery (Component 3);
design and rehabilitation/new construction of water distribution networks, household connections, and the
implementation of DMAs (Component 1); and water supply and non-network sanitation infrastructure design,
construction, and operations for LICs (Component 2). The PMU will be set up at CWASA with key professionals and staff
to spearhead project implementation. Under Component 3, CWASA will also be responsible for TA, third-party citizen
report cards, independent verification of performance-based results, and third-party audits to assess customer
satisfaction with services for the entire implementation period.
2. The GoB will establish a PSC in the Ministry of Local Government, Rural Development, and Cooperatives, chaired by
the secretary of the local government division, to provide overall guidance on project implementation, including policy
direction and oversight on required coordination between the CCC, CWASA, power and telecom utilities, the Bangladesh
Water Development Board, Bangladesh Railways, the Roads and Highways Department, and other responsible
coordinating agencies (for example, the Chittagong Development Authority). The PSC will meet at least twice a year to
review implementation progress and provide suggestions for improving performance. CWASA will also set up a project
implementation committee to coordinate CWASA’s planned activities in the city for the rehabilitation and new installation
of water supply connections, as well as related operational matters.
3.  Design review and supervision consulting firm. CWASA will select and supervise a design review and supervision
consulting firm tasked with providing design review and supervision support for the entire project period. The design
review and supervision consulting firm will carry out due diligence and recommend for approval the D‒B and water supply
contractors’ proposals and designs. Further, the design review and supervision consulting firm will supervise works
throughout implementation, especially for Components 1 and 2. This will include, but not be restricted to, assessment of
subproject plans, implementation performance monitoring, implementation supervision and quality assurance/quality
control of the infrastructure investments, relevant engineering support, advice on contract management, and reporting
on progress along with recommendations to the PMU. The design review and supervision consulting firm will be a firm
contract with personnel of expertise in relevant engineering and technical domains.
4. PMU project management specialists. The PMU will hire a group of individual project management and related
specialist consultants who will be responsible for overall support to enable the PMU to manage all project components
on time and within budget. These individual consultants will develop and use the project reporting templates and will
assist the PMU with the preparation of annual plans, regular reporting, financial administration, E&S management, IT
tasks; review designs and technical documents related to digital investments planned under Component 3; undertake
capacity building/trainings and stakeholder consultations; implement the communication strategy; advise on legal issues;
and update project documentation as needed. This cohort of individual consultants will include experts and professional
staff with the necessary expertise in project management tasks relevant to the implementation of a large-scale
infrastructure project and associated organizational, financial, E&S safeguard, legal, and related dimensions. The PMU will
also assist CWASA in procuring the firm that will implement the operational systems/digital investments proposed under
Component 3 to address institutional capacities and systems constraints, including developing/improving and
implementing the integrated data management (such as enterprise resource planning) system, integrated supervisory



                                                                                                                     Page 36
            The World Bank
            Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)


control, and data acquisition, including a GIS-enabled water quality testing system, a GIS-enabled asset management
system, and a computerized customer database along with a customer service website.
5. The PMU will further provide support to CWASA in the implementation of the training plan developed as part of the
previous Utility Modernization TA, mainstreaming periodic employee surveys within CWASA for capacity development
needs and planning workshops/campaigns focused on mainstreaming resilience across CWASA. The PMU will also support
CWASA in implementing key strategic/policy interventions planned under Component 3, covering development of i) a
digital transformation strategy, ii) a structured customer engagement and communication plan, and iii) developing
standard operating procedures to institutionalize customer relationship management. Additional specialized
consultancies, such as the master plan for the water sector and the development of a strategic business plan for the
CWASA, will be managed by the CWASA PMU. Capacity building and standard operating procedures for DMA operations
will be integrated as part of the D‒B contractor’s responsibility so that CWASA personnel and other CWASA contractors
are fully equipped to take over and operate the assets at the end of the contract period. The PMU and its individual project
management consultants will also support CWASA in convening the interagency operational coordination mechanism with
other Chattogram agencies.
6. Independent Verification Agency (IVA). CWASA will select and manage the services of a firm tasked with carrying out
independent verification assessments of the achievements set out in the PBCs, following terms of references satisfactory
to the Bank. The IVA will be responsible for verifying achievement of the PBCs and, in doing so, will examine secondary
data, collect primary data, and carry out other methods of measurements annually or periodically as needed. The IVA will
share the findings of assessments to CWASA and the Bank.
7. Contracting method for water supply improvement works. Under Component 1, performance-based D‒B contract
modalities will be introduced to leverage private sector participation to develop water supply systems infrastructure.
CWASA will enter into performance-based contracts with private contractors in which contracts will include targets for
installation and operational efficiency (for example, number of households connected, hours of supply, quantum of
leakage, water pressure, etc.). After the end of the D‒B contract installation period, the CWASA Maintenance
Operation Distribution and Services unit will take over the operations of assets following trial operations by the private
contractor for one year, after having received requisite training from the contractor (which will be a part of the respective
contract).
8. Implementation arrangements for water supply for LICs.44 The project preparation activity obtained detailed
information for targeted communities through technical surveys and community mapping. The study provided critical
information on the demographic profile, current WSS service, the social and political situation in Chattogram’s LICs, and
the role of various NGOs/organizations in the provision of WSS services in these communities. The study found that all
major national and international organizations are using some variation of intermediation for water supply services
delivery. Based on the assessment and lessons learned from CWSISP engagements with LICs, the engagement model and
the roles and responsibilities of key players will be as follows:
(i) Nongovernmental organization (NGO): Through service contracts, the CWASA PMU will engage existing NGOs that
    have active programs in Chattogram slums for social mobilization and consensus-building in the community. The NGOs
    will work in the selected LICs to establish CBOs and work with landowners to ensure that there are adequate spaces
    to install tube wells, pumping stations, reservoirs, and networks. If required, CWASA will also enter into a
    memorandum of understanding with landowners to enable installation and operations of the tube wells from their
    land until these tube wells are functional and handed over.



44
     Water supply arrangements will be implemented in 12 city wards (2, 9, 11, 12, 13, 19, 22, 30, 35, 40, and 41).


                                                                                                                       Page 37
             The World Bank
             Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)


(ii) Community: Within the communities, the NGOs will facilitate the creation of CBOs that will subsequently nominate a
     single representative to interface with CWASA for regular collection of bills. The NGOs will continue to work with the
     CBOs until necessary to ensure that the system operates smoothly.
(iii) CWASA: Financed by the project, CWASA will install deep tube-wells and extend distribution mains to serve selected
      LICs in the 12 proposed CCC wards. CWASA will be responsible for installing one to four master meters per site, which
      will be maintained and read by CWASA staff. The monthly tariff for each CBO will be decided based on the master
      meter readings. For any other cluster meters, the NGOs will work with CBOs to purchase, install, and read meters.
      CWASA will continue to be responsible for monitoring water quality, collecting tariffs from the CBO representative,
      and addressing any mechanical and technical issues that may arise.
(iv) Contractors: CWASA will enter into a contract with construction firms for test boring, deep tube well installation, and
     construction of the pumping stations, reservoirs, service and distribution lines, and household connections. The
     contractors will also be responsible for providing manpower to operate and maintain the pumping stations for the
     defect liability period following construction.
9. Implementation arrangements for non-network sanitation.45 The Institution and Regulatory Framework (2017)
accords the city corporation responsibility for FSM with the WASAs to provide TA as needed. While reiterating the city
corporation’s role in FSM service delivery, the National Action Plan for FSM (2021) also suggests that the WASAs may also
implement FSM services in coordination with local government departments. Therefore, according to the National Action
Plan for FSM, CWASA would be the leading agency responsible for the full chain of sanitation (sewerage or FSM services),
and the CCC will take the lead in (i) raising public awareness on the need for regular/scheduled emptying as per the
Bangladesh National Building Code and paying for emptying and treatment, and (ii) educating households on the dangers
to health and environment from toilets/containments connected to the drain and enforcing disconnection. Through a
memorandum of understanding signed by CWASA, CCC, and the Chittagong Development Authority, CWASA will obtain
the mandate to deliver all sanitation services (network and non-network).
10. CWASA will contract a construction firm to build new infrastructure for the communities, such as DEWATSs. Through
a consulting service contract, CWASA will also engage existing NGOs that have active programs in Chattogram slums to
verify that minimum connection criteria are met and to manage customer readiness for improved sanitation system
through community mobilization and awareness-raising.
(i) Toilet upgrade/communal septic tanks. NGOs will identify poor households requiring toilet upgrade (unimproved
    toilets), explain technical options, and help with implementation and toilet improvement—a process similar to what
    was adopted to improve water supply in LICs in Chattogram under the previous Bank-funded project.
(ii) DEWATS. The contract package will include construction and O&M for a three-year period.
11. The communication strategy will commence implementation at the beginning of the project. As CWASA is going to
undertake new installations of improved distribution systems and household connections under the DMA principle,
customer communications must be strong and effective in eliciting customer participation in improved management of
connections and meters, regular bill payment, and equitable supplies for all customers across city limits. It is therefore
important to raise awareness about the project interventions in general and, more specifically, on the importance of
connecting to the network to ensure sustained maintenance. CWASA will prepare a structured customer engagement and
communication plan and a mobile phone-friendly digitally enabled customer service website and will conduct customer
satisfaction surveys. The PMU will begin to implement the plan from the project outset, with support and mandate from
CWASA management.


45
     The non-network sanitation options will be built in seven city wards (1, 10, 14, 19, 20, 29, and 26).


                                                                                                                      Page 38
        The World Bank
        Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)


12. Commercial strengthening. The CWASA will prepare steps for rationalization of the tariff framework to increase tariffs
to ensure long-term financial sustainability. The tariff framework will be approved by the CWASA board, after which the
CWASA will implement the strategy for tariffs and revenue collections for water supply and sewerage services.
13. Gender Action Plan. The CWASA PMU will prepare and implement the project’s Gender Action Plan a range of gender-
related interventions. The PMU will arrange training programs for women at CWASA to improve their access to technical
knowledge (for example, network management) and develop their management/leadership skills (for example, contract
management and O&M and Distribution Systems personnel management). In addition, the Gender Action Plan will provide
for the training of women in LICs (that is, women in CBOs, NGOs, and women community leaders) for operations
management of water supply points and facilitation of sanitation interventions in the target LICs.
14. M&E. Project-level monitoring and reporting will be conducted by the PMU, with support from the PMU’s M&E
consultants. The PMU will implement a M&E framework to be developed during the implementation phase. The design
review and supervision consulting firm will provide updates on the progress achieved in Components 1 and 2, while the
PMU’s individual project management consultants will report on Components 3 and 4. The PMU will also collate other
independent audit reports and third party-administered citizen report card surveys that will measure customer,
community, and stakeholder satisfaction with CWASA’s services, alongside the use of funds and physical progress.
15. The M&E system will also be used to take corrective actions, improve coordination, and facilitate learning throughout
implementation of the project cycle. The PMU will take corrective actions based on the abovementioned inputs for
improving implementation performance and will provide recommendations to CWASA on matters requiring CWASA
management and GoB interventions. Project performance will be monitored based on the indicators and methodologies
presented in the Results Framework (Section VII). This will provide CWASA with the evidence to strategically improve the
effectiveness of investments and services during the project’s lifetime and in the future. The project-level M&E
information will feed into CWASA’s strengthened MIS as proposed through Component 3.
16. Project reporting. First, the PMU will submit comprehensive quarterly progress reports on implementation with
details on matters relating to procurement, contracts, FM, disbursements, physical implementation, E&S, gender,
customer orientation, grievance redressal, beneficiaries, communications, and public engagement. To this end, the PMU
will collate reports from the design review and supervision consulting firm and individual project management consultants
hired by the PMU. Second, semiannual project progress reports will be submitted and released in the public domain upon
approval by the World Bank and displayed on the CWASA website.

Financial management
17. Budgeting. CWASA will forecast the required resources to be budgeted for the project. These forecasts will be
incorporated into its budget, which will then be submitted to the Ministry of Finance. The PMU will prepare detailed
implementation plans in line with the itemized project budget to clearly specify the funding requirement for each
component and activity.
18. Flow of funds. For utilization of eligible project expenditures, CWASA will maintain two designated accounts: one for
the PBC part and one for the non-PBC part, where IDA funds will flow under agreed-on terms and conditions. The
designated accounts will be in Bangladesh taka and disbursements will be made based on six-month forecasts. The PMU
project director and his/her deputy will be the authorized persons to use the funds in the CWASA designated accounts.
CWASA will, as applicable, submit withdrawal applications to IDA for replenishment of the designated accounts on the
basis of actual expenditures; however, all four disbursement methods will remain open for the non-PBC part of the project.
19. Disbursements will be report-based for non-PBC components. The Bank will advance funds to the designated accounts
in adequate amounts to meet forecasted expenditures for the next six months, as reflected in the IUFR. For PBCs, advances



                                                                                                                    Page 39
        The World Bank
        Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)


to be provided to the designated account will be documented based on the lesser amount of i) achieved/partially achieved
PBCs and ii) eligible expenditures incurred.
20. Accounting and maintenance of accounting records. For all project funds drawn from the government and the Bank
and deposited in CWASA’s bank accounts, all accounting records (cash ledgers, vouchers with supporting documents,
reconciled bank statements) will be kept by CWASA using its existing manual accounting systems; however, an off-the-
shelf accounting system will be procured for the project purposes. The project’s accounting policies and procedures will
be governed by the existing system outlined in the Project Accounting Manual of the Ministry of Finance. The PMU will
bear the primary responsibility to provide accurate and timely information regarding resources and expenditures made
by CWASA to the government, with the Bank in copy. The key accounting functions for which the PMU will be responsible
are: (i) make fund requests to the Bank on the basis of the six-month estimated expenditure and approved work plan; (ii)
pay eligible project expenditures; (iii) request direct payments from third parties; (iv) prepare a monthly Statement of
Expenditures, quarterly IUFRs in standard reporting format as agreed by the Bank, and bank reconciliations; (v) submit the
IUFRs to the Bank; and (vi) provide assistance to the external audit and a timely response to audit.
21. Financial reporting. Three separate sets of books of accounts will be maintained for PBC, non-PBC, and parallel
financing. CWASA will be responsible for preparing quarterly financial reports, using the agreed-on reporting template to
be generated directly from the accounting software. CWASA will submit the quarterly IUFRs to the Bank within 45 days of
the close of each quarter. These will form the basis for disbursements from the IDA loan.
22. Staffing and capacity building. CWASA finance staff will be responsible for managing project funds. CWASA will assign
at least two accounting officials to support the smooth management of project FM functions. The assigned staff will be
trained on the Bank’s FM and disbursement requirements. In addition, to enable CWASA to meet the requirement of
project FM right from the project’s outset (including handling report-based disbursements and training CWASA staff), a
qualified accountant and an FM specialist with adequate experience in IDA and GoB systems and procedures will be
recruited by CWASA. The FM specialist will be procured as a full-time consultant based on agreed-on terms of reference,
with the procurement to be reviewed beforehand by IDA.
23. Internal audit. The project should undergo a risk-based internal audit to evaluate the adequacy and effectiveness of
other controls in the project in each fiscal year. The internal audit will be carried out by a professional audit firm on an
annual basis before an external audit is conducted. The PMU will coordinate and appoint a private audit firm following
the selection process acceptable to the Bank. In parallel, CWASA will strengthen the capacity of the internal audit unit by
transforming it into a risk-based internal audit unit as per international standards.
24. External audit. As part of FM Action Plan, CWASA will address the backlog of external audit for FY23 and FY24 by
March 2025. In all future audits during the project period, audit terms of reference for the entity/CWASA audit will be
shared with IDA. Foreign Aided Projects Audit Directorate under the Comptroller and Auditor General will audit the annual
project financial statements. A statement of audit needs will be prepared by the PMU and agreed with the Comptroller
and Auditor General. CWASA will submit to IDA the audited financial statements for the project no later than December
31 each year. The statement of audit needs will include an audit focus on testing the efficacy of internal control
arrangements at various departments and transaction testing to detect fraud and corruption. The following audit reports
(Table A1.1) will be monitored by the Bank:
                                                  Table A1.1. Audit Reports
             Implementing Audit Type                          Auditor                             Deadline
             Agency
             CWASA        Entity financial statements Private auditor               (chartered December
                          reflecting project receipt and accounting firm)                      31
                          use of project funds


                                                                                                                      Page 40
        The World Bank
        Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)


               CWASA          Audit of project’s annual Foreign Aided Projects Audit December
                              financial statements      Directorate    under     the 31
                                                        Comptroller   and     Auditor
                                                        General

25. Disbursement arrangements. The project is financed by an IDA credit of US$280 million, and the government will
contribute US$53 million. The project will have US$140 million of SUW-Regular financing out of total IDA financing of
US$280 million, while the remaining US$140 million will be provisioned under the SUW-SML. The project’s PBCs are to be
financed from the concessional financing source, namely SUW-SML. To facilitate the implementing agency’s debt service
obligations, the concessional financing source, i.e. SUW-SML, will be utilized and exhausted first before non-concessional
source, i.e. SUW-Regular, is used for expenditures under Category 1 of the Disbursement Table in Financing Agreement.
The PBC allocation of US$85 million will be utilized against all eligible expenditures under Component 1 only. GoB’s parallel
financing will cover land acquisition, resettlement compensation, incremental operating costs, road cutting charges,
customs duty and value added taxes on imports, vehicles, and workshop and sitting allowances. Category 1 expenditures
relating to part 1 will be first disbursed under IDA SUW-SML before disbursements under IDA SUW-Regular.
                        Table A1.2. Allocation of the IDA Credit by Categories (in US$, millions)
         Sl.      Category                                        Estimated Cost                        %
         No.                                                      IDA          Counterpart

         1.       Procurement of goods                           46.0               0.7              14.02%
         2.       Procurement of works                           214.5               -               64.41%
         3.       Procurement of consulting services             19.5                -               5.86%
                  and non-consulting services
         4.       Incremental operating costs                      -               52.3               15.71%
                  Total expenditures                             280.0             53.0              100.00%

26. PBC-based component. Disbursements of the amounts allocated to each PBC will be made, conditional on their
achievement of the relevant PBC targets. Section VIII provides an overall summary of the five enabling PBCs, with relevant
PBC targets to be met, the amounts allocated to each PBC target, and the timeline. Table A1.2 provides the allocation of
funds for disbursement on completion of the PBC action.
27. For PBC components, the Bank may advance funds to the designated account to finance eligible expenditures as they
are incurred. Subsequent disbursements/replenishments will be based on CWASA fulfilling two requirements: (a)
achievement of agreed PBCs, documented in a PBC report and verified by the Bank; and (b) a certification of the eligible
expenditure program (EEP) statements (where the EEP value should be greater than the PBC amount claimed). After
verification of the PBCs achieved, CWASA will submit a request for payment of the PBC amount. If an advance was made
to the designated account, claims relating to achievement of PBCs will then be documented/adjusted against advances. A
refund will be due to the Bank if the PBC is not met, even if the expenditures have been incurred.
28. Documentation of expenditures for each reporting period will be based on the lower of: (a) the total allocated amount
for each of the PBC targets, which are met and verified in the reporting period of the PMU; and (b) the total expenditures
incurred and paid on EEPs by the project in the reporting period. If total expenditures on EEPs for the reporting period are
less than the total PBC amount achieved for the reporting period, the undisbursed amount will be rolled over to the
subsequent reporting period. Similarly, any excess of the total PBC amount achieved against the total expenditures on
EEPs for any period will be rolled over to the subsequent period for comparison with the total expenditure (including any


                                                                                                                       Page 41
        The World Bank
        Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)


rolled-over expenditure) of the subsequent reporting period. EEPs can also be rolled over for the subsequent period until
the project’s closing date for disbursement purposes, as mentioned above. The IUFR format will be designed to track both
separately to prevent excess claims.
29. PBC reporting and verification. The project is expected to become effective in January 2025. Post effectiveness, the
PMU will regularly collect evidence and forward a report to the IDA on the achievement of the PBCs. The Bank will then
confirm the evidence of PBC achievement and expenditure against agreed-on eligible expenditures. On confirmation, the
PMU can forward a withdrawal application for the corresponding payment and related EEPs.
Procurement

30. Procurement under the proposed project will include goods, works, and non-consulting and consulting services.
Procurement will total approximately US$280 million. Procurement of goods will involve the CWASA SMART Metering
System, integrated data management for CWASA, and a GIS-based asset management system for CWASA. Key works
contracts will involve construction and renovation of a water distribution management system spreading over five sectors
across the Chattogram area to be performed mostly by under a D‒B arrangement, construction of deep tube-wells,
warehouse, piped water supply for LICs, DEWATSs, and communal septic tanks. Consulting services will include
preparation of a water supply master plan for the city of Chattogram, digital transformation strategy, asset management
strategy, customer relationship management system, design review and supervision consulting services, and services of
individual consultants in relation to procurement, FM, M&E, E&S, etc. The procurements required to achieve PBCs will
also follow the Procurement Regulations.
31. All the procurement activities will be carried out by the PMU to be set up in CWASA. A detailed procurement capacity
assessment has been carried out for CWASA, revealing a perceived weak implementation capacity due to lack of
procurement professionals. CWASA has experience in implementing previous World Bank-financed projects and utilizing
the Project Preparation Facility, but it still lacks familiarity with the World Bank’s new Procurement Regulations and
experience in procuring and managing D‒B contracts, which may lead to delays. In addition, use of rated criteria will be
mandatory for all international contracts of goods, works, and non-consulting services, which will require the enhanced
procurement and technical capacity of the PMU. Other procurement risks include possible delays in procurement due to
the lack of technical preparation (such as terms of reference, technical specifications, and cost estimates) before the start
of the procurement process, slow decision-making and approval processes within the government, and the risk of fraud
and corruption primarily due to weak internal control functions and limited accountability.
32. The risk mitigation measures will include:
(i)    Preparation and implementation of the PPSD with fit-for-purpose procurement and contract management
       approaches. An initial procurement plan has been developed as part of the PPSD.
(ii) Use of the STEP system to prepare and manage the procurement plan and all procurement transactions.
(iii) CWASA staff involved in procurement will attend the training entitled “Identification and Mitigation of Fraud &
       Corruption (F&C) in Bank-financed Operations” as delivered by the Bank.
(iv) Bank support for implementation through prior review and post reviews.
(v) Adherence to the established timelines to achieve key procurement milestones.
(vi) Use of the government’s e-GP system for all procurements following national and international approach for goods,
       works, and non-consulting services. Any procurement carried out outside e-GP will not be eligible for project
       financing.
(vii) Assignment of qualified government staff to handle procurement.
(viii) Creation of Bank-acceptable bid/proposal evaluation committees that have the necessary expertise depending on
       the type of contract and with the membership of a procurement consultant.
(ix) Use of the World Bank’s Standard Procurement Documents and standard/model procurement documents


                                                                                                                       Page 42
        The World Bank
        Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)


       satisfactory to the World Bank.
(x)    Hiring of experienced procurement consultants (local and international) based on the Bank-acceptable terms of
       reference.
(xi) Evaluation committee members will sign an integrity pledge in addition to a conflict-of-interest undertaking.
(xii) Delivery of procurement training to relevant project officials on procurement, contract management, STEP, etc.
       Initial training has been provided to the procurement staff of the implementing agency on operation of the STEP
       system.
(xiii) Engagement of a part-time probity adviser to ensure probity assurance during the key contract procurement
       processes.
(xiv) Implementation of anticorruption guidelines will be covered in the project kick-off workshop for PMU staff, CWASA
       staff, PSC members, and other stakeholders.

33. CWASA has prepared a draft PPSD that spells out the detailed procurement arrangements for the project, including
detailed risk mitigation measures. Extensive market analysis has been carried out for different packages of procurement
and based on the findings, decisions on packages will be finalized for civil works to ensure adequate bidder participation.
Consultancy contracts have also been framed based on market research and packaging in terms of the scope of services
and the periods.
34. Procurement planning. For each contract to be financed by the IDA credit, the different procurement or consultant
selection methods to be used, the need for prequalification, estimated costs, prior review requirements, and timeframe
will be reflected in the procurement plan. As agreed with the Bank, the procurement plan will be uploaded in STEP and
updated as and when necessary. The procurement timeline will be specified in the PPSD, and CWASA will submit a
procurement performance report as per the format enclosed in the PPSD.
35. National procurement arrangements. In accordance with paragraph 5.3 of the World Bank Procurement Regulations,
when approaching the national market, as agreed in the procurement plan, the country’s own procurement procedures
may be used. These procurement procedures will be consistent with the Bank’s Core Procurement Principles and ensure
that the Bank’s Anticorruption Guidelines and Sanctions Framework and the contractual remedies set out in its Legal
Agreement apply.
36. When the borrower uses its own national open competitive procurement arrangements (as set forth in the Public
Procurement Act 2006 and the Public Procurement Rules 2008), such arrangements will be subject to paragraph 5.4 of
the Procurement Regulations and the following conditions:
(i)   Lottery in award of contracts will not be allowed.
(ii)  Bidders’ qualification(s)/experience requirement(s) will be mandatory.
(iii) Bids will not be rejected based on a percentage above or below the estimated cost.
(iv)  Model bidding documents agreed with the Bank will be used for all national open competitive procurement.
(v)   Bidder eligibility will be as defined under Section III of the World Bank Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers.
      Accordingly, no bidder or potential bidder will be declared ineligible for contracts financed by the Bank for reasons
      other than those provided in Section III of the Procurement Regulations.
(vi) The request for bids/request for proposals document will require that bidders/proposers submitting bids/proposals
      present a signed acceptance (in the form attached) when bidding, to be incorporated in any resulting contracts and
      confirming application of and compliance with the Bank’s Anticorruption Guidelines, including without limitation
      the Bank’s right to sanction and the Bank’s inspection and audit rights.
(vii) Procurement documents include provisions, as agreed with the Bank, intended to adequately mitigate against
      environmental, social (including SEA/SH and gender-based violence), health, and safety risks and impacts.



                                                                                                                     Page 43
        The World Bank
        Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)


37. When other national procurement arrangements (other than national open competitive procurement) are applied by
the borrower, such arrangements will be subject to paragraph 5.5 of the Procurement Regulations.
38. As per paragraph 5.4 of the Procurement Regulations, the “Letter of Acceptance of the World Bank’s Anticorruption
Guidelines and Sanctions Framework” as available in the World Bank website, will form part of the model bidding
documents.
39. CWASA will be required to use rated criteria for international procurements of goods, works, and non-consulting
services. The purpose of rated criteria is to evaluate quality, sustainability, and innovative aspects of bids or proposals in
decision-making. This will enable the implementing agency to adopt a more strategic approach to procurement, including
the use of evaluation criteria that prioritize fit-for-purpose solutions rather than the lowest evaluated price. It will also
increase the willingness of the best suppliers to bid and participate in Bank-financed projects—with the knowledge that
their added value will be part of the evaluation, thereby increasing options, global competition, and likelihood for effective
market solutions.
40. For each contract to be financed by the World Bank, the procurement/selection methods, the need for
prequalification/initial selection, estimated costs, prior review requirements, evaluation options, timeframe, etc. will be
reflected in the procurement plan to be uploaded in STEP and updated as and when necessary, with the World Bank’s
approval. The World Bank’s procurement supervision will be ensured through implementation support in the form of prior
review and post review of the contracts. Procurement post review by the Bank will be conducted at least on an annual
basis as part of procurement supervision or more frequently based on need. In view of fiduciary issues in the past, the
percentage of contracts that will be post reviewed will be increased based on initial procurement post review finding.




                                                                                                                        Page 44
