Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Program (P176619)




Public Disclosure Authorized

                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                            Concept Stage


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                       Date Prepared/Updated: 02/02/2023 | Report No: ESRSC03148




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Feb 02, 2023                                                                        Page 1 of 15
                               The World Bank
                               Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Program (P176619)



                     BASIC INFORMATION

                     A. Basic Project Data

                     Country                       Region                           Project ID                     Parent Project ID (if any)

                     Jordan                        MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH            P176619
                                                   AFRICA

                     Project Name                  Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Program

                     Practice Area (Lead)          Financing Instrument             Estimated Appraisal Date       Estimated Board Date

                     Water                         Investment Project               3/19/2023                      5/15/2023
                                                   Financing

                     Borrower(s)                   Implementing Agency(ies)

                     Ministry of Planning and   Ministry of Water and
                     International Cooperation, Irrigation, Hashemite
                     Hashemite Kingdom of       Kingdom of Jordan
                     Jordan




Public Disclosure
                     Proposed Development Objective
                     The project development objective (PDO) is to improve the efficiency of water services in Jordan


                     Financing (in USD Million)                                                                                          Amount

                      Total Project Cost                                                                                                     300.00



                     B. Is the project being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project [including overview of Country, Sectoral & Institutional Contexts and
                     Relationship to CPF]

                     The proposed Series of Projects (SOP) provides the investments support and long-term approach needed to support
                     full implementation of the Water Sector Financial Sector Roadmap and to improve the efficiency and resilience of the
                     water sector. Through the SOP, multiple projects financed by the World Bank contribute to the Government’s
                     objectives to improve efficiency, service delivery and financial sustainability of the water sector. The SOP is expected
                     to be implemented between 2023 and 2032, through three proposed investments beginning with US$300 million in

                    Feb 02, 2023                                                                                                        Page 2 of 15
                              The World Bank
                              Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Program (P176619)



                     Investment Project Financing, followed by two further investments in sector efficiency. Presentation to the Board of
                     subsequent projects in the SOP will be staggered by approximately 1.5 years, allowing for preparatory works to be
                     carried out in earlier phases.

                     The first SOP (Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Program) will help to improve efficiency, service delivery, and financial
                     sustainability of the water sector. The SOP will operationalize the FSR approved by the Cabinet of Ministers in
                     November 2022. The program is also aligned with, and will contribute to, the new Vision for Economic Modernization,
                     Government’s National Strategy for the Water Sector, and Non-Revenue Water Reduction and Energy Efficiency
                     Strategies.

                     Proposed interventions are grouped around four components:
                     Component 1. Improving the efficiency of water supply services. Efficiency will be improved by reducing waste of the
                     available water resources (financial and commercial) and overall improvement in operational systems in the water
                     sector, in support of adaptation to climate change impacts on water availability.

                     Component 2. Increased energy efficiency and reduced energy supply costs. The water sector in Jordan requires
                     significant energy for operation - energy costs represent over half of the water utilities' operational costs - due largely
                     to pumping costs associated with the extraction of deep groundwater, and conveyance of water from the source to
                     population centers. Energy efficiency improvements in the water sector are a national priority for more sustainable
                     management of the water sector in Jordan and will have a direct impact on the financial sustainability of the water
                     sector by reducing operational costs. This component will improve the efficiency of the water sector by reducing




Public Disclosure
                     energy used, costs, and GHG emissions..

                     Component 3. Drought management and informed water allocation. Given Jordan’s extreme water scarcity and
                     frequent and intense droughts, improved water allocation will support different mechanisms to enable efficient and
                     fair management of water shortages. Tools that underpin the assessment of water availability and decision-making
                     related to water allocation, particularly monitoring, and forecasting under drought conditions when water availability
                     becomes increasingly scarce, are necessary to ensure that allocation responds to changing conditions, improving
                     beneficial use. Strengthening institutions responsible for planning and allocation of water at the farm level will
                     increase opportunities for participation and negotiation with different stakeholders to enable a more efficient and fair
                     management of the risks of shortages. Water storage systems play an important role in an efficient response to highly
                     variable precipitation, such as minimizing water spilling water during high-flow years can help maximize its use during
                     drought years and maintaining storage for blending and timing of deliveries of treated wastewater facilitates its use in
                     agriculture. Continued safe and competent operation of storage facilities will underpin an efficient response to
                     variable water availability.

                     Component 4. Institutional strengthening for water sector efficiency. This Component will focus on key institutional
                     measures identified in the Financial Sustainability Roadmap that will enhance the overall financial position of the
                     sector in complement to actions identified in Components 1-3.



                     D. Environmental and Social Overview



                    Feb 02, 2023                                                                                                        Page 3 of 15
                              The World Bank
                              Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Program (P176619)



                     D.1. Detailed project location(s) and salient physical characteristics relevant to the E&S assessment [geographic,
                     environmental, social]
                     Jordan is one of the most water-scarce countries in the world, which poses severe constraints on the country’s
                     economic and human development. Water resources are concentrated in the northern highlands and the Jordan
                     River Valley, with over 92% of the land in Jordan classified as semi-arid or arid and receiving less than 200 mm of
                     rainfall per year.

                     Jordan has seen its population growth through a combination of organic growth and refugee influxes to around 10.3
                     million in 2021, reducing the amount of water available per person. Jordan is also becoming increasingly urbanized,
                     where around half of Jordan’s available water is used for domestic water supply (including industry), while the other
                     half is allocated to agriculture.

                     This project (SOP-1) is aimed at improving efficiency, service delivery, and financial sustainability of the water sector.
                     It is the first project in a proposed Series of Projects (SOP) that provides the investment support and long-term
                     approach needed to support the improvement in the quality and equity of service delivery, to the Jordanian
                     population and the refugees, including through private sector solutions. Project activities will take place throughout
                     the kingdom of Jordan, while some activities have a more specific geographic focus. The project will not entail new
                     water resources, wastewater treatment or treated wastewater reuse projects. F

                     The Project’s interventions to reduce technical and commercial losses (non-revenue water) under Component 1 will
                     be focused within urban environments. Energy efficiency initiatives under Component 2 will entail replacing pumps at




Public Disclosure
                     existing pumping stations that are located throughout Jordan.

                     D. 2. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity

                     The six main entities have significant technical experience implementing similar NRW and energy efficiency projects
                     funded by several development agencies, in accordance with national and international environmental and social
                     standards of these agencies.

                     At this stage, implementation arrangements envision a central unit that will be responsible for overall coordination
                     and communication on the Project, including a central environmental and social team which will be responsible for
                     the overall environmental and social risk management of the project. The project will support enhanced capacity
                     within the Water Companies to deliver on Components 1 and 2, where an Environmental and Social Focal Point for
                     each Water Company, with knowledge of the national Environmental laws and regulations, and experience managing
                     environmental, health and safety and social risks, will be necessary to support implementation. The specific staffing
                     arrangements and capacity-building measures including a training program will be further assessed and specified in
                     the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF),
                     Resettlement Framework (RF), Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), and Labor Management Procedures (LMP).


                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                          Substantial


                    Feb 02, 2023                                                                                                        Page 4 of 15
                              The World Bank
                              Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Program (P176619)




                     Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                     Substantial
                     The project is expected to have positive impacts including improving the efficiency of water services (Component 1),
                     improving water availability, and resources efficiency by reducing GHG emissions in the water systems (Component
                     2), strengthening the institutional capacity to enable efficient management during water shortage (Component 3),
                     and enhancing the sector E&S sustainability (Component 4). The exact geographical location and the scale of
                     interventions/sub-projects is not yet confirmed and will be selected according to framework criteria and government
                     prioritization. The environmental risks related to the construction and rehabilitation of the water networks (air
                     pollution, noise, occupational health and safety risk on construction workers, generation and improper management
                     of non-hazardous waste, and hazardous waste such as replaced pumps, mechanical equipment’s, potential damaged
                     PV cells, leakage of oils and lubricants from vehicles. In addition, risks associated with hazardous waste are related to
                     potentially uncovering of old asbestos pipe during network rehabilitation, where WAJ has identified the location of
                     underground asbestos pipes and has committed to replacing the remaining functional asbestos pipes under other
                     projects. On the other hand, rehabilitation of groundwater wells is associated with occupational health and safety,
                     generation of hazardous waste risk during rehabilitation, cleaning and disinfection activities, in addition to use of
                     chemicals, and increased water extraction affecting the aquifers safe yield during operation. In addition to potential
                     risk of impacting biodiversity conservation will also be assessed during rehabilitation/restructuring of the water
                     system in areas of biodiversity value and will be considered in the dam rehabilitation assessment studies (component
                     3). Drought and water allocation contingency planning under component 3 is expected to be associated with the
                     reuse of treated wastewater as an alternative irrigation water source –currently practiced in the lower Jordan Valley
                     There is a potential risk of pollution and health risk for farmers using the irrigation water, which will be assessed



Public Disclosure
                     during preparation. A chance find of cultural heritage resources is possible during implementation of Components 1
                     and 2 especially within historical areas. The environmental risk at the concept stage is rated Substantial based on the
                     above identified risks and capacities.
                     Social Risk Rating                                                                                             Moderate
                     The Project has a variety of social risks and is rated Moderate. The main social risks are related to small to moderate-
                     scale civil works under Component 1, across the large geographic scope of the Project, including
                     relaying/rehabilitating existing distribution pipes and household water connections, as well as for enhancing in-
                     network water storage (e.g., above ground, and/or elevated in-network storage-tanks). Component 2 may also lead
                     to works to replace water pumps within existing water pumping stations. Temporary community health and safety
                     risks associated with these types of small to moderate works include road safety and traffic, noise, and dust as well as
                     worker health and safety and labor and working conditions. These physical works also have the potential to cause
                     socio-economic and hygiene impacts from water service disruption, especially if the works are not properly
                     coordinated amongst municipalities and utilities. In addition, rehabilitating household connections have the potential
                     to create moderate social tensions or exclusions if areas or neighborhoods are not selected in an equitable and
                     transparent manner. Works will take place within existing Rights of Way and sites. However small parcels of land may
                     be required under Component 1 and 2, as the detailed designs are developed. Component 3 will support technical
                     assistance for drought management and water allocation and studies for rehabilitaiton of water storage systems.
                     These studies have potential downstream social risks such as risks related to distributional equity of water allocations,
                     and safety risks for affected communities related to rehabilitation of water storage. The risk rating considers the
                     experience of implementing agencies of delivering similar projects according to environmental and social



                    Feb 02, 2023                                                                                                      Page 5 of 15
                              The World Bank
                              Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Program (P176619)



                     requirements of international donors and financial institutions, although a strong environmental and social
                     organizational structure across 6 implementing agencies, as well as capacity building on the ESF, is needed


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESSs) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1. General Assessment

                     ESS1 Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     Overview of the relevance of the Standard for the Project:
                     This standard is relevant to SOP-1 owing to the range of environmental and social risks and impacts across the various
                     components, and throughout the project life cycle.
                     The project is expected to have positive impacts including improving the efficiency of water services (Component 1),
                     improving water availability, sustainable management and improvement of efficiency of the water sector by reducing
                     GHG emissions (Component 2), strengthening the institutional capacity to enable efficient management water
                     shortage (Component 3), and enhancing the sector E&S sustainability (Component 4).
                     The main environment and social risks are related to small to moderate-scale civil works that are part of non-revenue
                     water (NRW) interventions under Component 1, across several governates where categories of support and criteria
                     for including sub-projects in the support will be agreed during preparation and specific investments will be appraised
                     through the Annual Work Planning process according to the framework criteria. NRW interventions include
                     relaying/rehabilitating existing bulk distribution pipes and household water connections, enhancing in-network water
                     storage (e.g., above-ground and elevated in-network storage-tanks), rehabilitating groundwater wells, and installing



Public Disclosure
                     meters and monitoring systems. Activities will be predominantly within existing right-of-way and existing sites.
                     However, small parcels of land may be required on a temporary or permanent basis, depending on the specific
                     rehabilitation needs. Temporary community health and safety risks associated with these types of small to moderate
                     works include road safety and traffic, noise, and dust. There are also risks related to labor and working conditions,
                     and risks of SEA/SH due to interactions between work crews and the communities in urban environments. Potential
                     environmental risks include air pollution, noise, workers’ health and safety, risk of water contamination and impact
                     on water quality related to improper management of waste generated, and hazardous waste generation (including
                     old asbestos pipes). Works might also have potential impacts on the physical cultural resources particularly in
                     governorates with historical sites. Rehabilitation of groundwater wells is associated with occupational health and
                     safety, generation of hazardous waste risk during rehabilitation, cleaning, disinfection activities, and during operation
                     as well. Interventions under Component 1 also have the potential to cause socio-economic and hygiene impacts from
                     water service disruption, especially if the works are not properly coordinated amongst municipalities and utilities. In
                     addition, moderate social tensions or exclusions may arise, if areas or neighborhoods are not selected in an equitable
                     and transparent manner. Through Component 1.1 the project intends to contribute to preparation of a Performance
                     Based-Contract, jointly developed with IFC and GOJ to reduce commercial and technical water losses. The feasibility
                     and covered area of the PBC is not yet determined, but it could cover portions of Amman.
                     Component 1will also finance preparatory studies (feasibility, design, impact assessment) related to these NRW
                     interventions. Component 2 entails works to replace water pumps within existing water pumping stations and no
                     land acquisitions is envisioned, where environmental risks are similar to component 1, coupled with additional types
                     of hazardous waste (i.e replaced pumps, PV cells) addressed under ESS3.
                     There are no civil works under Component 3 and 4. Component 3 consists of technical assistance aimed at improving
                     information and governance systems for drought management and water allocations, and assessments of

                    Feb 02, 2023                                                                                                      Page 6 of 15
                              The World Bank
                              Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Program (P176619)



                     rehabilitation needs for water storage systems and dams. SOP-1 may finance the detailed assessments and prepare
                     the necessary designs and tender documents, as well as environmental and social impact assessments, for
                     rehabilitation of existing water storage reservoirs and dams, that could be potentially supported under SOP-2. Dam
                     safety considerations are treated under ESS4, and biodiversity conservation are addressed under ESS6.

                     To manage the environmental and social impacts for a series of interventions and sub-projects with designs and
                     locations that are yet to be identified and agreed, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF),
                     Resettlement Framework (RF), Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), and Labor Management Procedures (LMP) will be
                     prepared, covering all project components. These instruments will be prepared, consulted, cleared, and disclosed
                     prior to project appraisal. An Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) will also be finalized, cleared by the
                     Bank, and publicly disclosed by project appraisal. The ESCP will be included in the legal agreement between the Bank
                     and the Government of Jordan.
                     The ESMF sets out the principles, rules, guidelines and procedures to assess environmental and social risks and
                     impacts for all project components and the measures and plans to mitigate adverse impacts. The ESMF will include a
                     screening methodology reflecting all the relevant standards, in addition to an exclusion list, to be applied to the
                     annual workplan of activities, in order to determine the required instruments to be prepared (e.g. ESIA, ESMP) for the
                     various sub-projects prior to implementation, and actions to address identified risks under ESS1,2,3,4,5,6,8,10. The
                     number/type of instruments and their Terms of Reference will be agreed with the World Bank. The ESCP will require
                     all sub-project E&S instruments to be cleared by the bank, consulted and disclosed prior to implementation and
                     incorporated into bidding packages. The ESMF will also include measures for non-hazardous waste management and
                     plan for hazardous waste generation (asbestos/ACM, e-waste, etc). The ESMF will set out the institutional




Public Disclosure
                     arrangements, roles and responsibilities, monitoring and reporting, capacity building and budgeting. The ESMF will
                     require screening of all technical studies, including feasibility studies, assessment studies, consultancies and
                     environmental and social impact assessments, and ensure they are carried out in accordance with terms of reference
                     acceptable to the World Bank and consistent with the ESSs. The ESCP will ensure that thereafter the outputs of such
                     activities comply with the terms of reference. The E&S measures instruments should be in accordance with the
                     General EHS Guidelines and the EHS Guidelines for Water and Sanitation.
                     To manage potential small scale land acquisition and land-related impacts as a precautionary approach under
                     Component 1 and 2, a Resettlement Framework will be prepared, consistent with ESS5, considering that the site
                     locations and affected people will only be known once the detailed sub-project designs are known. The RF will set
                     out the criteria for preparing Resettlement Action Plans when needed. Additional detail about the RF is provided
                     under ESS5.
                     The project has a wide range of stakeholders including beneficiaries, project-affected people, municipalities,
                     development partners, other public sector institutions, and civil society. Vulnerable groups or individuals are
                     considered to be members of the urban poor, women, youth, refugees, the disabled, who might be
                     disproportionately affected from project activities. The client will prepare a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) to
                     establish a systematic approach to stakeholder engagement; to promote and provide means for effective and
                     inclusive engagement with project -affected parties throughout the project life cycle; and to ensure that appropriate
                     project information on environmental and social risks is disclosed to stakeholders in a timely and accessible manner.
                     All environmental and social assessments and instruments under the project will assess the differentiated impacts on
                     vulnerable groups.




                    Feb 02, 2023                                                                                                   Page 7 of 15
                              The World Bank
                              Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Program (P176619)




                     Areas where “Use of Borrower Framework” is being considered:
                     Use of Borrower Framework is not envisaged for this project.


                     ESS10 Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure
                     i) Primary Stakeholders of the project include direct and indirect beneficiaries: i) residents of Jordan who will benefit
                     directly from efficiency improvements to the water supply (467,027 connections translating to 1,190,444 residents);
                     ii) approximately 7,000,000 individuals living in the four governorates will indirectly benefit from the reduction in
                     water losses and improvements in system efficiency; iii) residents of Jordan who will indirectly benefit from energy
                     efficiency and reduced supply costs; iv) farmers and agribusinesses will directly benefit from improved water
                     allocation planning and capacity to prepare and respond to varying water availability and drought risks reducing
                     potential drought impacts. Other primary stakeholders include municipalities and governorates/decentralization
                     committees, communities and neighborhoods where civil works and project interventions will take place, persons
                     and households affected by economic or physical displacement or access to natural resources. and; v) water
                     companies in Jordan and the Water Authority of Jordan will directly benefit through training and capacity-building
                     elements of the Project.
                     ii) Other interested parties include other public sector institutions including the Ministry of Environment (MoEnv.),
                     Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources (MEMR), Ministry of Health (MoH), Ministry of Labor (MoL) involved in
                     aspects of projects authorizations and assessment; private sector (contractors, consultants, water tankers operators,
                     EE&RE firms, suppliers of water meters and other equipment, etc.); water users associations (WUAs) in the Jordan



Public Disclosure
                     Valley; civil society organizations (local and national level NGOs and CBOs); development partners (USAID, KFW/GIZ,
                     AFD, Netherlands, JICA, EIB, EU, etc.);
                     iii) vulnerable groups include urban poor, women, youth, refugees, the disabled who might be disproportionately
                     affected from health and socioeconomic impacts during water service disruptions; from exposure to the health and
                     safety impacts from construction hazards or SEA/SH risks associated with construction; or because of exclusion from
                     benefits if there is inequitable prioritization of activities’ locations (neighborhoods).
                     A series of consultations have already been conducted jointly by the Bank and the MWI/WAJ during project
                     preparation. The stakeholders consulted included: municipalities and decentralization committees in the
                     governorates where NRW interventions are expected to take place; a women focus group, and a consultation session
                     with the development partners (active in the water sector). The following key concerns and issues were raised during
                     these consultation sessions based on experience with similar activities: lack of coordination between WAJ, the water
                     utilities, the municipalities, and other service providers creates disagreements between these agencies and causes
                     delays and enquiries from affected people; necessity to include all relevant stakeholders early in the process of
                     project preparation; lack of dedicated E&S staffing within the IAs which could affect project implementation. The
                     women’s focus group presented the different initiatives funded by the different donors and supporting women-
                     targeted activities such as Women Plumbers Association. The main concern raised was the issue of the sustainability
                     of these initiatives once donor support comes to an end. The development partners outlined issues related the
                     institutional capacity strengthening needs to implement the E&S requirements of donor-funded projects; weak
                     existing stakeholder engagement policies; and efficiency of the GRM system.
                     A Stakeholder Engagement Plan for the project is under preparation. Water programs in general have many
                     stakeholders and require a systematic engagement process to implement them effectively, inclusively, and
                     successfully. The SEP will identify the various stakeholders both project-affected persons and other interested

                    Feb 02, 2023                                                                                                      Page 8 of 15
                              The World Bank
                              Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Program (P176619)



                     parties, summarize their views on preferred modes of engagement throughout the project, and propose stakeholder
                     engagement activities with the respective implementation responsibilities, timeline, and budget to be carried out
                     through the life of the project. The SEP will set out the process required to carry out meaningful consultations that
                     are inclusive and accessible (both format and location). The engagement process will include diverse outreach and
                     participation mechanisms that are gender-sensitive and customized to meet the needs of the various stakeholders,
                     including marginalized and vulnerable groups. It will also include sharing project information (including but not
                     limited to relevant environmental and social issues and risks), mitigating potential social concerns or misperceptions
                     about project impacts and benefits, and soliciting feedback on the project’s scope. The SEP will include a robust
                     communication and public outreach strategy to inform communities about impacts as well as benefits and
                     implementation schedule to ensure coordination and good planning with other interventions of other service public
                     providers and utilities (municipalities, electricity, telecommunication, etc.). The SEP will outline development of
                     information/reference materials in relation to the project and findings of the ESMF/RF in order to support the
                     consultation process and assist communities in understanding the subject matter.
                     A Project Grievance Mechanism (GRM) will also be elaborated in the SEP. The GRM will be based on existing systems
                     that are already operational. The six implementing agencies has their own grievance mechanism (GM) that falls under
                     one or several responsible departments. At WAJ, which will be implementing two major components under the
                     project (Components 1 & 2) complaints handling falls under the Crisis Management and Control Directorate-
                     Complaints and Customer Service Section. The GM system is managed through a set of handling procedures (Service
                     Recipient GM Handling Procedures) depending on the source of the complaint. However, the sector operates a major
                     call center with a hotline (117116) which receives thousands of complaints on a daily basis. All three water companies
                     are connected to the system and WAJ monitors their performance in relation to complaints handling (time of




Public Disclosure
                     response, resolution, unresolved complaints, etc.). The Call Center also hosts the Maintenance and Control
                     Directorate for Miyahuna in Amman which manages several Maintenance Teams that are deployed once a complaint
                     is received. The complaints received are mainly related to water disruption, breakages in the network, pollution, etc.
                     A citizen could file a complaint from anywhere in the country through this hotline and it will be handled according to
                     a set of procedures and a defined timeline. The call center covers all Jordan and coordinates with 41 Maintenance
                     and Control Offices around the country (which operates under the three water companies). The system will be
                     further assessed against ESS10 as part of SEP preparation.
                     Draft SEP will be disclosed prior to appraisal and will be updated, as necessary, throughout the project
                     implementation.



                     B.2. Specific Risks and Impacts

                     A brief description of the potential environmental and social risks and impacts relevant to the Project.
                     ESS2 Labor and Working Conditions
                     ESS2 is relevant to the project. The project workforce will include direct workers, contracted workers, and primary
                     suppliers.
                     (i)      Direct workers of the project are those who are working in the PMU and some civil servants (staff of the
                     MWI/WAJ/JVA and water companies). These are expected to be qualified professionals working mainly in an office
                     environment and conducting field visits as necessary. Direct workers also include expert consultants hired to prepare
                     studies who may be Jordanian or international.


                    Feb 02, 2023                                                                                                   Page 9 of 15
                              The World Bank
                              Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Program (P176619)




                     ii) Contracted workers: Throughout the project life cycle, there will be a significant number of contracted workers
                     including unskilled and skilled labor, management, and supervision of the contractors and sub-contractors during
                     construction and operations of various sub-projects. Sub-project timing and duration will be spread out over the
                     project life cycle, and the number of contracted workers at any one sub-project location, or period of time, will be
                     small to moderate (e.g. less than 50).

                     (ii)    Primary Supply Workers: during construction and rehabilitation works, contractors will require materials on
                     an on-going basis for civil works (e.g. cement, sand) that will be sourced locally, as well as equipment and parts (e.g.
                     pipes, house connections (water meters), that may be sourced locally or internationally. Primary supply workers are
                     workers of these primary suppliers.

                     The most significant project labor risks are related to the various civil works. The construction sector employs both
                     Jordanian and non-Jordanian workers including Syrians and Egyptians. Typically, labor risks areas in the construction
                     sector include 1) lower working conditions amongst smaller firms compared to larger construction firms; 2) potential
                     for exploitation (e.g. excessive overtime) of non-Jordanian workers who are typically not hired into supervisory roles;
                     3) lack of active unions; 4) child and forced labor risks, 5) occupational health and safety risks, 6) weak enforcement
                     by the Ministry of Labor.

                     The project will prepare a Labor Management Procedures (LMP) before appraisal that will lay out its approach to
                     labor management consistent with ESS2 including: contractor management; terms and conditions of employment;




Public Disclosure
                     non-discrimination and equal opportunity; protecting the labor force (i.e. the prohibition of child or forced labor and
                     sexual exploitation and abuse and harassment); non-retaliation against Project workers; protection of primary supply
                     workers and migrant workers, and a grievance mechanism for all project workers. . The number and types of workers
                     will be estimated and characterized in the LMP. Civil works contractors will be required to develop their own labor
                     and supplier management plans based on the requirements outlined in Project LMP.

                     Project activities that involve physical works such as rehabilitation of water networks, pumps and groundwater wells,
                     have are associated occupational health and safety (OHS) risks. For example, exposure to physical hazards (cave-ins;
                     falls; working in confined spaces, electrocution etc), and chemical hazards (contaminated water; exposure to
                     chemicals, asbestos, etc) OHS mitigation measures, including requirements for e contractors to prepare OHS plans
                     proportionate to the risks, and in accordance with the World Bank Group EHS Guidelines (i.e. General EHS Guideline
                     and Water and Sanitation Guideline), will be identified under the ESIA/ESMP’s and will be incorporated into the
                     bidding documents.,



                     ESS3 Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management
                     This standard is relevant. Overall, the project has a positive impact on resources efficiency and conservation, SOP-1
                     aims to improve water availability and revenues within the project areas, more sustainable management of the water
                     sector, and improvement of efficiency of the water sector by reducing energy used, costs and greenhouse emissions
                     (GHG) and planning of water allocation to manage through periods of more intense water shortage in the country.



                    Feb 02, 2023                                                                                                     Page 10 of 15
                              The World Bank
                              Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Program (P176619)



                     Rehabilitation of water wells under Component 1 might be correlated to low potential increase in water extraction,
                     that is not expected to impact ground aquifer yield, therefore, no potential risk to surface water quality through
                     contaminant mobilization and/or saltwater intrusion is expected. Wells that will be selected under this project should
                     have the yield and water quality indicators monitored and reported. The Project activities (technical studies and
                     feasibility studies), under Components 3, and the wells rehabilitation studies under Component 1 or 2 shall be
                     screened and assessed in accordance with ESS3, resources efficiency and pollution prevention. The ESMF will exclude
                     activities that will cause adverse significant degradation or pollution of the water resource. The client is to ensure the
                     technical studies are carried out in accordance with terms of reference acceptable to the World Bank and consistent
                     with the ESS3.
                     Different activities under components 1 and 2 are expected to generate non-hazardous waste (construction waste,
                     packaging, excavation), and hazardous waste (replaced pumps and other mechanical equipment, potential damage of
                     PV cells, leakage of oils and lubricants from vehicles, in addition to the potential uncover/destruction of asbestos
                     pipes and chemicals handling and disposal related to the rehabilitation of wells).

                     The ESMF shall identify the risk and mitigation requirements for proper handling, management, and disposal of all
                     types of wastes including: (i)measures for safe handling and disposal of non-hazardous waste under the site-specific
                     ESIA’s/ESMPs, and (ii)Hazardous Waste Management plan including (a) safe handling and management of asbestos
                     and asbestos containing material (ACM) in accordance with the World Bank Group EHS Guidelines (i.e. General EHS
                     Guideline and Water and Sanitation Guideline), and in compliance with national environmental regulations. This plan
                     will be implemented and monitored in full coordination with the Ministry of Environment (MoEn), the responsible
                     entity for the management of the hazardous waste in Jordan, and (b) safe handling, storage, and reuse or/and




Public Disclosure
                     disposal of other types of hazardous waste in accordance with the national regulations.



                     ESS4 Community Health and Safety
                     ESS4 is relevant. The project is expected to have significant positive community health impacts from improved
                     reliability of delivery of treated water to beneficiaries. There is also a range of community health and safety risks
                     related to the project. During construction activities, community health and safety risks relate to road safety risks
                     associated with traffic diversions; disruption of water services; temporary lack of access and movement; falls and
                     accidents due to digging and excavation, and indiscriminate dumping of supplies or waste. These risks will need to be
                     assessed at a site-specific level, and site-specific Traffic Management Plans developed as necessary as part of sub-
                     project/site-specific ESMPs.

                     Interventions under Component 1 also have the potential to cause hygiene impacts from water service disruption,
                     especially if the works are not properly coordinated amongst municipalities and utilities and water users resort to
                     uncontrolled sources of water. During construction and rehabilitation works, the presence of construction workers
                     may introduce risks of sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA) and sexual harassment (SH) in local communities in a
                     variety of settings. Overall the risks are assessed as low given that most labor will be sourced locally from
                     surrounding areas with high absorptive capacity. Limited labor influx from other parts of the city or neighboring
                     governates may occur for any given sub-project with small to moderate number of workers (e.g. less than 50).
                     However, a contributing risk factor is that most interventions for NRW will be implemented within highly- populated



                    Feb 02, 2023                                                                                                     Page 11 of 15
                              The World Bank
                              Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Program (P176619)



                     areas and neighborhoods where women, girls, and minors are residing and frequently nearby institutions such as
                     schools and universities.

                     The ESMF will further assess SEA/SH risks and other risks of communicable diseases (HIV, COVID) from interactions of
                     work crews with the public, and set out mitigation measures, including the requirement for the project to adopt and
                     incorporate a Code of Conduct into the bidding documents for all works contracts. The sub-project ESIA/ ESMP will
                     further assess SEA/SH risks and other community health and safety risks and propose mitigation measures, during
                     both construction and operational phases. The SEP will include details of the grievance redress mechanism (GM) for
                     the community to lodge complaints and receive answers to any questions they have about the project. The
                     Grievance Mechanism (GM) will include appropriate options for monitoring, receiving complaints, and responding to
                     any SEA/SH incidents, based on a mapping of GBV service providers.

                     The E&S instruments determined under ESS1 will take into account climate change considerations as appropriate,
                     including extreme weather events, and stakeholders’ views on potential positive or negative impacts on livelihoods,
                     the inclusion of local communities, access to services, and community health and safety.

                     Dam safety is identified under the technical assistance studies including the existing dams rehabilitation assessment
                     studies under component 3, where the terms of reference for all rehabilitation studies for existing dams shall include
                     dam safety assessment, and measures designed by qualified engineers in accordance with Good International
                     Industry Practices (GIIP) according to ESS4 Annex 1.




Public Disclosure
                     ESS5 Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement
                     ESS5 is considered relevant to the project No significant land acquisition is expected under the project. Activities
                     under Component 1 and 2 will be predominantly within existing right-of-way and existing sites. However, small
                     parcels of land may be required on a temporary or permanent basis, depending on the specific sub-project design.
                     There are no physical activities or land acquisition under Component 3 and 4, however, studies supported under the
                     project for water storage rehabilitation, may have land impacts that need to be assessed in accordance with ESS5. .

                     A project-level Resettlement Framework (RF), consistent with ESS5 will be prepared, consulted and disclosed before
                     appraisal. The RF will clarify resettlement principles, organizational arrangements, and design criteria to be applied
                     to the sub-projects or activities during project implementation. The RF will provide procedures and guidance to
                     avoid, minimize, mitigate and compensate land-related impacts of the project’s interventions. The Project’s ESMF
                     and RF, will describe the sub-project and activity screening procedure to identify land and resettlement-related
                     impacts and the requirements for expanding the RF into a specific resettlement plan proportionate to the risks and
                     impacts, if such impacts are identified. Project activities that will cause physical and/or economic displacement will
                     not commence until such specific plans have been finalized and approved by the Bank




                     ESS6 Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources


                    Feb 02, 2023                                                                                                    Page 12 of 15
                              The World Bank
                              Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Program (P176619)



                     This standard is relevant. Most of the project activities under components 1 and 2 are expected to be implemented
                     within populated urban and rural areas that do not have high biodiversity conservation value and no ecosystem
                     services are likely to be impacted.
                     However, the project is expected to include technical assistance feasibility studies, assessment studies for
                     rehabilitation of water storage (dam rehabilitation assessment studies) under component 3, where the open water
                     storage areas must be assessed to determine if they are of high biodiversity value. Drought Management plans under
                     Component 3 are expected to be used as management tool for monitoring drought hazards, including surface water
                     and groundwater wells, and will therefore provide data on potential impacts of drought on environmental assets. The
                     ESMF will provide exclusion criteria for activities that may cause significant risk on biodiversity conservation, and the
                     risk will be assessed the impact on biodiversity conservation shall be assessed under each of the activities, applying
                     the mitigation hierarchy and specific measures will be included under the ESIAs/ESMPs. Also, the client shall ensure
                     the technical studies are carried out in accordance with terms of reference acceptable to the World Bank and
                     consistent with the ESS6, applying the mitigation hierarchy where risks also cumulative impact of over abstraction
                     and recommend on biodiversity conservation and restoration measures under the ESIA/ESMP.



                     ESS7 Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional Local Communities
                     This standard is not relevant. There are no known indigenous peoples/sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved
                     Traditional Local Communities in Jordan.




Public Disclosure
                     ESS8 Cultural Heritage
                     This standard is considered relevant given the national scope of the project activities. The towns’ and cities’
                     masterplans identify the location of the physical cultural resource designated by the Ministry of Tourism and
                     Antiquities (MoTA), however, the masterplans do not identify uncovered resources and nontangible resources. The
                     screening process under ESMF will exclude any activity that may cause significant impacts on tangible or intangible
                     cultural heritage resources. Chance Find approach is proposed as a mitigation measure for potential cultural heritage
                     findings, where the Chance Find Procedures will be part of the specific ESIA/ESMP, and simplified ESMPs for all sub-
                     project works contracts.


                     ESS9 Financial Intermediaries
                     his standard is not relevant. There are no FI under the Project


                     C. Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                     OP 7.50 Projects on International Waterways                                                                           Yes


                     OP 7.60 Projects in Disputed Areas                                                                                    No



                    Feb 02, 2023                                                                                                     Page 13 of 15
                              The World Bank
                              Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Program (P176619)



                     III. WORLD BANK ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL DUE DILIGENCE

                     A. Is a common approach being considered?                                                                              No
                     Financing Partners
                     The Bank is working with development partners and the GOJ to identify co-financing opportunities for the Series of
                     Projects. No specific common approach is being considered. World Bank will work collaboratively through technical
                     discussions and sharing E&S instruments for review and comment, as requested during preparation, to address
                     environmental and social risks and impacts in a coordinated manner wherever possible


                     B. Proposed Measures, Actions and Timing (Borrower’s commitments)
                     Actions to be completed prior to Bank Board Approval:
                     Prepare, consult, clear and disclose environmental and social instruments prior to appraisal:
                     1.     Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
                     2.     Resettlement Framework (RF)
                     3.     Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)
                     4.     Labor Management Procedures (LMP)
                     5.     Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)
                     Possible issues to be addressed in the Borrower Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP):
                     As part of the ESCP, the implementing agency should:



Public Disclosure
                     •         Organizational Capacity Prior Effectiveness:
                     •        Hire/Maintain Env. Specialist at the proposed Central Project Management Unit
                     •        Hire a Social Specialist as part of the proposed Central Project Management Unit
                     •        Assign Environmental and Social Focal Points in the other IA’s (MWI, JVA, and the three water companies)
                     Ensure appropriate Dam Safety Expertise is in place to support implementation of sub-component 3.2
                     •        E&S Progress Reports and Incidents/accidents Reporting.
                     •        ESS1: Adopt and Implement the ESMF.
                     •         ESS1: Prepare, consult, and disclose and implement sub-project ESIAs/ESMPs
                     •         ESS1: Technical Assistance activities: Screen all technical assistance activities to ensure they are carried out
                     in accordance with terms of reference acceptable to the World Bank, and consistent with the ESSs. Thereafter the
                     outputs of such activities comply with the terms of reference.
                     •        ESS1: Contractor Management: Incorporate relevant E&S aspects into the ESHS specifications of the
                     procurement documents and contracts with contractors and supervising firms. Thereafter ensure that the contractors
                     and supervising firms comply and cause subcontractors to comply with the ESHS specifications of their respective
                     contracts.
                     •        ESS3: Hazardous Waste Management Plan under the ESMF.
                     •        ESS4: Traffic Management Plans for specific sub-projects as determined by screening under the ESMF
                     •        ESS4: Dam Safety Assessment consistent with ESS4, for Sub-Component 3.2
                     •        ESS5/Land Acquisition: Adopt and implement the RF requirements in a manner consistent with ESS5 and
                     Prepare, disclose, consult and implement, in a manner consistent with ESS5, any identified Resettlement Plans (RP)
                     prior to impacts occurring.
                     •        ESS10/Stakeholder Engagement:

                    Feb 02, 2023                                                                                                      Page 14 of 15
                              The World Bank
                              Jordan Water Sector Efficiency Program (P176619)



                     o      Adopt and Implement the Stakeholder Engagement Plan and operate and maintain a GRM consistent with
                     ESS10.



                     C. Timing
                     Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage ESRS                                             23-Feb-2023

                     IV. CONTACT POINTS

                     World Bank
                     Contact:            Jacqueline Marie Tront               Title:            Senior Water Resources Management
                                                                                                Specialist

                     Telephone No:       +1-202-473-7029                      Email:            jtront@worldbank.org

                     Contact:            Sally Zgheib                         Title:            Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                Specialist

                     Telephone No:       5367+3363 / 1-202-7391285            Email:            szgheib@worldbank.org

                     Borrower/Client/Recipient



Public Disclosure
                     Borrower:              Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation, Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan

                     Implementing Agency(ies)
                     Implementing Agency: Ministry of Water and Irrigation, Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan



                     V. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     VI. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                Jacqueline Marie Tront, Sally Zgheib

                     Practice Manager (ENR/Social)       Lia Carol Sieghart Recommended on 02-Feb-2023 at 12:19:37 GMT-05:00

                     Safeguards Advisor ESSA             Ruma Tavorath (SAESSA) Cleared on 02-Feb-2023 at 15:40:51 GMT-05:00




                    Feb 02, 2023                                                                                                 Page 15 of 15
