Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                          Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                    (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                       Date Prepared/Updated: 02/21/2024 | Report No: ESRSA03312




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Feb 07, 2025                                                                        Page 1 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                    Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P176429                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)         CWSIP                        2025

                     Operation Name            Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries             Region                        Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Bangladesh                Bangladesh                                SOUTH ASIA                    Water


                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                  Estimated Appraisal Date      Estimated Board Date

                     People's Republic of      Chattogram Water Supply and               22-Oct-2024                   19-Dec-2024
                     Bangladesh                Sewerage Authority

                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost
                     Review Date




Public Disclosure
                     06-Aug-2024               333,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) are to (i) increase access to safely managed water supply in Chattogram;
                     and (ii) improve operational performance and financial sustainability of Chattogram Water Supply and Sewerage
                     Authority (CWASA).


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The project (Phase I of the Bangladesh Water Security and WSS MPA) will support the Government of Bangladesh in
                     achieving the SDG Goal 6 and advance the utility reform agenda ensuring long-term sustainability of Water Supply and
                     Sanitation (WSS) service provision in Chattogram. The MPA will comprise four phases spanning over nine years (2024-
                     2033) to support 15 cities with an estimated 20 million beneficiaries. The program framework includes three mutually
                     reinforcing categories of interventions: (i) strengthen institutions and policies for planning, service delivery and
                     regulations, (ii) improve infrastructure and service delivery systems, and (iii) enhance financial sustainability and access


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                        Page 2 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)



                     to finance for capital and operational expenditures. Phase 1 of the MPA will lay the foundation of implementing this
                     framework by implementing important activities across all three categories in Chattogram and introducing the
                     performance orientation in Chattogram Water Supply and Sewerage Authority's (CWASA) operations through
                     Performance Based Conditions (PBCs) for accessing IDA resources. The project builds on the achievements of the
                     previous Bank-funded Chittagong Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation Project (CWSISP) that closed on December
                     31, 2020 by financing investment in infrastructure and by supporting institutional strengthening. The project will
                     include: (a) expansion of the water distribution system, following the District Metered Area (DMA) concept to enable
                     efficient, reliable and equitable water supply to all customers within the utility’s service area; (b) expansion of water
                     supply and non-network sanitation services in Low-income Communities (LIC); and (c) support to strengthen the
                     Chattogram Water Supply and Sewerage Authority's (CWASA) utility systems, financial performance and
                     creditworthiness including tariff roadmap, and building CWASA’s capacity for planning, delivering, and managing WSS
                     services. The proposed project provides emphasis on improving service delivery and institutional sustainability while
                     scaling up access.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     As a sequel to Phase-I of the project, the Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (CWSIP) is proposed to extend
                     access to safe water supply, invest in developing resilience against natural disasters, and to support the operational
                     performance of Chattogram Water and Sanitation Authority (CWASA).

                     The proposed project is located in 23 of the 41 Wards in Chattogram City. Chattogram is a major coastal city in



Public Disclosure
                     southeastern Bangladesh and serves as the country's second-largest city. It plays a crucial role in the nation's economy
                     due to its strategic location by the Bay of Bengal and its hosting of the busiest seaport in Bangladesh - the Port of
                     Chattogram. This port is pivotal for international trade, handling over 90% of Bangladesh's import-export activities. As a
                     center for industrial and commercial activities in Bangladesh Chattogram hosts a wide range of industries, including
                     textiles and garments (which are the backbone of Bangladesh's economy), shipbuilding, steel, chemicals,
                     pharmaceuticals, and fisheries. The city's economic growth is significantly bolstered by its port activities, including
                     shipping, logistics, and trade.

                     Despite its economic importance, Chattogram faces several social challenges, including poverty, urban congestion,
                     environmental degradation, and the impacts of climate change, such as cyclones and flooding.As per the United Nations
                     population projections, the population in Chattogram Metropolitan Area (CMA) in 2024 is approximately 5.51 million
                     people (50.2% males and 49.8% females), an increase of 2.49% from the previous year. There are over 1000 slums
                     within the CMA limits. It is estimated that together these slums have over 560,000 households. At an average household
                     size of 4.92 persons per household, more than 50% of the Chattogram city’s population reside in slums. Less than 1% of
                     the city’s population belong to indigenous peoples and other ethnic minority groups. The majority of the city’s
                     population, especially in slum areas, depend on shallow tube wells for drinking water with its inherent risks to public
                     health.

                     No new water production is proposed under this project as treated water is supplied from existing surface water
                     treatment plants (SWTPs) at Modhunaghat, Mohara and Karnaphuli. The plants draw water from the Karnaphuli and
                     Halda Rivers, both located in south-eastern Bangladesh and hosting important aquatic life including Ganges river
                     dolphins in the Karnaphuli. The Halda draws from uphill streams of the Chittagong Hill tracks, providing water and

                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                     Page 3 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)



                     irrigation across the Halda basin, and finally discharging into the Karnaphuli river. The Chattogram city also has patches
                     of urban forest.

                     The footprint of activities is in built-up brownfield sites, urban, populated and largely contained within the CMA. Most
                     houses in the area serve mixed purposes as people reside and operate small/medium sized enterprises in the same
                     living units. In parts of the city, errand traders and vendors conduct business in the open, makeshift shelters, sidewalks.
                     This is characteristic of the unplanned neighborhoods where streets are narrow with clusters of small shops. The
                     construction of the distribution networks will occur along existing road networks and alleys with no need for land
                     acquisition. Nonetheless, construction works may restrict access to homes and disrupt economic activities. Digging
                     across some roads may cause traffic congestion and diversion with inconveniences for people during construction
                     activities. These impacts are expected to be temporary lasting the construction period. Based on experiences from
                     CWSISP-I, works under this project will be scheduled to avoid and/or minimize displacement and disruption of income
                     generating activities. Where unavoidable, CWASA will implement measures to mitigate the adverse impacts of
                     displacement. Ahead of construction, CWASA will consult local communities and affected persons, disclose potential
                     adverse impacts of projects, and discuss measures for addressing risks. In the case of errand traders and vendors, the
                     authority will identify vacant spaces in the vicinities for temporary relocation and serve advance notification to enable
                     them to relocate for the ensuing construction works. As in the case of CWSISP-I, traders will be allowed to return to the
                     previous spots when construction is complete.


                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts




Public Disclosure
                     The proposed project will be implemented by the Chattogram Water Supply and Sewerage Authority (CWASA), a
                     government agency with familiarity and experience in implementing World Bank-financed projects in the water and
                     sanitation sector. Phase-I of the project – CWSISP – was implemented by CWASA with satisfactory performance in
                     managing the environmental and social impacts of the project. At project closure, safeguards performance on CWSISP
                     was rated satisfactory, reflecting the existing capacity and commitment of CWASA to address environmental and social
                     impacts associated with projects of this nature.

                     Key staff of CWASA who held oversight responsibilities on CWSISP (e.g. Chemists) remain in post and are currently
                     supporting CWASA in project preparation including on environmental and social issues. Despite this relative project
                     experience, the requirements and full scope of the Bank’s Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) and relevant
                     Environmental and Social Standards are new to the staff, and suggest the need for upfront technical support from the
                     Bank and experienced E&S consultants to enable CWASA operationalize the ESF as the guiding framework for managing
                     social and environmental impacts of the proposed investments.

                     As part of the implementation arrangements, CWASA will set up a Project Management Unit (PMU) early in the project
                     implementation phase with adequate staffing to manage the various aspects of the project. To meet the existing E&S
                     capacity constraint, CWASA has committed to hiring one environmental and one social safeguards specialist on full time
                     basis in the PMU and keep them in place till project completion using, if required, resources made available through
                     Component 4 of the Project. Where required, the Bank will provide orientation/training on the ESF to the E&S
                     specialists and other PMU & CWASA staff as the project is prepared and implemented.




                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                      Page 4 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)



                     An Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) and other relevant management plans are already drafted with
                     commitments, procedures and responsibilities for managing environmental and social impacts of the project. The
                     staffing requirements to ensure compliance to the relevant ESSs throughout the project is outlined in the ESCP. CWASA
                     maintains two zonal offices in Chattogram. These offices provide day-to-day service delivery to the communities and
                     will be leveraged to support information disclosure and consultation activities under this project.

                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                          Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                    Moderate
                     The environmental risk rating remains 'moderate', which was proposed at the concept stage. This is based on the
                     nature of physical works (water supply pipe laying and installation of non-network sanitation management services
                     for LICs facilities), which will be in built-up brownfield sites. No new water production is proposed in this project. The
                     risk and impact screening data for the project show that the environmental and social impacts and risks are
                     predictable and measures to manage these have been planned; which will be implemented as per the proposed
                     ESMP. As noted above, the implementing agency is familiar with the nature of physical works involved in the project
                     and are expected to draw from past experiences in managing risks associated with the project. The main
                     environmental risks are expected to materialize during construction phase, and include noise and dust pollution,
                     dumping and disposal of excavated materials, traffic congestion, as well as concerns for health and safety of workers
                     and communities. Where feasible, trenchless and pipe bursting technology will be considered to minimize the extent



Public Disclosure
                     of excavations and trenching. Some of the old existing water lines are made of asbestos cement materials, and will be
                     left in the ground. Where these are removed, contractors will ensure careful handling and safe disposal of excavated
                     materials. During operation phase, main risks will be community and worker health & safety issues as well as some
                     solid and liquid wastes disposal. In line with the relevant World Bank Environmental and Social Standards, two
                     Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) documents have been drafted by the implementing agency, one
                     for water supply and management section and another for non-network sanitation management services for
                     assessing and managing environmental and social risks during construction activities. These instruments will be
                     finalized before implementation starts. It is expected that successful implementation of this project will have major
                     positive environmental impacts as the reduction in leakages will improve overall supply efficiency and reduce/delay
                     the need for further water abstractions (from rivers and groundwater). Some greenhouse gas emissions savings are
                     also expected in the long-run due to energy savings and more efficient use of resources.
                                                                                                                                     Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     At the PCN stage, the social risks of the project is was rated Substantial. To understand the nature and significance of
                     the E&S risks, CWASA commissioned two ESIA studies – one for the sanitation component, and the other for the
                     water supply component of the Project – during the preparation of the Project. These instruments will be finalized
                     before implementation starts. The preliminary findings of the ESIA studies indicate that the key social risks of the
                     Project to be the following - (i) potential economic displacement and disruption of other livelihood activities that take
                     place on or alongside pavements and the Right of Way (ROW) for water transmission and distribution lines
                     (approximately 250 PAPs); (ii) limited in-situ displacement of informal settlers (+/- 20 households) on parcels of land
                     owned by CWASA or other Government Departments, that might be required for construction and operation of water


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                       Page 5 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)



                     reservoir facilities; and (iii) the restriction of access to homes businesses and common property resources during
                     construction. Other social issues include community health and safety risks, traffic safety and congestion and
                     exclusion of the poor and marginalized households from accessing project benefits due to tariffs and affordability.
                     Therefore, at appraisal the social risk rating of the Project is retained as ‘Substantial’. The Project will be able to
                     manage these risks through appropriate mitigation measures that will be outlined in the Environment and Social
                     Management Plans (ESMPs) that are a part of the recommendations in the ESIAs. The ESMPs will be part of the
                     bidding documents with requirements for contractors to plan and implement Contractor Environmental and Social
                     Management Plans (C-ESMPs). The cost of ESMP implementation will be included as a separate BOQ list in the
                     contract documents. CWASA has also prepared a detailed Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) and Labor
                     Management Plan (LMP). A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) is also being prepared as a part of the ESIA study
                     for the water supply component of the project. The RPF will include an entitlement matrix for project-affected
                     households (PAHs) and will outline procedures for the preparation and implementation of site-specific Resettlement
                     Action Plans (RAPs) or Livelihood Restoration Plans (LRPs) – depending on the nature and scale of impacts - when
                     designs are complete. In addition, Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) Prevention and
                     Response measures will be incorporated into bidding documents with mandates and requirements to institute and
                     monitor code of conduct for workers and provide remedies for potential SEA/SH issues. CWASA is committed to
                     putting in place the appropriate institutional arrangements to manage the E&S risks and impacts of the Project and
                     these have also been described in detail in the ESCP.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered




Public Disclosure
                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                 Relevant

                      Given the scope of work defined in the PAD, the project is expected to pose some environmental and social risks and
                      impacts. Key environmental risks and impacts include noise and dust pollution, dumping and disposal of excavated
                      materials, traffic congestion, as well as concerns for health and safety of workers and communities. It should be
                      noted that no new water production is proposed in this project. Distribution networks will tap into existing SWTPs at
                      Modhunaghat, Mohara and Karnaphuli; thus reducing the need for exploring different water sources. On social risks
                      and impacts, the proposed activities may result in displacement of non-titleholders and informal occupiers from
                      parcels of land owned by CWASA or other Government Departments and disruption of income generating activities
                      during the construction phase. Other social concerns include issues of equitable access to potable water for unserved
                      and underserved low income populations in the city as well as the potential risk of SEA/SH which may arise from labor
                      influx. Low income and vulnerable households, typically urban poor households operating table-top business along
                      the streets, may not be able to access WSS services provided by CWASA if tariffs are high. Issues about tariffs and
                      access will be included in a tariff review study to inform cost recovery. Under CWSISP-I, CWASA piloted a community-
                      managed water supply system to extend access to poor urban households. The effectiveness of this model will be
                      reviewed to inform scale up and improve tariff systems in low-income households under this project. The inherent
                      E&S risks and impacts of the project underscores the relevance for the ESS1 to be used as a guiding framework for
                      assessing and managing such impacts. For Non-network Sanitation Management Services component, during the
                      construction stage stock piling of construction materials, excavations may cause increased dust and increased
                      number of vehicles may also contribute to air pollution. However, they are temporary and insignificant in nature. At


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                     Page 6 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)



                      this stage of the project, design of pipeline alignments and at least two of the locations of Non-network Sanitation
                      Management Services facilities are finalized and hence two separate Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
                      (ESIA) documents has been drafted with detailed E&S Management Plans and these documents will be finalized
                      within 45 days of the negotiation. The ESIA which is drafted for the non-network sanitation system (CNNS) covers
                      only two wards where sub-projects’ details are known. However, the location of the DEWATs for some other wards
                      are yet to be finalized and therefore a broad ESMP is provided in the sanitation systems related ESIA with guidance
                      on how to address specific E&S risks and impacts in wards where the specific location of project assets and activities
                      related thereto are yet to be decided. An Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) and other relevant
                      management plans are also drafted with commitments, procedures and responsibilities for managing environmental
                      and social risk and impacts of the project. If Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) is triggered the CERC
                      Manual will include a description of the ESHS assessment and management arrangements. The Project will adopt any
                      environmental and social (E&S) instruments which may be required for activities under CERC of the Project in
                      accordance with the ESSs, and thereafter implement the measures and actions required under said E&S instruments
                      within the timeframes specified in said E&S instruments.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                     Relevant

                      Demand for and access to potable water is a basic need which often draws significant interest from consumers and
                      stakeholders. Official statistics indicate that only 30 percent of the urban population of Bangladesh have access to
                      piped water services. At the same time, reliability and safety of water supplies remain problematic in the country,
                      with 70% of the population being exposed to unsafe drinking water. These challenges coupled with growing
                      urbanization often generate interest in water investment projects in the country. The proposed activities under the



Public Disclosure
                      project aims at extending improved water access to the entire Chattogram community including urban poor and low
                      income income communities. Accordingly, this standard is considered relevant for this project and will serve as the
                      guiding framework for planning and implementing stakeholder consultation and information disclosure activities in
                      the project. In line with the standard, a stakeholder engagement plan (SEP) has been prepared by CWASA to serve as
                      basis for early consultation of local communities, school authorities, health facility administrators, women, and other
                      water user groups. The SEP prioritizes timely disclosure of relevant information about the project, the population
                      areas targeted to benefit from the project, and the expected environmental and social impacts of these activities.
                      Throughout project planning and implementation, the SEP will be updated from time to time to reflect the scope of
                      risks and concerns associated with project designs and will include feedback and grievance redress mechanism to
                      raise concerns about the Project including on SEA/SH. The stakeholder engagement activities will discuss issues about
                      access and tariffs in low income communities, discuss issues about inclusive designs and universal access, promote
                      safe hygienic practices and leveraged to disseminate information about prevention measures against COVID-19. The
                      SEP will identify the consultation and disclosure needs for site-specific project environmental and social management
                      plans. The SEP will be implemented by the Public Relations Unit of the CWASA.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                           Relevant

                      Based on the scope of the project, direct workers – typically staff of the CWASA and contracted workers – and
                      Primary Supply Workers (PSWs) will be engaged to undertake specific project activities with inherent risks related to
                      Occupational, Health and Safety (OHS). Engineers from the Construction and Supervision Unit of CWASA and workers
                      hired by contractors are expected to carry out excavation, earth movement, trenching and pipe laying works during
                      the construction of the project. The number of workers to be involved and the full scope of this risks cannot be


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                    Page 7 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)



                      ascertained at this stage of the project. The Bank will liaise with project engineers to assess the number and type of
                      workers that will be involved in the construction activities, and advice on training and mitigation measures against
                      OHS risks and impacts throughout project implementation. During operations, women may be engaged in fee
                      collection as well as operations and maintenance of community-managed systems in low-income neighborhoods, as
                      CWASA attempts to encourage community-managed water points and to engender WASH services in such
                      communities. Working in the context of COVID-19 may also expose workers to the risk of infections if adequate
                      corona virus control measures are not instituted at the sites. Consistent with the requirements of this standard, a
                      labor management plan (LMP) has been prepared with guidance and measures to ensure OHS and control the
                      potential spread of COVID-19 and other infectious diseases among workers at project sites and offices. The LMP
                      clarifies the terms and conditions under which women will be engaged in tariff collection and outline avenues by
                      which they can raise complaints and grievances related to their involvement in operating community-managed water
                      points. Child labor is prevalent in Bangladesh, predominantly in agriculture and industry. Consequently, children
                      below the age of 18 could attempt to seek construction related work under the project. However, in line with ESS2,
                      the use of child and forced labor is prohibited in the project. The LMP clearly states that persons under the age of 18
                      are not allowed to work at any site or any facility being financed by the project. Contractors will carry out age
                      verification (using certified birth certificates and citizen identification cards) as a precondition for employment. The
                      project will provide accessible grievance mechanism to allow all workers (direct, contracted and PSWs) to raise
                      workplace concerns to be addressed by the CWASA, site foremen, and sub-station managers. The GRM will provide a
                      parallel avenue for SEA/SH-related grievances to be submitted for review and redress following the necessary
                      confidentiality requirements and sensitivities.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                             Relevant



Public Disclosure
                      The project will support construction of improved and energy efficient water supply systems. The treated water is
                      sourced from Karnaphuli and Halda Rivers via existing surface water treatment plants. In addition, new Non-network
                      Sanitation Management Services facilities will be installed at public and communal areas to promote hygiene practice
                      and help prevent the spread of diseases. Despite these positive impacts, some project activities (i.e. excavation,
                      trenching, etc.) may cause pollution of air, soils, and water bodies during the construction phase. Similar impacts may
                      occur during the operation and maintenance of the water supply networks and are expected to be marginal.
                      Domestic wastewater in the city is currently is managed through direct discharge to soil (soak wells), canals and
                      rivers. The ESMPs contained in the two ESIAs will address these adverse impacts.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                             Relevant

                      There will be some community health and safety risks during the construction phase of this project, especially during
                      the physical works along urban roads for laying water supply pipelines. These risks include traffic diversion and
                      congestion with the potential to exacerbate traffic conditions and induce vehicular accidents and injury; potential for
                      increased transmission of COVID-19 among workers and local population due to the presence of ‘outside’ workers in
                      communities; and the risk of SEA/SH which may materialize in slum and low-income areas during works due to
                      intimate interactions between workers and local women. In addition, there are risks of vector-borne disease that may
                      occur during operation and maintenance which needs to be properly managed. Works phased during night hours may
                      give rise to noise and nuisance in the communities. The ESMPs will outline protocols to minimize transmission of
                      COVID-19 and detail out safety precautions for protecting community from CHS risks associated with construction
                      activities (such as protective labels, fences around trenches, traffic management related guidance). Construction


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                     Page 8 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)



                      plans contained in the ESMPs will set out plans for managing traffic diversions and community safety issues. The
                      project will have overwhelming positive impacts due to improved water supply system and may help in preventing
                      the spread of COVID-19 by increasing the number of WASH facilities. The water supplied after distribution networks
                      are installed will comply with Bangladesh’s national drinking water quality standards. In addition, the SEP will include
                      messages aimed at promoting hand hygiene and actions to be adopted in preventing COVID infections.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                  Relevant

                      As noted above, the construction, expansion and rehabilitation of water distribution networks will occur along access
                      roads, often traversing urban and populated areas. Project component consisted of an east-west transmission main,
                      1,600mm diameter Ductile Iron approximately 12.8 km long, from Modhunaghat pumping station to a new
                      “Northwest” ground-level reservoir adjacent to the Bhatiari-Hathazari Link Road, initially for 20 ML with room for
                      expansion to 80 ML capacity. The revised treated water transmission system three main components (1) Sheikh
                      Hasina WTP to supplying the KSA, (2) The output from the Sheikh Russel WTP and any additional input from the
                      Sheikh Hasina WTP be pumped to the Kalurghat WTP for onward distribution to sector 1, via the existing Kalurghat
                      Booster, a new ground-level reservoir at ADC Hill and the existing Patenga Booster, and to sectors 4 and 5 a new
                      pumping station at Kalurghat and additional local transmission pipelines and (3) The output from the Mohara WTP to
                      supply Sector 3 and then onward to Sector 2 via a new ground tank and pumping station at the site of the existing DT
                      Booster. Although no land acquisition is expected, the proposed project activities are expected to induce limited in-
                      situ physical displacement of non titleholders and informal occupiers, (+/- 20 households) settled on government land
                      that might be required for the creation of Project assets, temporary adverse economic and livelihood impacts on
                      Project Affected Persons (approximately 250 PAPs) and temporary hardships for a limited durations of time on



Public Disclosure
                      account of relocation of public utility lines and services such as water, gas, telephone and electricity. During
                      construction activities errand vendors selling on table-tops may not be able to operate their business especially when
                      trenching and pipe laying is being carried out. In addition, excavated materials and trenches are also expected to
                      restrict access to homes, businesses, offices and other facilities of interest to the population. Based on these
                      identified impacts, this standard is considered relevant. Any restrictions on land use which is connected to the project
                      implementation will be addressed through voluntary and good faith negotiations between CWASA and local
                      communities . However, loss of income resulting from disruption of livelihood and economic activities as a result of
                      project works will be compensated for in line with the objectives and requirements of this standard. A Resettlement
                      Policy Framework (RPF) is being finalized to guide the conduct of resettlement planning and implementation
                      throughout the project life. Upon completion of network layout designs, depending on the nature and scale of
                      impacts, either Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) or Livelihood Restoration Plans (LRPs) will be prepared based on the
                      guidance provided in the RPF and implemented with provisions for compensation and additional livelihood assistance
                      for Project-Affected Persons (PAPs). Based on the current scope of activities, no permanent land acquisition is
                      anticipated. All impacts related to involuntary resettlement and restriction of access to resources are largely expected
                      to be temporary and reversible . For Non-network Sanitation Management Services component, all the land to be
                      used in the project either belong to CCC or private that will be given access for construction of toilets/DEWATs.
                      Consultations with the host community and other stakeholders have been carried out as a part of this ESIA and none
                      raised any issues regarding land ownership.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                   Relevant
                      Resources



                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                      Page 9 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)



                      The proposed project activities will be in built-up brownfield sites, urban, populated and largely contained within the
                      CMA areas, that is already highly altered. However, there are some sensitive sites in and around the city. This includes
                      hills, trees and sensitive water bodies, such as the Halda River, which is one of the country’s major natural spawning
                      ground for major carps. The ESMPs will provide general guideline and procedures for managing impacts related to
                      biodiversity and natural habitats.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional               Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      Based on preliminary social assessment and the findings of the ESIA studies, there are no populations or groups in the
                      project footprint that meet the description of Indigenous People as noted in paragraph 8 of the World Bank’s ESS7.
                      Chattogram is typically urban, cosmopolitan, and inhabited by non-IP populations. Whilst some families may belong
                      to IPs communities, they do not live in distinct settlements and political systems from the mainstream population.
                      Based on this assessment, this standard is not relevant for managing risks in the project.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                       Relevant

                      Based on the scope of activities and preliminary risks assessment, risks and impacts associated with cultural heritage
                      are not expected to occur. Excavation and trenching will involve depth of 1 to 2m, and are not expected to uncover
                      cultural artifacts. Nonetheless, the relevant aspects of this standard will be drawn to inform the ESMF and ensure
                      that artifacts, if discovered during works, will be duly registered and presented with the relevant authorities in
                      Bangladesh. The ESMF will include a Chance Find Procedure with relevant guidance project for securing requisite




Public Disclosure
                      permits from national authorities regarding cultural heritage registrations and the stakeholder consultation process
                      will include consultations related to identifying cultural heritage in collaboration with the communities.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                  Not Currently Relevant

                      The project does not involve Financial Intermediaries therefore this standard is not relevant.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                        Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                  No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                             No
                       The Government of Bangladesh (GoB) has policies for environmental risk management, albeit implementation and
                       oversight are weak. The project will use Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) of the World Bank and will not use
                       the borrower framework for managing environmental and social risks. Nonetheless, all project activities will be
                       conducted in compliance with relevant national laws and regulations of Bangladesh and the World Bank’s
                       Environmental and Social standards.




                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                    Page 10 of 12
                               The World Bank
                               Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)



                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                              No
                       The Government of Bangladesh is not receiving funds for joint activities related to this project

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     Through Project preparation, the following E&S analyses, instruments, plans have been prepared or are in an advanced
                     stage of preparation by CWASA - (i) 2 Environment and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) – one for the water supply
                     component and one for the sanitation components (in advanced stage of preparation), (ii) 2 Environment and Social
                     Management Plan (ESMPs) - one for the water supply component and one for the sanitation components (in advanced
                     stage of preparation), (iii) Environment and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP; prepared and disclosed), (iv) Stakeholder
                     Engagement Plan (SEP; prepared and disclosed), (v) Labor Management Plan (LMP; prepared and disclosed), (vi)
                     Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF – part of ESIA for water supply component; in advanced stage of preparation). In
                     addition, other plans and instruments, if and as required (viz. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) and / or Livelihood
                     Restoration Plan (LRP), Cultural Heritage Management Plan (CHMP), Chance Find Procedures (CFP)) will be prepared
                     and implemented during Project implementation.


                     III. CONTACT POINT




Public Disclosure
                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Arif Ahamed                             Title:          Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                      Specialist

                      Email:                  aahamed@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Harsh Goyal                             Job Title:      Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                      Specialist

                      Email:                  hgoyal@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT




                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                  Page 11 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)



                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                             Arif Ahamed, Harsh Goyal

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                                    Md Istiak Sobhan

                     ADM Social Specialist:                                           Anindo Kumar Chatterjee




Public Disclosure




                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                 Page 12 of 12
