Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                          Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                    (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                       Date Prepared/Updated: 10/27/2024 | Report No: ESRSA03614




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Mar 23, 2025                                                                        Page 1 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                    Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P176429                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)         CWSIP                        2025

                     Operation Name            Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries             Region                        Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Bangladesh                Bangladesh                                SOUTH ASIA                    Water


                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                  Estimated Appraisal Date      Estimated Board Date

                     People's Republic of      Chattogram Water Supply and               22-Oct-2024                   19-Dec-2024
                     Bangladesh                Sewerage Authority

                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost
                     Review Date




Public Disclosure
                     06-Aug-2024               333,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) are to (i) increase access to safely managed water supply in Chattogram;
                     and (ii) improve operational performance and financial sustainability of Chattogram Water Supply and Sewerage
                     Authority (CWASA).


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The project (Phase I of the Bangladesh Water Security and WSS MPA) will support the Government of Bangladesh in
                     achieving the SDG Goal 6 and advance the utility reform agenda ensuring long-term sustainability of Water Supply and
                     Sanitation (WSS) service provision in Chattogram. The MPA will comprise four phases spanning over nine years (2024-
                     2033) to support 15 cities with an estimated 20 million beneficiaries. The program framework includes three mutually
                     reinforcing categories of interventions: (i) strengthen institutions and policies for planning, service delivery and
                     regulations, (ii) improve infrastructure and service delivery systems, and (iii) enhance financial sustainability and access


                    Mar 23, 2025                                                                                                        Page 2 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)



                     to finance for capital and operational expenditures. Phase 1 of the MPA will lay the foundation of implementing this
                     framework by implementing important activities across all three categories in Chattogram and introducing the
                     performance orientation in Chattogram Water Supply and Sewerage Authority's (CWASA) operations through
                     Performance Based Conditions (PBCs) for accessing IDA resources. The project builds on the achievements of the
                     previous Bank-funded Chittagong Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation Project (CWSISP) that closed on December
                     31, 2020 by financing investment in infrastructure and by supporting institutional strengthening. The project will
                     include: (a) expansion of the water distribution system, following the District Metered Area (DMA) concept to enable
                     efficient, reliable and equitable water supply to all customers within the utility’s service area; (b) expansion of water
                     supply and non-network sanitation services in Low-income Communities (LIC); and (c) support to strengthen the
                     Chattogram Water Supply and Sewerage Authority's (CWASA) utility systems, financial performance and
                     creditworthiness including tariff roadmap, and building CWASA’s capacity for planning, delivering, and managing WSS
                     services. The proposed project provides emphasis on improving service delivery and institutional sustainability while
                     scaling up access.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     As a sequel to the previous investment (Chittagong Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation Project: P103999), the
                     Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (CWSIP) is proposed to (a) expand of the water distribution system,
                     following the District Metered Area (DMA) concept to enable efficient, reliable and equitable water supply to all
                     customers within the utility’s service area; (b) expand of water supply and non-network sanitation services in Low-
                     income Communities (LIC); and (c) support to strengthen the Chattogram Water Supply and Sewerage Authority's



Public Disclosure
                     (CWASA) utility systems, financial performance and creditworthiness including tariff roadmap, and building CWASA’s
                     capacity for planning, delivering, and managing WSS services. The proposed project provides emphasis on improving
                     service delivery and institutional sustainability while scaling up access.

                     The proposed project is located in 23 of the 41 Wards in Chattogram City. Chattogram is a major coastal city in
                     southeastern Bangladesh and serves as the country's second-largest city. It plays a crucial role in the nation's economy
                     due to its strategic location by the Bay of Bengal and its hosting of the busiest seaport in Bangladesh - the Port of
                     Chattogram. This port is pivotal for international trade, handling over 90% of Bangladesh's import-export activities. As a
                     center for industrial and commercial activities in Bangladesh Chattogram hosts a wide range of industries, including
                     textiles and garments (which are the backbone of Bangladesh's economy), shipbuilding, steel, chemicals,
                     pharmaceuticals, and fisheries. The city's economic growth is significantly bolstered by its port activities, including
                     shipping, logistics, and trade.

                     Despite its economic importance, Chattogram faces several social challenges, including poverty, urban congestion,
                     environmental degradation, and the impacts of climate change, such as cyclones and flooding. As per the United
                     Nations population projections, the population in Chattogram Metropolitan Area (CMA) in 2024 is approximately 5.51
                     million people (50.2% males and 49.8% females), an increase of 2.49% from the previous year. There are over 1000
                     slums within the CMA limits. It is estimated that together these slums have over 560,000 households. At an average
                     household size of 4.92 persons per household, more than 50% of the Chattogram city’s population reside in slums. Less
                     than 1% of the city’s population belong to indigenous peoples and other ethnic minority groups. The majority of the
                     city’s population, especially in slum areas, depend on shallow tube wells for drinking water with its inherent risks to
                     public health.

                    Mar 23, 2025                                                                                                     Page 3 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)




                     No new water production is proposed under this project as treated water is supplied from existing surface water
                     treatment plants (SWTPs) at Modhunaghat, Mohara and Karnaphuli. The plants draw water from the Karnaphuli and
                     Halda Rivers, both located in south-eastern Bangladesh and hosting important aquatic life including Ganges River
                     dolphins in the Karnaphuli River. The Halda draws from uphill streams of the Chittagong Hill tracks, providing water and
                     irrigation across the Halda basin, and finally discharging into the Karnaphuli river. The Chattogram city also has patches
                     of urban forest. Although the project includes the upgrading of existing groundwater extraction facilities, but this
                     doesn't consist of any additional abstraction and will only be limited to improved treatment processes.

                     The footprint of activities is in built-up brownfield sites, urban, populated and largely contained within the CMA. Most
                     houses in the area serve mixed purposes as people reside and operate small/medium sized enterprises in the same
                     living units. In parts of the city, errand traders and vendors conduct business in the open, makeshift shelters, sidewalks.
                     This is characteristic of the unplanned neighborhoods where streets are narrow with clusters of small shops. The
                     construction of the distribution networks will occur along existing road networks and alleys with no need for land
                     acquisition. Nonetheless, construction works may restrict access to homes and disrupt economic activities. Digging
                     across some roads may cause traffic congestion and diversion with inconveniences for people during construction
                     activities. These impacts are expected to be temporary lasting the construction period. Based on experiences from
                     CWSISP-I, works under this project will be scheduled to avoid and/or minimize displacement and disruption of income
                     generating activities. Where unavoidable, CWASA will implement measures to mitigate the adverse impacts of
                     displacement. Ahead of construction, CWASA will consult local communities and affected persons, disclose potential
                     adverse impacts of projects, and discuss measures for addressing risks. In the case of errand traders and vendors, the




Public Disclosure
                     authority will identify vacant spaces in the vicinities for temporary relocation and serve advance notification to enable
                     them to relocate for the ensuing construction works. As in the case of CWSIP, traders will be allowed to return to the
                     previous spots when construction is complete.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The proposed project will be implemented by the Chattogram Water Supply and Sewerage Authority (CWASA), a
                     government agency with familiarity and experience in implementing World Bank-financed projects in the water and
                     sanitation sector. The CWSIP was implemented by CWASA with satisfactory performance in managing the
                     environmental and social impacts of the project. At project closure, safeguards performance on CWSISP was rated
                     satisfactory, reflecting the existing capacity and commitment of CWASA to address environmental and social impacts
                     associated with projects of this nature.

                     Key staff of CWASA who held oversight responsibilities on CWSISP (e.g. Chemists) remain in post and are currently
                     supporting CWASA in project preparation including on environmental and social issues. Despite this relative project
                     experience, the requirements and full scope of the Bank’s Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) and relevant
                     Environmental and Social Standards are new to the staff and suggest the need for upfront technical support from the
                     Bank and experienced E&S consultants to enable CWASA operationalize the ESF as the guiding framework for managing
                     social and environmental impacts of the proposed investments.

                     As part of the implementation arrangements, CWASA will set up a Project Management Unit (PMU) early in the project
                     implementation phase with adequate staffing to manage the various aspects of the project. To meet the existing E&S
                     capacity constraint, CWASA has committed to hiring one environmental and one social safeguards specialist on full time


                    Mar 23, 2025                                                                                                      Page 4 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)



                     basis in the PMU and keep them in place till project completion using, if required, resources made available through
                     Component 4 of the Project. Where required, the Bank will provide orientation/training on the ESF to the E&S
                     specialists and other PMU & CWASA staff as the project is prepared and implemented.

                     An Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) and other relevant management plans are already drafted with
                     commitments, procedures and responsibilities for managing environmental and social impacts of the project. The
                     staffing requirements to ensure compliance to the relevant ESSs throughout the project is outlined in the ESCP. CWASA
                     maintains two zonal offices in Chattogram. These offices provide day-to-day service delivery to the communities and
                     will be leveraged to support information disclosure and consultation activities under this project.

                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                        Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                  Moderate
                     The environmental risk rating remains 'moderate', which was proposed at the concept stage. This is based on the
                     nature of physical works (water supply pipe laying and installation of non-network sanitation management services
                     for LICs), which will be in built-up brownfield sites. No new water production is proposed in this project. The risk and
                     impact screening data for the project show that the environmental and social impacts and risks are predictable and
                     measures to manage these have been planned, which will be implemented as per the proposed ESMP. As noted
                     above, the implementing agency is familiar with the nature of physical works involved in the project and are expected



Public Disclosure
                     to draw from past experiences in managing risks associated with the project. The main environmental risks are
                     expected to materialize during construction phase, and include noise and dust pollution, dumping and disposal of
                     excavated materials, traffic congestion, as well as concerns for health and safety of workers and communities. Where
                     feasible, trenchless and pipe bursting technology will be considered to minimize the extent of excavations and
                     trenching. Some of the old existing water lines are made of asbestos cement materials and will be left in the ground.
                     Where these are removed, contractors will ensure careful handling and safe disposal of excavated materials. During
                     operation phase, main risks will be community and worker health & safety issues as well as some solid and liquid
                     wastes disposal. In line with the relevant World Bank Environmental and Social Standards, two Environmental and
                     Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) are prepared one for water supply and management services and another for non-
                     network sanitation management services (fecal sludge management) by the implementing agency, for assessing and
                     managing environmental and social risks during construction activities. In addition, one Environmental and Social
                     Management Framework (ESMF) for fecal sludge management for the wards in which the actual activity locations are
                     yet to be determined are also prepared. These instruments are in an advanced stage of preparation and will be
                     finalized within 1 month of project effectiveness, and thereafter implemented throughout project implementation.
                     E&S instruments (ESIAs, ESMF and ESMPs) will be updated within 30 days of PMU informing the Bank about any
                     changes in sub-project activities and / or associated changes, if any, in the E&S risks and impacts of the sub-projects.
                     The updated instruments will remain effective till the next changes (if any). It is expected that successful
                     implementation of this project will have major positive environmental impacts as the reduction in leakages will
                     improve overall supply efficiency and reduce/delay the need for further water abstractions (from rivers and
                     groundwater). Fecal sludge management will improve the overall environmental health and reduce contamination




                    Mar 23, 2025                                                                                                     Page 5 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)



                     and water borne diseases. Some greenhouse gas emissions savings are also expected in the long-run due to energy
                     savings and more efficient use of resources.
                                                                                                                                    Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risks of the project rated Substantial. To understand the nature and significance of the E&S risks, CWASA
                     commissioned two ESIA studies – one for the sanitation component, and the other for the water supply component of
                     the Project – during the preparation of the Project. Additionally, an ESMF is also drafted for sanitation component,
                     where activity locations are not yet determined. The preliminary findings of the ESIA/ESMF studies indicate that the
                     key social risks of the Project to be the following - (i) potential economic displacement and disruption of other
                     livelihood activities that take place on or alongside pavements and the Right of Way (ROW) for water transmission
                     and distribution lines (approximately 250 PAPs); (ii) limited in-situ displacement of informal settlers (+/- 20
                     households) on parcels of land owned by CWASA or other Government Departments, that might be required for
                     construction and operation of water reservoir facilities; and (iii) the restriction of access to homes businesses and
                     common property resources during construction. Other social issues include community health and safety risks, traffic
                     safety and congestion and exclusion of the poor and marginalized households from accessing project benefits due to
                     tariffs and affordability. Therefore, at appraisal the social risk rating of the Project is retained as ‘Substantial’. The
                     Project will be able to manage these risks through appropriate mitigation measures that will be outlined in the
                     Environment and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) that are a part of the recommendations in the ESIAs and ESMF.
                     The ESMPs will be part of the bidding documents with requirements for contractors to plan and implement
                     Contractor Environmental and Social Management Plans (C-ESMPs). The cost of ESMP implementation will be
                     included as a separate BOQ list in the contract documents. CWASA has also prepared a detailed Stakeholder




Public Disclosure
                     Engagement Plan (SEP) and Labor Management Plan (LMP). A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared before
                     the commencement of the construction activities. The RPF will include an entitlement matrix for project-affected
                     households (PAHs) and will outline procedures for the preparation and implementation of site-specific Resettlement
                     Action Plans (RAPs) or Livelihood Restoration Plans (LRPs) – depending on the nature and scale of impacts - when
                     designs are complete. In addition, Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) Prevention and
                     Response measures will be incorporated into bidding documents with mandates and requirements to institute and
                     monitor code of conduct for workers and provide remedies for potential SEA/SH issues. CWASA is committed to
                     putting in place the appropriate institutional arrangements to manage the E&S risks and impacts of the Project and
                     these have also been described in detail in the ESCP.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                  Relevant

                      Given the scope of work defined in the PAD, the project is expected to pose some environmental and social risks and
                      impacts. Key environmental risks and impacts include noise and dust pollution, dumping and disposal of excavated
                      materials, traffic congestion, as well as concerns for health and safety of workers and communities. It should be
                      noted that no new water production is proposed in this project. Distribution networks will tap into existing Surface
                      Water Treatment Plants (SWTPs) at Modhunaghat, Mohara and Karnaphuli rivers; thus, reducing the need for
                      exploring different water sources. On social risks and impacts, the proposed activities may result in displacement of


                    Mar 23, 2025                                                                                                      Page 6 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)



                      non-titleholders and informal occupiers from parcels of land owned by CWASA or other Government Departments
                      and disruption of income generating activities during the construction phase. Other social concerns include issues of
                      equitable access to potable water for unserved and underserved low-income populations in the city as well as the
                      potential risk of SEA/SH which may arise from labor influx. Low income and vulnerable households, typically urban
                      poor households operating table-top business along the streets, may not be able to access WSS services provided by
                      CWASA if tariffs are high. Issues about tariffs and access will be included in a tariff review study to inform cost
                      recovery. Under CWSIP, CWASA piloted a community-managed water supply system to extend access to poor urban
                      households. The effectiveness of this model will be reviewed to inform scale up and improved tariff systems in low-
                      income households under this project. The inherent E&S risks and impacts of the project underscores the relevance
                      for the ESS1 to be used as a guiding framework for assessing and managing such impacts. For Non-network Sanitation
                      Management Services component, during the construction stage stock piling of construction materials, excavations
                      may cause increased dust and increased number of vehicles may also contribute to air pollution. However, they are
                      temporary and insignificant in nature. At this stage of the project, design of pipeline alignments and at least two of
                      the locations of Non-network Sanitation Management Services facilities are finalized and hence two separate
                      Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) documents has been drafted with detailed E&S Management
                      Plans and these documents will be finalized within finalized within 1 month of project effectiveness, and thereafter
                      implemented throughout project implementation. The ESIA which is drafted for the non-network sanitation system
                      (CNNS) covers only two wards where sub-projects’ details are known. However, the location of the DEWATs for other
                      wards are yet to be finalized and therefore a broad Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) is also
                      drafted, which provided E&S management framework in the sanitation systems, on how to address specific E&S risks
                      and impacts in wards where the specific location of project assets and activities related thereto are yet to be decided.




Public Disclosure
                      An Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) and other relevant management plans are also drafted with
                      commitments, procedures and responsibilities for managing environmental and social risk and impacts of the project.
                      If Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) is triggered the CERC Manual will include a description of the
                      ESHS assessment and management arrangements. The Project will adopt any environmental and social (E&S)
                      instruments which may be required for activities under CERC of the Project in accordance with the ESSs, and
                      thereafter implement the measures and actions required under said E&S instruments within the timeframes specified
                      in said E&S instruments.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                      Relevant

                      Demand for and access to potable water is a basic need which often draws significant interest from consumers and
                      stakeholders. Official statistics indicate that only 30 percent of the urban population of Bangladesh have access to
                      piped water services. At the same time, reliability and safety of water supplies remain problematic in the country,
                      with 70% of the population being exposed to unsafe drinking water. These challenges coupled with growing
                      urbanization often generate interest in water investment projects in the country. The proposed activities under the
                      project aims at extending improved water access to the entire Chattogram community including urban poor and low-
                      income communities. Accordingly, this standard is considered relevant for this project and will serve as the guiding
                      framework for planning and implementing stakeholder consultation and information disclosure activities in the
                      project. In line with the standard, a stakeholder engagement plan (SEP) has been prepared by CWASA to serve as
                      basis for early consultation of local communities, school authorities, health facility administrators, women, and other
                      water user groups. The SEP prioritizes timely disclosure of relevant information about the project, the population
                      areas targeted to benefit from the project, and the expected environmental and social impacts of these activities.


                    Mar 23, 2025                                                                                                     Page 7 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)



                      Throughout project planning and implementation, the SEP will be updated from time to time to reflect the scope of
                      risks and concerns associated with project designs and will include feedback and grievance redress mechanism to
                      raise concerns about the Project including on SEA/SH. The stakeholder engagement activities will discuss issues about
                      access and tariffs in low-income communities, discuss issues about inclusive designs and universal access, promote
                      safe hygienic practices and leveraged to disseminate information about prevention measures against COVID-19 and
                      other possible environmental hazards and pandemics. The SEP will identify the consultation and disclosure needs for
                      site-specific project environmental and social management plans. The SEP will be implemented by the Public
                      Relations Unit of the CWASA.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                                Relevant

                      Based on the scope of the project, direct workers – typically staff of the CWASA and contracted workers – and
                      Primary Supply Workers (PSWs) will be engaged to undertake specific project activities with inherent risks related to
                      Occupational, Health and Safety (OHS). Engineers from the Construction and Supervision Unit of CWASA and workers
                      hired by contractors are expected to carry out deep excavation, earth movement, trenching and pipe laying works
                      during the construction of the project. The number of workers to be involved and the full scope of this risks cannot be
                      ascertained at this stage of the project. The Bank will liaise with project engineers to assess the number and type of
                      workers that will be involved in the construction activities, and advice on training and mitigation measures against
                      OHS risks and impacts throughout project implementation. During operations, women may be engaged in fee
                      collection as well as operations and maintenance of community-managed systems in low-income neighborhoods, as
                      CWASA attempts to encourage community-managed water points and to engender WASH services in such
                      communities. Consistent with the requirements of this standard, a labor management plan (LMP) has been prepared



Public Disclosure
                      with guidance and measures to ensure OHS and control the potential spread of infectious diseases among workers at
                      project sites and offices. The LMP clarifies the terms and conditions under which women will be engaged in tariff
                      collection and outline avenues by which they can raise complaints and grievances related to their involvement in
                      operating community-managed water points. Child labor is prevalent in Bangladesh, predominantly in agriculture and
                      industry. Consequently, children below the age of 18 could attempt to seek construction related work under the
                      project. However, in line with ESS2, the use of child and forced labor is prohibited in the project. The LMP clearly
                      states that persons under the age of 18 are not allowed to work at any site or any facility being financed by the
                      project. Contractors will carry out age verification (using certified birth certificates and citizen identification cards) as
                      a precondition for employment. The project will provide accessible grievance mechanism to allow all workers (direct,
                      contracted and PSWs) to raise workplace concerns to be addressed by the CWASA, site foremen, and sub-station
                      managers. The GRM will provide a parallel avenue for SEA/SH-related grievances to be submitted for review and
                      redress following the necessary confidentiality requirements and sensitivities.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                                 Relevant

                      The project will support construction of improved and energy efficient water supply systems. The treated water is
                      sourced from Karnaphuli and Halda Rivers via existing surface water treatment plants. In addition, new Non-network
                      Sanitation Management Services facilities will be installed at public and communal areas to promote hygiene practice
                      and help prevent the spread of diseases. Despite these positive impacts, some project activities (i.e. excavation,
                      trenching, etc.) may cause pollution of air, soils, and water bodies during the construction phase. Similar impacts may
                      occur during the operation and maintenance of the water supply networks and are expected to be marginal.



                    Mar 23, 2025                                                                                                          Page 8 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)



                      Domestic wastewater in the city is currently managed through direct discharge to soil (soak wells), canals and rivers.
                      The ESMPs contained in the two ESIAs and an ESMF will address these adverse impacts.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                            Relevant

                      There will be some community health and safety risks during the construction phase of this project, especially during
                      the physical works along urban roads for laying water supply pipelines. These risks include traffic diversion and
                      congestion with the potential to exacerbate traffic conditions and induce vehicular accidents and injury; potential for
                      increased transmission of infectious diseases among workers and local population due to the presence of ‘outside’
                      workers in communities; and the risk of SEA/SH which may materialize in slum and low-income areas during works
                      due to intimate interactions between workers and local women. In addition, there are risks of vector-borne disease
                      that may occur during operation and maintenance which needs to be properly managed. Works phased during night
                      hours may give rise to noise and nuisance in the communities. The ESMPs will outline protocols to minimize
                      transmission of COVID-19 and detail out safety precautions for protecting community from CHS risks associated with
                      construction activities (such as protective labels, fences around trenches, traffic management related guidance).
                      Construction plans contained in the ESMPs will set out plans for managing traffic diversions and community safety
                      issues. The project will have overwhelming positive impacts due to improved water supply system and may help in
                      preventing the spread of COVID-19 by increasing the number of WASH facilities. The water supplied after distribution
                      networks are installed will comply with Bangladesh’s national drinking water quality standards. In addition, the SEP
                      will include messages aimed at promoting hand hygiene and actions to be adopted in preventing any contamination
                      and health hazard.




Public Disclosure
                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                Relevant

                      As noted above, the construction, expansion and rehabilitation of water distribution networks will occur along access
                      roads, often traversing urban and populated areas. Project component consisted of an east-west transmission main,
                      1,600mm diameter Ductile Iron approximately 12.8 km long, from Modhunaghat pumping station to a new
                      “Northwest” ground-level reservoir adjacent to the Bhatiari-Hathazari Link Road, initially for 20 ML with room for
                      expansion to 80 ML capacity. The revised treated water transmission system three main components (1) Sheikh
                      Hasina WTP to supplying the Karnaphuli Service Area (KSA), (2) The output from the Sheikh Russel WTP and any
                      additional input from the Sheikh Hasina WTP be pumped to the Kalurghat WTP for onward distribution to sector 1,
                      via the existing Kalurghat Booster, a new ground-level reservoir at ADC Hill and the existing Patenga Booster, and to
                      sectors 4 and 5 a new pumping station at Kalurghat and additional local transmission pipelines and (3) The output
                      from the Mohara WTP to supply Sector 3 and then onward to Sector 2 via a new ground tank and pumping station at
                      the site of the existing DT Booster. Although no land acquisition is expected, the proposed project activities are
                      expected to induce limited in-situ physical displacement of non-titleholders and informal occupiers, (+/- 20
                      households) settled on government land that might be required for the creation of Project assets, temporary adverse
                      economic and livelihood impacts on Project Affected Persons (approximately 250 PAPs) and temporary hardships for
                      a limited durations of time on account of relocation of public utility lines and services such as water, gas, telephone
                      and electricity. During construction activities errand vendors selling on table-tops may not be able to operate their
                      business especially when trenching and pipe laying is being carried out. In addition, excavated materials and trenches
                      are also expected to restrict access to homes, businesses, offices and other facilities of interest to the population.
                      Based on these identified impacts, this standard is considered relevant. Any restrictions on land use which is
                      connected to the project implementation will be addressed through voluntary and good faith negotiations between


                    Mar 23, 2025                                                                                                     Page 9 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)



                      CWASA and local communities. However, loss of income resulting from disruption of livelihood and economic
                      activities as a result of project works will be compensated for in line with the objectives and requirements of this
                      standard. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) is being finalized to guide the conduct of resettlement planning and
                      implementation throughout the project life. Upon completion of network layout designs, depending on the nature
                      and scale of impacts, either Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) or Livelihood Restoration Plans (LRPs) will be prepared
                      based on the guidance provided in the RPF and implemented with provisions for compensation and additional
                      livelihood assistance for Project-Affected Persons (PAPs). Based on the current scope of activities, no permanent land
                      acquisition is anticipated. All impacts related to involuntary resettlement and restriction of access to resources are
                      largely expected to be temporary and reversible. For Non-network Sanitation Management Services component, all
                      the land to be used in the project either belong to CCC or private that will be given access for construction of
                      toilets/DEWATs. Consultations with the host community and other stakeholders have been carried out as a part of
                      this ESIA and none raised any issues regarding land ownership.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                   Relevant
                      Resources

                      The proposed project activities will be in built-up brownfield sites, urban, populated and largely contained within the
                      CMA areas, that is already highly altered. However, there are some sensitive sites in and around the city. This includes
                      hills, trees and sensitive water bodies, such as the Halda River, which is one of the country’s major natural spawning
                      grounds for major carps. The ESMPs will provide general guideline and procedures for managing impacts related to
                      biodiversity and natural habitats.




Public Disclosure
                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional               Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      Based on preliminary social assessment and the findings of the ESIA studies, there are no populations or groups in the
                      project footprint that meet the description of Indigenous People as noted in paragraph 8 of the World Bank’s ESS7.
                      Chattogram is typically urban, cosmopolitan, and inhabited by non-IP populations. Whilst some families may belong
                      to IPs communities, they do not live in distinct settlements and political systems from the mainstream population.
                      Based on this assessment, this standard is not relevant for managing risks in the project.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                        Relevant

                      Based on the scope of activities and preliminary risks assessment, risks and impacts associated with cultural heritage
                      are not expected to occur. Deep excavations sometime will go more than 2 meters and trenching are unlikely to
                      uncover cultural artifacts. Nonetheless, the relevant aspects of this standard will be drawn to inform the ESMPs and
                      ensure that artifacts, if discovered during works, will be duly registered and presented with the relevant authorities in
                      Bangladesh. The ESMPs prepared within the ESIAs and ESMF under the project have included Chance Find Procedures
                      with relevant guidance project for securing requisite permits from national authorities regarding cultural heritage
                      registrations and the stakeholder consultation process will include consultations related to identifying cultural
                      heritage in collaboration with the communities. C-ESMPs will also have relevant instructions on this regard taking
                      notes from the E&S instruments.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                  Not Currently Relevant



                    Mar 23, 2025                                                                                                     Page 10 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)



                      The project does not involve Financial Intermediaries therefore this standard is not relevant.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                     Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                               No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                          No
                       The Government of Bangladesh (GoB) has policies for environmental risk management, albeit implementation and
                       oversight are weak. The project will use Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) of the World Bank and will not use
                       the borrower framework for managing environmental and social risks. Nonetheless, all project activities will be
                       conducted in compliance with relevant national laws and regulations of Bangladesh and the World Bank’s
                       Environmental and Social standards.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                             No
                       The Government of Bangladesh is not receiving funds for joint activities related to this project

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities



Public Disclosure
                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     Through Project preparation, the following E&S analyses, instruments, plans have been prepared - (i) two Environment
                     and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) – one for the water supply component and one for the sanitation component
                     (advanced draft under review), (ii) Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for the sanitation
                     component for the city wards where specific project activity sites are not yet determined (advanced draft under
                     review), (iii) 2 Environment and Social Management Plan (ESMPs) - one for the water supply component and one for
                     the sanitation components (in advanced under review), (iii) Environment and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP; prepared
                     and disclosed), (iv) Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP; prepared and disclosed), (v) Labor Management Plan (LMP;
                     prepared and disclosed), (vi) Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF – part of ESIA for water supply component; in
                     advanced stage of preparation). In addition, other plans and instruments, if and as required (viz. Resettlement Action
                     Plan (RAP) and / or Livelihood Restoration Plan (LRP), Cultural Heritage Management Plan (CHMP), Chance Find
                     Procedures (CFP)) will be prepared and implemented during Project implementation.


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank




                    Mar 23, 2025                                                                                                 Page 11 of 12
                               The World Bank
                               Chattogram Water Supply Improvement Project (P176429)



                      Task Team Leader:       Arif Ahamed                        Title:           Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                  Specialist

                      Email:                  aahamed@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Harsh Goyal                        Job Title:       Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                  Specialist

                      Email:                  hgoyal@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                              Arif Ahamed, Harsh Goyal



Public Disclosure
                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                                     Md Istiak Sobhan

                     ADM Social Specialist:                                            Anindo Kumar Chatterjee




                    Mar 23, 2025                                                                                              Page 12 of 12
