Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Urban Resilience Project (P177146)




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                         Project Information Document (PID)



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                         Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 25-Apr-2023 | Report No: PIDC32688




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Apr 07, 2023                                                                                          Page 1 of 15
         The World Bank
         Urban Resilience Project (P177146)


  BASIC INFORMATION


  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE

  Country                                        Project ID                    Parent Project ID (if any)     Project Name
  Burundi                                        P177146                                                      Urban Resilience
                                                                                                              Project (P177146)
  Region                                         Estimated Appraisal Date      Estimated Board Date           Practice Area (Lead)
  EASTERN AND SOUTHERN                           Apr 18, 2024                  Jul 30, 2024                   Urban, Resilience and
  AFRICA                                                                                                      Land
  Financing Instrument                           Borrower(s)                   Implementing Agency
  Investment Project Financing                   Ministry of Finance, Budget   Ministry of Infrastructure,
                                                 and Economic Planning         Equipment and Social
                                                                               Housing

   Proposed Development Objective(s)

    To increase resilience to floods and improve climate resilient urban management in Bujumbura.

    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

   SUMMARY-NewFin1

    Total Project Cost                                                                                                         120.00
    Total Financing                                                                                                            120.00

                             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                 120.00

    Financing Gap                                                                                                                 0.00

   DETAILS     -NewFinEnh1




    World Bank Group Financing

       International Development Association (IDA)                                                                             120.00
          IDA Grant                                                                                                            120.00




  Environmental and Social Risk Classification                                 Concept Review Decision
   Substantial                                                                 Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to
                                                                               continue



Apr 07, 2023                                                                                                                 Page 2 of 15
          The World Bank
          Urban Resilience Project (P177146)



  B. Introduction and Context

  Country Context
 1.      Burundi is s one of the most densely populated countries in the world facing widespread poverty. The
 population density of around 478 people per square kilometer (2021 population projection) is the second highest in Sub
 Saharan Africa and the annual population growth is more than 3 percent. Almost 82 percent of its 12.3 million people (as
 of 2021)1 live below the international poverty line of $2.15/day, up from 65 percent in 20132, and 75 percent of the
 population live in multidimensional poverty.3 Burundi ranks 187 out of 191 on the UN Human Development Index in the
 2021/2022 report, descending two places since 2015. Economic growth and poverty reduction have been severely
 constrained by the COVID-19 pandemic, repeated climate disasters and political shocks.4
 2.       The country, with an undiversified economy heavily reliant on agriculture and services, remains one of the
 poorest countries in the world with an estimated per capita GDP of US$274 in 20215. Economic growth is projected at
 2.1 percent in 2022 from 1.8 percent in 2021 and expected to increase to 3-4 percent over 2023-24.6 Burundi’s two
 economic drivers are agriculture (half of GDP growth in 2022 and close to 30 percent of GDP in 20217) and services (the
 largest sector in 2022 with 44 percent of real GDP).8 The services sector - driven by the public sector, ICT, and hospitality
 - is recovering from COVID-19 pandemic, with an estimated growth of 1.7 percent in 2022. Although agriculture´s relative
 share of GDP has decreased in the last three decades (from almost 50 percent in 1991), 86 percent of the population are
 employed in agriculture.9 Agriculture is expected to keep driving GDP growth in the country, though it is mostly rain-fed,
 and vulnerable to climate shocks.10 Bujumbura, the economic capital of Burundi where 61 percent of the urban population
 live, could play a key role supporting the economic drivers in the country. Agribusiness jobs are increasingly concentrated
 in urban areas. Consumer services account for the majority (47 percent) of employment in Bujumbura and employment
 related to other agricultural value-addition activities are mainly found in peri-urban areas.11 However, inadequate
 infrastructure and services and poor resilience hinder the growth and job generating potential of these economic
 activities. Moreover, Burundi’s reliance on the agriculture sector and rapid population growth have resulted in depletion
 of its natural capital and environmental degradation, resulting, among others, in soil erosion and increased impacts from
 natural hazards and disasters.
 3.      Burundi remains largely rural, with 14 percent of urban population; however, it is one of the countries with the
 fastest growing urban population in the region. Burundi experienced an urbanization rate of 5.7 percent between 2000
 and 2019. As a result, the urban population is estimated to double by 2050.12 According to the latest government reports,
 poverty levels at the national poverty line are around 40 percentage points lower in urban areas, compared to rural areas,
 with Bujumbura Mairie displaying the lowest ones across the country. However, 58 percent of the urban population live

 1 See World Development Indicators—population, total: https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.POP.TOTL?locations=BI
 2 According to the latest World Bank Burundi Economic Monitor (Fall 2022).
 3 UN Human Development Index Report 2021/2022. Table 6. Multidimensional Poverty Index: developing countries. Multidimensional Poverty Index: Proportion of

 the population that is multidimensionally poor adjusted by the intensity of the deprivations. Burundi’s latest surveys are from 2016/2017.
 4
   SDC 2018
 5 IMF, World Economic Outlook (October 2022), considering countries where data is available as of 2021 (no data is available for Afghanistan, Lebanon, and Syria).

 US$805 in purchasing power parity terms.
 6 According to the latest World Bank Burundi Economic Monitor (Fall 2022).
 7 World Bank Open data. Agriculture, forestry, and fishing, value added (% of GDP), Burundi, 2021.
 8
   According to the latest World Bank Burundi Economic Monitor (Fall 2022).
 9 World Bank Open Data. Employment in agriculture (% of total employment) (modeled ILO estimate), Burundi, 2021.
 10 Industry is projected to accelerate due to a moderate loosening of forex constraints and assuming resolution in mining disputes and increased power generation.
 11 World Bank (2021): Urbanization Review & Government of Burundi (2011): Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock Development.
 12
    World Bank 2021. Burundi Urbanization Review.


Apr 07, 2023                                                                                                                                             Page 3 of 15
          The World Bank
          Urban Resilience Project (P177146)


 in unplanned areas, often under-resourced and without basic services. This is an indication of significant poverty pockets
 in urban areas, which are masked by an average higher income in cities, due to the higher income of a small percentage
 of urban dwellers. Adequate provision of basic services, conflicts over land ownership, exposure to disaster risks, and
 refugee return represent major challenge in urban areas, as more people move to cities in search of livelihood
 opportunities, housing, and access to services. Between 2010 and 2020, unplanned urban and built-up areas doubled in
 the country, increasing from about 5,000 ha (0.2 percent of the country’s total area) to about 10,000 ha (0.4 percent),
 with expanded impermeable land area leading to increased risk of flood and erosion. Upstream watershed degradation
 compounds the flooding risks of the streams entering the urban areas.
 4.       Burundi is highly vulnerable to natural hazards and climate-related events, with large implications for people,
 infrastructure, and ecosystems. Burundi ranks as the 22nd most vulnerable country and the 20th least ready to adapt,
 according to the latest Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative (ND-GAIN) Country Index13. Past extreme weather events,
 including the severe floods in 2006 and 2007 and severe droughts in 1999, 2000 and in 2005,14 accounted for losses
 exceeding 5 percent of GDP.15 Regular climatic variations of the El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO) and Indian Ocean
 Dipole (IOD) lead to more prolonged periods of wetness in the country. The intersection of these geoclimatic features with
 the high population density, further exacerbated by the hilly nature of the country creates ideal conditions for flash
 flooding and landslides, which have severe humanitarian and economic consequences. Long term climatic oscillations are
 also drivers in the long-term cyclical level of Lake Tanganyika. Climate models predict an increasing trend in temperature
 and the frequency and intensity of extreme rainfall events as well as longer dry periods.16 These changes have already
 resulted in direct impacts in urban areas, notably flooding and landslides. Additionally, climate change in the absence of
 supplemental irrigation, will lead to reduced yield of rainfed crops and increased food insecurity. This threatens livelihoods
 and strains resilience of rural communities, which will likely increase rural-urban migration. In the recent years, more than
 a 100,000 people, about 84 percent of all internally displaced people (IDP) in Burundi, have been displaced due to natural
 hazards and disasters, mostly due to the rise of Lake Tanganyika.17
 5.       The links between unplanned urbanization, climate, and fragility risks are clear.18 Even though the security
 environment has improved significantly in recent years, the situation remains fragile. Unplanned, rapid urbanization,
 coupled with land scarcity in the context of demographic growth and increasing intensity of climate events, are two of the
 key drivers of fragility, conflict, and violence in Burundi, according to the 2022 Risk and Resilience Assessment (RRA).
 Limited opportunities for upward mobility in an undiversified economy, within unplanned urban areas which lack services
 and infrastructure, create a vicious circle of segregation, especially among disenfranchised groups. The sustainability of
 livelihoods is being compromised by dwindling amounts of arable and productive land per capita in the context of
 demographic growth and increasing poverty, the increasing intensity of climate events, and influxes of returnees.
 6.      Furthermore, climate shocks and disasters exacerbate existing inequalities and have a disproportionate impact
 on women and girls.19 Women are often more affected by disasters due to a combination of lack of voice and agency,
 limited access to information, assets, financial protection, and emergency services. Women tend to be underrepresented
 in urban planning and disaster preparedness and emergency agencies. Not having women involved in decision making

 13 The ND-GAIN index summarizes a country’s vulnerability to climate change and other global challenges in combination with readiness to improve resilience.

 http://index.gain.org/country/burundi
 14
    Republic of Burundi 2007.
 15 SCD 2018.
 16 World Bank (2021): Urbanization Review and World Bank (2022): Addressing Drivers of Climate Change and Environmental Fragility in Burundi’s Colline Landscapes.
 17
    IOM. (2021). Internal Displacement Dashboard.
 18
    The World Bank’s Country Partnership Framework for the Republic of Burundi for the Period FY19-FY23’ expands on these four risk areas,
 suggesting that the country has been stranded in a low-level equilibrium of fragility and poverty more or less since independence in 1962.
 19
    World Bank (2019): Country Partnership Framework for the Republic of Burundi.


Apr 07, 2023                                                                                                                                            Page 4 of 15
          The World Bank
          Urban Resilience Project (P177146)


 may result in women’s needs not being met. In addition, women living in cities are less likely to engage in work and 24.2
 percent of urban women are not working. Although the 2018 Constitution refers to Burundi's international commitments
 to gender equality and prohibits gender-based discrimination, women continue to face limitations on their ability to legally
 inherit (which remains customary).20 In addition, historical customs of land tenure result in large gender gaps in land and
 housing ownership, which limits women’s ability to access formal financial services and disincentivizes investments in land
 and housing.21 Due to the lack of access to intangible assets among women (such as small business or income-generating
 activities), it is likely that a larger share of women’s assets is at risk of disaster impacts. If affected, women have lower
 access to coping mechanisms to respond to shocks.
   Sectoral and Institutional Context
 7.      Bujumbura is the most populous urban area in the country, with an estimated population of about 1 million
 concentrating 71 percent of the total urban growth of the country between 2014-2019. Bujumbura´s built-up area has
 experienced steady average annual growth of 1.4 percent since 1985, reaching a total of 86 square kilometers today. Its
 population is estimated to reach 4 million by 2045.22 Bujumbura concentrates a large proportion of total urban
 employment across Burundi—accounting for 61 percent of all industry, 70 percent of all services, 74 percent of all
 construction and 79 percent of all electricity, gas, and water.23 Bujumbura is the commercial center of Burundi and
 experienced in 2015 the highest employment growth among regional piers (such as Kampala, Kigali, Mwanza, Dodoma,
 Bulawayo) at 11.2 percent.24 Bujumbura also hosts the greatest number of internal displacement population in the country
 – while official statistics from September 2020 point to about 30 thousand displaced individuals in both Bujumbura City
 (Bujumbura Mairie) and the neighboring Bujumbura Rural, the actual numbers are likely to be higher.25Critical services
 such as drinking water are intermittently supplied with poor water quality (leakages) and a small fraction is connected to
 a sewer system26.
 8.       Due to Bujumbura’s location, the unplanned development of its low-lying areas, and insufficient drainage
 infrastructure, the city is acutely affected by three drivers of recurring floods - lake level rise, river overflows, and heavy
 rains. It is estimated that unplanned settlements account for 39 percent of the city’s area.27 More than half, or 53 of 86
 square kilometers, of built-up area are exposed to pluvial flooding, and 72 percent of the densest settlement areas are
 exposed to both fluvial and pluvial flooding. Recent flood modeling demonstrates that estimated annual damage (EAD) to
 exposed residential homes and critical infrastructure (from lake, pluvial, and fluvial flooding) in Bujumbura amounts to
 around US$39 million, almost 5 percent of the country’s total budget for 2021/2022.28 Population and properties adjacent
 to the coast are especially vulnerable to changes in lake level. This was most recently demonstrated in the flooding events
 of 2021, which affected around 14,000 households in Bujumbura and neighboring municipalities (Rumonge and Gatumba),


 20 There is no legal framework on inheritance. The Personal and Family Code (Civil Code and Decree-Law 1/024 of April 28, 1983, reforming the Personal and Family

 Code) does not address this issue. The management of inheritance is solely customary. Most of the customary rules exclude women from inheritance. The draft of the
 new personal and family code has been in Parliament since 2004 without be voted.
 21 DHS, 2017
 22 Government of Burundi. Plan directeur innovant de la ville de Bujumbura et ses alentours « Vision 2045 ».
 23 World Bank (2021): Urbanization Review and World Bank (2022): Addressing Drivers of Climate Change and Environmental Fragility in Burundi’s Colline Landscapes
 24 World Bank (2021): Burundi Urbanization Review.
 25 World Bank staff calculations using the Burundi Displacement Tracking Matrix (DTM) data.
 26 Urban access to basic water supply is estimated at 91 percent, access on premises only 57 percent. Urban access to sewer is estimated at 3 percent, with majority

 relying on septic tanks and latrines (often unimproved). (DHS. 2017). No data is available in terms of Bujumbura’s water and sanitation coverage. Water access
 statistics include service provision by the national utility, REGIDESO, as well as supplementary service providers.
 27 UNDP supported Burundi on the development of a Master Plan 2045 for the city of Bujumbura. However, this plan has not been adopted and further analysis is

 needed to understand what aspects are covered (e.g., risk management).
 28 Burundi's parliament passes $870 million budget for 2021/22 FY : https://www.reuters.com/world/africa/burundis-parliament-passes-870-mln-budget-202122-fy-

 2021-05-15/


Apr 07, 2023                                                                                                                                            Page 5 of 15
          The World Bank
          Urban Resilience Project (P177146)


 prompting the Government to declare the event a national disaster.29 Heavy rainfall in the upper water catchments of the
 city is a major factor in flood hazard for the city, as the hilly environments to the east of Bujumbura create smaller flash-
 floods due to rapid overflow of streams, which can lead to banks breaching. Also, accumulation of surface water can lead
 to pluvial flooding. Informal attempts to manage flood through defense schemes (such as artisanal dikes) as well as poor
 drainage, land management practices, waste management, and infrastructure maintenance, further compound the level
 of hazard. These flood risks are likely to increase in light of expected precipitation increases and soil degradation due to
 climate change, thus exacerbating the already considerable vulnerabilities.30
 9.       Risk-informed spatial planning and enforcement is not practiced in Bujumbura or in other urban areas of
 Burundi; there are no urban land use management systems to support flood risk prevention and resilient urbanization.
 Burundi does not have a comprehensive, up-to-date land mapping and registry system31 that consolidates information on
 the characteristics of the territory, land tenure, type of ownership, and the dynamism of the land and real estate market.
 This context hinders the government´s ability to track urbanization, to anticipate, and to plan viable areas for urban
 expansion. Currently, urban expansion is driven by the national Government through urbanization projects (villagization)
 and housing development (lotissement). Both initiatives use peri-urban land to promote new residential areas, and hence,
 a direct effect of these initiatives is the promotion of urbanization and urban expansion. Using current population growth
 estimates, if in the next years all newly formed urban households were to locate in planned housing/urban development
 projects around Bujumbura, the urban footprint will grow between 7 to 20 times. Conversely, on a regional scale,
 Bujumbura’ city density is relatively low and hence there is ample opportunity to encourage and promote improved spatial
 management to enhance densities and reduce costs of infrastructure networks, service provision and overall economic
 efficiencies. The use and enforcement of systematic spatial planning, risk sensitive urban land use management and the
 provision of basic services will be key for the development of a green, resilient and inclusive Bujumbura.
 10.       The institutional responsibility for urban planning and local infrastructure provision is ambiguous across levels
 of government, poorly staffed and financed, exacerbating underlying causes of urban flooding in Burundi. According to
 the 2015 Law No. 1/16 on Transfer of Competences from the State to the Communes, local governments have a mandate
 to participate in the design of urban planning policies and to create and enforce local urban planning regulations. The law
 also transfers to local governments the responsibility of building and maintaining local infrastructure, i.e., water,
 sanitation, solid waste management, transport, and developing green spaces and various socio-cultural infrastructure.
 However, this law has never been implemented through relevant decrees, leaving these mandates de facto still under the
 responsibility of central administrations and agencies. For instance, the National Urban Planning, Housing, and
 Construction Agency (OBUHA) is still in charge of delivering transport, sanitation, and solid waste management services;
 and it is responsible for urban planning, land management, urban upgrading, and the provision of social housing. However,
 OBUHA is not able to fulfill its responsibilities, with a staffing contingent of about 340 and limited financial resources. In
 addition, the new decentralization package of laws that is currently being evaluated by the Government of Burundi is
 expected to provide an important shift from central to local entities, both in urban planning and in planning, building, and
 managing local infrastructures. This institutional shift will come with important legal, financial, and technical implications.



 29 In February 2014, flooding and landslides in Greater Bujumbura led to about 80 casualties, destroying around 1,000 houses leaving 20,000 people homeless,

 destroying markets and important roads.
 30
    World Bank (2022): Addressing Drivers of Climate Change and Environmental Fragility in Burundi’s Colline Landscapes.
 31 The 2011 Land Code renewed the legal framework for land tenure, restructuring and modernizing the institution in charge of land administration, and introducing

 decentralized land management based on the issuance of low-cost land certificates by local land services. Initiatives for the digital strengthening of the State's land
 information system and the modernization of land administration have been launched but still require support. Until now only 100,000 properties are registered and
 legally secured in the land registry, 80 percent of which are in Bujumbura.


Apr 07, 2023                                                                                                                                               Page 6 of 15
          The World Bank
          Urban Resilience Project (P177146)


 11.     Municipalities already face challenges to fulfill their current mandates, expecting a bigger challenge with the
 new decentralization reforms currently awaiting approval. Yearly investment grants are allocated from the national
 budget to local governments based on a flat equal-shares amount, which is insufficient for the largest municipalities (i.e.,
 Bujumbura). Municipalities face important difficulties in raising own source revenues, with rates for communal taxes
 undefined, resulting in difficulties calculating their tax bases and collecting taxes. For instance, the base for land and rental
 income taxes (two out of the ten municipal taxes in Burundi) is underestimated because of the lack of land certification in
 the municipalities and the lack of a comprehensive land registry undermines municipal revenues. As a result, municipalities
 struggle to invest in their growing needs, and capacity for planning and implementation is limited. Furthermore, an
 increase of population influx into urban areas (from rural areas) adds pressure on already weak urban infrastructure and
 basic service provision. Water and electricity services are provided through REGIDESO (Régie de Production et de
 Distribution de l’Eau et de l’Électricité), although informal water operators are serving fast growing outskirts where
 REGIDESO has limited reach. Financial challenges of municipalities will have a mounting impact on urban resilience if
 decentralization is rolled out, without additional fiscal transfers.
 12.      Despite the frequent occurrence and severity of the impacts of hydrometeorological hazards, Burundi lacks
 effective preparedness systems and Early Warning Systems (EWS)1. Existing EWS rely on a weak observation network;
 outdated technology; limited data collection and processing capacity; poor coordination and lack of data sharing protocols
 amongst information producers and users; and a weak regulatory framework around Disaster Risk Management and Early
 Warning Systems. The Geographical Institute of Burundi (IGEBU), the institution responsible for hydrometeorological
 service provision, lacks the capacity for adequate maintenance and improvement of its monitoring systems, has
 insufficient technological resources and limited qualified personnel, which hinders the production and delivery of
 hydrometeorological products and services, including flood forecasts and other types of floods or hydrological early
 warnings.32 This has impacted lives and infrastructure. For instance, in February 2014, flooding and landslides in Greater
 Bujumbura led to about 80 casualties, destroying around 1,000 houses (leaving 20,000 people homeless), markets, and
 important roads. The institutional and planning framework for water resources management remains underdeveloped.
 While Burundi participates in transboundary mechanisms set-up for the Nile Basin33 and the Congo Basin34 - including Lake
 Tanganyika as sub-basin of the Congo Basin - the full operationalization of permanent river basin management
 organization(s) to ensure the sustainable use of the country’s shared water resources requires further efforts.
 13.     The Government of Burundi (GoB) is committed to addressing the above challenges cognizant they need to act
 now to avoid locking in a development path with unbearable costs in the future. GoB has developed several sector
 strategies and investment plans to guide the development of project investments. The National Development Plan (PND
 2018-2027)35 and related priority action plans aim to protect the environment, adapt to climate change, and improve land
 use planning for sustainable development. The GoB put forward the need for strengthening capacities to adapt and
 manage climate change and to reduce the impact of extreme weather events though reliable preparedness processes,
 systems and adaptive water management approaches. In addition, the NDP highlights the importance of urban planning,
 and more broadly, urban management, to ensure urban spaces have the conditions and services to enable quality of life

 32 World Bank 2020. Etat Des Lieux Des Services Hydrologiques et Météorologiques Du Burundi.

 33 Around 49 percent of Burundi’s surface falls within the Nile Basin. The Government of Burundi is part of the Nile Basin Initiative (NBI), which is an
 intergovernmental partnership of 10 Nile Basin countries. The Organization for the Management and Development of the Kagera River Basin (part of the NBI)
 requires further legislative frameworks and operationalization.
 34
    Around 51 percent of Burundi’s surface falls within the Congo basin. Burundi is a party to the 1999 Agreement establishing a uniform river regime and creating the
 International Congo Ubangui Sanga Commission (CICOS) and its 2007 Protocol. Burundi signed (together with Democratic Republic of Congo and Rwanda) the
 International Convention on Integrated Water Resources Management in the Lake Kivu and Ruzizi/Rusizi River Basin (2014). However, its trilateral basin authority has
 not yet been established in a permanent manner. Burundi is also party to the transboundary Lake Tanganyika Authority.
 35
    Source : http://www.presidence.gov.bi/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/PND-Burundi-2018-2027-Version-Finale.pdf


Apr 07, 2023                                                                                                                                              Page 7 of 15
           The World Bank
           Urban Resilience Project (P177146)


 and economic activities. Furthermore, in Burundi´s most recent Vision 2040-2060 (Vision Burundi Pays Emergent en 2040
 et Pays Développé en 2060), the GoB sets the objectives of supporting the process of urbanization, protecting the
 environment, and building resilience to climate change, strengthening their commitment on these sectors for the years
 to come. The GoB has recently launched a series of studies and interventions to address urban flooding in Bujumbura 36,
 but a comprehensive program of investments and soft interventions are needed to ensure sustainability.


      Relationship to CPF
 14.      The proposed project supports the focus areas of the CPF (FY19-FY23), which align with the WBG Strategy for
 Africa to create sustainable and inclusive growth, strengthen human capital, and build resilience to fragility and climate
 change. The proposed project will support the CPF’s two focus areas ‘Building Human Capital and Inclusion’ and
 ‘Strengthening Foundations for Economic and Social Resilience’. The project will help mitigate several of the localized
 climate change-related shocks identified in the CPF as threats to Burundi’s economy and drivers of fragility: ‘Land Scarcity
 and Demographics’ and ‘Youth Unemployment and Unplanned Urbanization’ outlined in the February 2022 Risk and
 Resilience Assessment (RRA). It will also enhance the capacity of authorities and communities to respond to shocks. In
 addition, citizen engagement is built into project design through project consultative processes and support to better
 structural inclusion of citizens in planning and decision-making, with a special focus on vulnerable groups and with a view
 to addressing gender disparities.
 15.      The project is well coordinated with interventions supported by other donors and can serve as a platform to
 reduce flood risk, improve water security and build urban resilience in the country. The European Union is very active in
 the proposed project areas and finances activities to enhance water management and pollution control of Lake
 Tanganyika, including wastewater treatment and civil protection, and supports water management for the Lake Kivu and
 Ruzizi River Basin, north of Lake Tanganyika. The African Development Bank has experience in the sector through past
 WatSan2 project and is being consulted during project preparation. JICA finances the rehabilitation of the port of
 Bujumbura. UNICEF carries out activities in WASH and the French bilateral collaboration in decentralization and land. In
 addition, a partnership could be established with the University of Bujumbura for the hiring of interns to work with the
 Bank team and to carry out urban planning activities as part of the project.
 16.      The proposed Project is in line with the 2022 WBG Global Crises Response Framework “Navigating multiple
 crises, staying the course on long-term development”, which aims to provide mutually reinforcing support by
 addressing short-term shocks to improve prospects for long-term sustainable development, while developing long-term
 resilience to help prepare for future shocks37. The unequal effects of COVID-19, exacerbated by the geopolitical
 consequences of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, vulnerable supply chains, rising food and fuel insecurity, increased fragility
 and conflict, and climate shocks are compounding each other, creating potentially permanent scars on productivity,
 human capital, and economic mobility. The Response Framework proposes to move from crisis to recovery and build
 foundations for sustainable growth, underpinned by green, resilient, and inclusive development. The proposed Project is
 fully aligned with Pillar 1 —that is, risk identification, risk reduction, residual risk management, and the inclusion of
 vulnerable groups—as well as the relevant measures under the green and inclusive principles. Strengthening institutions,
 urban development and investments for rebuilding better are aligned with Pillar 4 (Strengthening Policies, Institutions and

 36
    Activities shared by the GoB on April 4th, 2023: (i) Stabilization and protection of the foothills, upstream of the Bridge on RN1 of Gasenyi; (ii) construction of the
 Gasenyi River downstream of the RN1 Bridge and rehabilitation of the Carama retention basin; (iii) improvement of the collection of the ravine separating
 Q.Bukirasazi I and II in Ntahangwa commune; (iv) study to support the Winterekwa district in the Nthangwa commune; (v) topographical study of the Cari and
 Nyamanogo rivers; (vi) targeted upstream interventions in Bujumbura.
 37
    World Bank Group. Navigating multiple crises, staying the course on long-term development. Global Crises Response Framework Paper July 2022


Apr 07, 2023                                                                                                                                                     Page 8 of 15
             The World Bank
             Urban Resilience Project (P177146)


 Investments for Rebuilding Better). The flood and erosion control measures as well as resilient infrastructure activities are
 expected to create temporary employment opportunities for local communities, which will contribute to a quicker
 recovery from the economic shocks aligned with Pillar 2 (Protecting People and Preserving Jobs).
 17.      The project follows other Bank-funded projects that have invested in urban services and local development in
 the cities of Burundi. The Local Development for Jobs Project (P155060) invested in small-scale infrastructure and local
 capacity building, but without addressing the systemic flaws in the urban system. Building on the Burundi Urbanization
 Review and the Climate ASA,38 the proposed project is coordinated with Burundi Transport Resilience Project (P172988),
 particularly for investments in transport resilience in Bujumbura, and with the Burundi Landscape Restoration and
 Resilience Project (P160613) that supports land administration, disaster contingency plans, improved hydromet services
 and early warning systems.
 18.      The proposed project is considered aligned with the Paris Agreement on both climate mitigation and
 adaptation. The Project is consistent with the country’s Nationally determined contributions (NDCs)39 and the National
 Strategy and Action Plan on Climate Change (NSAPCC).40 Key mitigation activities identified in the NDC 2021 include
 promoting increased carbon stocks in the sector of land uses including protecting riverbanks. Ensuring floodplain
 protection, identifying most climate risks affected areas, building the country's capacity for climate risk management, as
 well as promoting resilient water and sanitation (WSS) services are among the priority adaptation actions. Similarly, the
 NSAPCC, which runs from 2013 to 2025, proposes a.o. the following adaptation measures: improving seasonal climate
 forecasts for early warning, implementing erosion control measures in sensitive areas, and protecting buffer zones in the
 Lake Tanganyika floodplain. Moreover, both documents (NDC and NSAPCC) emphasize the improvement of rainwater
 harvesting and storage and retention facilities for agricultural and other uses. The proposed project will address climate
 change adaptation, through Component 1 by financing investments to mitigate flood risk, reducing the direct negative
 impact on the population and avoiding damage to urban infrastructure that affects access to jobs and services, including
 structural and non-structural risk reduction measures, such as nature-based solutions. Through Component 2, the project
 will strengthen the institutional capacities for Flood Risk Reduction and Emergency Preparedness and Response at the
 National and Local Levels, including Hydrometeorological Services by promoting risk-informed land use planning and
 investing in equipment, technology, and disaster risk management capacity. Regarding climate mitigation, project
 investments are included in the Universally Aligned list (flood management and protection, urban drainage, and drought
 management) and do not present risks of having a negative impact on Burundi’s low-GHG-emissions development
 pathway. The project has been screened for climate change and disaster impacts, and specific resilience-building measures
 will be identified and duly considered in the project documents prior to the appraisal. No specific risks regarding the
 mitigation and adaptation aspects of the Paris Alignment assessment are reported at this stage.
  C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

      To increase resilience to floods and improve climate resilient urban management in Bujumbura.

 *Resilience is defined as the capacity to prepare for disruptions, recover from shocks, and grow from a disruptive
 experience.

  Key Results (From PCN)


 38 A PROGREEN-funded World Bank-executed Burundi climate and environmental fragility Advisory Services and Analytics (ASA).
 39 Burundi First NDC (updated submission), 05 Oct 2021: https://unfccc.int/documents/497263
 40
      Stratégie et Plan d’Actions du Burundi sur le changement climatique (obpe.bi)


Apr 07, 2023                                                                                                                   Page 9 of 15
         The World Bank
         Urban Resilience Project (P177146)


     The proposed PDO level indicators are:

          1. Number of people benefitting from interventions to reduce flood risk, disaggregated by gender.
          2. Number of people benefitting from early warning systems. [Community engagement indicator]
          3. Number of risk-informed urban planning tools to support national and local government entities.
  D. Concept Description
 19.      Strategic Approach to Flood Mitigation and Resilience in Bujumbura. The Project will finance high impact
 investments for flood risk management, while building the central and the city Government’s systems and capacities,
 combining support for urban development and resilient service provision, while minimizing new risk in a growing city. In
 doing so, the Project will seek to reduce flood risks for: a) lives and livelihoods to the most vulnerable population; b) critical
 service infrastructure; and c) critical economic activities.
 20.      Structural and non-structural measures will be implemented under the Project to measurably reduce overall
 city flood risk and potential impacts, including (a) physical interventions, including structural measures and nature-based
 solutions, or a combination of both (to control lake, river, and pluvial flood hazard); (b) planning approaches (to manage
 future exposure, land use and limit the creation of new risk); (c) regulatory approaches (to reduce vulnerability of the built
 environment); and (d) flood preparedness, forecasting and early warning investments (to manage residual risks and
 safeguard at-risk populations). Each of these flood and damage control measures would have differing levels of impact on
 flood risk reduction and cost effectiveness depending on the specific flood drivers and unique considerations within each
 of the six hydrologically catchment areas within Greater Bujumbura (Figure 1).
 21.      The Project will finance the most impactful combination of structural and non-structural measures. All proposed
 investments options will be modeled against the existing flood hazard baseline, which was developed during project
 preparation through activities financed by World Bank-managed trust funds. looking at results of each investment on flood
 risk reduction, for a range of flood return period scenarios, lake level rise scenarios, and hazard interdependencies by
 catchment. This work will provide clear insight into the most cost-effective and impactful priority investments within these
 catchments and help the Government lay the foundations for strategically reducing city flood risk, ensuring continuity in
 service delivery, and proactively managing resilient urban growth. It will support the Government as well in leveraging
 parallel financing for needed investments not covered by the proposed project and to develop a pipeline of potential
 additional investments. The mix of measures and the spatial focus of investments at catchment level will aim to maximize
 the reduction of flood risk in hotspot areas, safeguard the poorest and most vulnerable and protect and rehabilitate critical
 urban service infrastructure. In addition, the investments will be strategically sequenced to ensure progress on reducing
 flood risk in Bujumbura.
               Figure 1. Catchments defined for hydrological analysis and identification of high impact investments




Apr 07, 2023                                                                                                            Page 10 of 15
          The World Bank
          Urban Resilience Project (P177146)


 Component 1: Climate Resilient Infrastructure to Reduce Urban Flood Risk in Bujumbura (US$95 million).
 22.       This component would finance investments to mitigate flood risk and prepare for future climate shocks,
 reducing direct negative impact on the population and avoiding damage to urban infrastructure that affects access to
 jobs and services. Component investments would include, inter alia: (i) upstream catchment restoration to attenuate
 fluvial risk, reduce erosion and siltation of storage/drainage facilities; (ii) lakeshore restoration and protection along Lake
 Tanganyika; (iii) river bank restoration and protection, with differentiated interventions considering the two main rivers
 in Bujumbura and smaller rivers; (iv) drainage in prioritized areas of the cities, including conveyance management of
 channels and bridges; (iv) nature based solutions and investments (e.g. swales, upstream check dams) to support
 infiltration and manage pluvial flood risk; and (v) protecting and rehabilitating at-risk critical infrastructure, such as water
 service infrastructure and roads/bridges in hotspot areas. These investments will be complemented with support to
 establishing operations and maintenance (O&M) processes to ensure their sustainability and adequate financing
 throughout their lives. Investments under this component will be planned through a participatory process that is expected
 to include targeting of existing land rights of people living in the area of intervention as well as the community’s
 participation, particularly including women´s needs and their participation in design processes.
 23.      Eligibility Criteria: Flood construction and rehabilitation investments will be prioritized based on three criteria: (i)
 impacts to people and critical infrastructure; (ii) relevance of the investments for flood protection and resilience; and (iii)
 possibility to implement adequate operation and maintenance modalities, including financing. All construction and
 rehabilitation activities will ensure the built infrastructure is resilient to future climate shocks, by applying build-back-
 better (BBB) principles41, and will use Labor-Intensive Public Works (LIPW) approaches when possible.

 Component 2: Capacity Building and Institutional Strengthening for Urban Resilience (US$20 million).
 24.      This component will build capacity and strengthen institutions at the local and central level to better manage
 climate-resilient urbanization in Bujumbura and other urban areas. Activities financed by this component will be linked
 with the investments under Component 1. Particular attention will be given to the development of processes engagement
 between local authorities and communities to embed the activities in the local context and strengthen local accountability
 and ownership, with a special focus on voice and agency for women and leveraging innovative approaches and
 digitalization.42
 25.     Sub-component 2.1: Urban Management Capacity Building. This sub-component will finance capacity building
 and institutional strengthening to address the underlying causes of the impact of urban flooding in Burundi, which has
 risen and will continue to rise due to climate change. It will finance the update of municipal planning tools, including O&M
 and asset management instruments, the elaboration of risk-informed and gender-sensitive and disability inclusive zoning
 and land use plans to consider climate risk. The Project will support the government in applying these tools to areas of
 expansion in Bujumbura. Risk-informed urban and territorial land-use planning needs to go hand-in-hand with activities
 linked to strengthening land administration. For this, activities will also include the modernization of urban land public
 service at the national level and in Bujumbura, implementing fit-for-purpose tools and affordable procedures; technical
 assistance to improve land administration processes and land delivery mechanisms in urban expansion areas, securing



 41
    The core principles of building back better are described in detail in the following GFDRR website:
 https://www.gfdrr.org/en/events/WRC4/session1b#:~:text=The%20core%20principles%20of%20building,and%20livelihoods%20must%20be%20a
 42 For example, digital platforms can be used to enhance community participation and feedback mechanisms, enabling residents to report on issues such as

 infrastructure needs and safety concerns. This information can then be used by local and central authorities to inform decision-making and prioritize investments in
 resilient urbanization.


Apr 07, 2023                                                                                                                                             Page 11 of 15
          The World Bank
          Urban Resilience Project (P177146)


 women’s community-recognized land rights43; the development of methodologies to progressively achieve a complete
 mapping and identification of state lands. This sub-component will include activities targeted to strengthening the
 capacities of stakeholders by working with the University of Burundi and other institutions to increase the quality and
 relevance of the training of urban planners, implement Smart City Labs to help break down institutional barriers and bring
 stakeholders together to develop workable solutions to urban resilience issues, piloting the planning and land
 management of expansion areas in Bujumbura, planning of basic service infrastructure (e.g WSS) and the diversification
 of water sources beyond Lake Tanganyika. Other activities can include the developing of digital mapping platforms and
 providing adequate planning tools, where communities can contribute with local knowledge, as well as the creation and
 implementation of mechanisms to increase engagement between citizens and local authorities.
 26.       There is a need to support central and local governments’ capacities considering the evolving decentralization
 agenda, and the need to provide technical and financial means to local governments to carry out increasing levels of
 responsibilities. Activities to support Bujumbura, will include, inter alia: (i) a financial analysis of the city of Bujumbura;
 (ii) a systematic inventory of the urban occupation in Bujumbura and related revenue generation; (iii) the development of
 a plan/roadmap to improve local financing, potentially as part of the rolling out of the upcoming local tax law, and the
 quality and accuracy of the data collected over time.
 27.      Sub-component 2.2: Institutional Strengthening for Flood Risk Reduction and Emergency Preparedness and
 Response, and climate-resilient delivery of critical basic services at the National and Local Level, including
 Hydrometeorological Services. This sub-component will finance interventions to improve preparedness capacity for
 effective mitigation, response, and recovery to hydrometeorological hazards, such as floods and droughts, to reduce
 disaster impacts on life, livelihoods, critical basic services, and the economy. These activities can include the
 implementation of hydrometeorological Early Warning Systems in Bujumbura, through inter alia: (i) investments in
 infrastructure, equipment and technology, and development of capacities for multi-hazard risk assessment, forecasting of
 the hazards, dissemination and communication, preparedness planning, outreach and community engagement for
 improved disaster preparedness; (ii) policy dialogue to identify priority policies, regulatory and institutional improvements
 to increase flood and drought resilience; (iii) introduction of data-driven safety and disaster prevention to collect and
 communicate hydro-meteorological risk information, warning, and alerts, and support real-time intervention
 management; (iv) the preparation of business continuity and performance improvement plans44 for REGIDESO and
 implementation of high priority measures for more resilient water services including non-revenue water and efficiency
 programs and expanding social connections to vulnerable communities Women´s increased preparedness on flood
 disasters and the gender dimension, as well as universal accessibility, of access to information will be considered in the
 choice of communication methods for early warning systems. In addition, flood risk assessments can be carried out in
 Gitega or other urban areas in Burundi to prepare the baseline for future interventions and investments and studies to
 expand climate-resilient basic services (water and sanitation). As urban areas are part of larger basins, whose hydrological
 cycle is impacted by climate change, water resources management plans will be developed for selected sub-basins,
 identifying future priority investments to reduce climate risks. During preparation, priorities to strengthen institutions and
 capacities for basin management capacity will be further identified.
 Component 3. Project management (US$5 million)


 43
    Activities will integrate the Joint Operation of Recognition (OGR, Opération groupée de reconnaissance in French) to allow for better information and awareness, to
 open dialogue and to consolidate the rights of women and men through land certification but also through land contracts delivery. OGR approach consists of
 systematically collecting information on people, spatial units, and land rights. OGR is a social survey, but also a topographic survey parcel by parcel to feed a
 geospatial database. The OGR results are then posted to receive potential objections and, as far as possible, to resolve disputes arising from these objections.
 44
    This will build on technical assistance provided to REGIDESO under the Utility of the Future initiative where long-term.


Apr 07, 2023                                                                                                                                             Page 12 of 15
          The World Bank
          Urban Resilience Project (P177146)


 28.     This component will finance incremental project management costs for the Project Implementation Unit (PIU),
 such as consultant costs, audit cost, implementation of the Environmental and Social Framework (ESF), monitoring and
 evaluation (including sex-disaggregated data) and an impact assessment to inform future investments, stakeholder
 engagement, communication, and knowledge exchange. Funding of resettlement under this component is to be
 confirmed.
 Component 4: Contingency Emergency Response Component (US$0 million)
 29.      This component is a ‘zero-assignation’ CERC that will provide funding for immediate response in the event of an
 eligible crisis or emergency, defined as an event that has caused or is likely to imminently cause a major adverse economic
 and/or social impact associated with natural or man-made crises or disasters.
 30.       The World Bank has mobilized substantial funding for upstream analytical work to support investment
 selection. Two Bank-executed trust funds support upstream preparation: (i) elaboration of a comprehensive urban flood
 risk assessment for Bujumbura and prioritization of resilience investment options, funded by US$575,000 from the Global
 Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR); and (ii) development of national hydrometeorological solutions with
 a view to better hazard and risk forecasting and early warning systems, funded by grants totaling US$523,000 from the
 Climate Risk and Early Warning Systems (CREWS) Initiative.
 Corporate priorities
 Gender
 31.      The project will be developed to reduce identified gender disparities in urban areas and risk of adverse gender
 impacts of project activities. An assessment will be carried out during preparation of the specific kinds of gender exclusion
 or inequity in project areas, including gender-based violence, with a view to developing mitigation measures. Project
 activities will be designed to reduce the exclusion of women and youth in local development process and adequate gender-
 disaggregated indicators included in the results framework to monitor and evaluate results. The project will assure a
 gendered approach to community resilience, and women’s empowerment is a key factor to achieving it. Focus will be
 given to reducing imbalances, promoting transparency, accountability, and participation in decision-making, building the
 capacity of public institutions and civil society organizations (CSOs), and promoting gender equity. The project will support
 increased involvement of women in disaster risk management by involving existing local women’s grassroot organizations.
 The project will also focus on planning and land related issues to address the identified gender gaps in women access to
 land rights (ownership, lease, tenure, land rights).45
 Climate
 32.     The project is designed to respond to the identified climate change impacts through the type of investments
 funded and their design. Infrastructure investments will be made in line with best practice to support resilience to climate
 change (protecting existing sites from future risks, incorporating systemic and contextual risk in investment planning, etc.).
 To the extent possible, technology selection will also support minimizing environmental impacts, including greenhouse
 gas generation, by relying on natural and green systems.46




 45 Among urban women, 68.7 percent own a cell phone compared to 78.6 percent of men in cities. As for internet, 22.2 percent of women in cities used the internet

 in the past 12 months, compared to 41.0 percent of men in cities (DHS, 2017).
 46
    The specific type of green systems and technology will be decided as prioritization of investments and interventions advances.


Apr 07, 2023                                                                                                                                          Page 13 of 15
             The World Bank
             Urban Resilience Project (P177146)


 Citizen Engagement
 33.     Project beneficiaries will be engaged from the outset of project preparation and the approach detailed in the
 Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) to be guide implementation of PPA activities. This process will be designed to assure
 that investments correspond to beneficiaries’ needs and to manage expectations. It will be developed throughout project
 preparation to assure empowerment of beneficiaries. The SEP will identify a strategy for soliciting beneficiary feedback to
 engage citizens not only in the planning but also in the implementation and monitoring of project activities, thereby
 creating a feedback loop. Consultations and other forms of citizen engagement will consider gender aspects and respect
 of Covid-19 measures. The project will put in place strong mechanisms for citizen engagement, participatory budgeting,
 the development of participatory and inclusive local development plans including land tenure management, participatory
 climate adaptation diagnostics, and support to adopt a climate adaptation filter to select investment projects.
 Lessons Learned and Reflected in Project Design
 34.      Lessons from past and on-going Bank-financed urban projects in the region and analytical work in Burundi can
 be highlighted, such as creating jobs, sequencing the implementation of investments, including operations and
 maintenance in project design, managing risk, and addressing systemic shortcomings (e.g., local capacity) in the urban
 system. Past and on-going projects and technical assistance in the Africa region have demonstrated a strong ability to link
 urban resilience green and gray infrastructure with opportunities for job-creation, but also the need to address urban
 systemic sector issues in a more comprehensive manner where city-level implementation and planning capacity is quite
 limited. Some project examples in the region are the Niger Integrated Urban Development and Multi-sectoral Resilience
 Project (P175857), the Africa Coastal Areas Resilience Investment Project 2 (WACA ResIP 2, P175525), or the Tourism
 Diversification and Resilience Project in the Gambia (P177179). In addition, the Burundi 2021 Urbanization Review
 demonstrated that unplanned urbanization in Burundi has exacerbated environmental and social risk and that the
 fortunes of urban areas are closely intertwined with that of their rural counterparts. The main recommendations, which
 guide the project concept and activities, are to better finance and manage urban areas (including service delivery), prevent
 the creation of new risk, and reduce existing risk through better knowledge of hazard and exposure factors, and to reform
 land administration and planning to manage density. Good practice from the EPIC response framework47, developed by
 the World Bank, will be integrated in the overall project design.



  Legal Operational Policies                                                                                     Triggered?
      Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                                                TBD
      Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60                                                                         TBD

      Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
  .




 47
      See https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/water/publication/an-epic-response-innovative-governance-for-flood-and-drought-risk-management.


Apr 07, 2023                                                                                                                                   Page 14 of 15
          The World Bank
          Urban Resilience Project (P177146)


 .
     CONTACT POINT


     World Bank
     Christian Vang Eghoff, Diana Cristina Tello Medina, Susanna Smets
     Senior Urban Development Specialist


     Borrower/Client/Recipient
     Ministry of Finance, Budget and Economic Planning
     Annonciate Nshimirimana
     Director General of Planning
     nshanny.3@gmail.com

     Implementing Agencies

     Ministry of Infrastructure, Equipment and Social Housing
     Protais Manirakiza
     Focal Point
     mananiprotais@gmail.com


     FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
     The World Bank
     1818 H Street, NW
     Washington, D.C. 20433
     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects



     APPROVAL

     Task Team Leader(s):                      Christian Vang Eghoff, Diana Cristina Tello Medina, Susanna Smets

     Approved By
     APPROVALTBL
     Practice Manager/Manager:

     Country Director:                         Hawa Cisse Wague                       22-May-2023




Apr 07, 2023                                                                                                       Page 15 of 15
