Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Urban Resilience Emergency Project (P177146)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                          Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                    (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                       Date Prepared/Updated: 05/22/2024 | Report No: ESRSA03488




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Feb 07, 2025                                                                        Page 1 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Urban Resilience Emergency Project (P177146)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                  Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P177146                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)       Urban Resilience Project    2025

                     Operation Name            Urban Resilience Emergency Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries           Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Burundi                   Burundi                                  EASTERN AND                 Urban, Resilience and
                                                                                        SOUTHERN AFRICA             Land

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                 Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Board Date

                     Republic of Burundi       Ministry of Infrastructure, Equipment    22-Apr-2024                 01-Jul-2024
                                               and Social Housing

                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost
                     Review Date



Public Disclosure
                     22-Apr-2024               113,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     To respond to the flood emergency, increase flood resilience, and improve climate-resilient urban management in
                     Bujumbura.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     Yes


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The project design is developed to respond to the most pressing identified issues in the urban landscape in Burundi and
                     the government’s policy priorities. The proposed project has four components: (1) Emergency Flood Response and
                     Climate Resilient Infrastructure, (2) Capacity Building and Institutional Strengthening for Urban Resilience, (3) Project
                     Management, and (4) Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC).


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                    Page 2 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Urban Resilience Emergency Project (P177146)



                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     Bujumbura is the economic capital of Burundi, a locked East African country, without access to the sea, but with a wide
                     coastline on Lake Tanganyika, located in the Great Lakes region and surrounded by the Democratic Republic of Congo to
                     the west, Rwanda to the North and Tanzania to the Eastern southern. Its political capital is, since February 4, 2019,
                     Gitega province. Bujumbura has an area of 127 square kilometers with a population density of 9,647 inhabitants per
                     square kilometer, i.e. a population of 1,225,169 (ISTEEBU projections of 2021).
                     This proposed project shall be implemented in Bujumbura, the economic capital of Burundi situated in the Congo Basin.
                     This city is built along Lake Tanganyika which borders the DRC to the west. To the northwest of the city is the Ruzizi
                     Delta sector (15km from Bujumbura City), the second sector of the Ruzizi Nature Reserve after the Palmeraie sector of
                     Rukoko (Umuko, endemic species). The Rusizi River, one of the largest rivers flowing into Lake Tanganyika, connects it to
                     Lake Kivu further north between Rwanda and the DRC. The Rusizi River, which crosses the Gatumba area, often causes
                     recurrent seasonal floods (rainy seasons) to the surrounding populations of this area. Other rivers cross the city of
                     Bujumbura including the Mutimbuzi, Ntahangwa, Muha, and Kanyosha rivers. All these rivers cross the city of
                     Bujumbura and are in the Congo Basin where all water of the hydrological network flows into Lake Tanganyika. It should
                     be noted that the city of Bujumbura is built on a width of 20km on average (from East to West) and from North to South
                     (30-40km). To the East of this town, the altitude (770m) changes abruptly to rise gradually to the Congo-Nile divide
                     (about 1200m in the Bugarama area) which separates the two basins (Congo and Nile
                     The overall drainage and wastewater management system in Bujumbura is not functioning effectively. The drainage
                     system dates from the colonial era around the 1940s and today the inhabitants of the different neighborhoods have
                     triple or quadruple. The Buterere wastewater treatment plant has a wastewater absorption capacity of 40,000 cubic
                     meters per day, but however, it only receives less than 22,000 cubic meters of wastewater per day. A Region




Public Disclosure
                     organization LATAWAMA (Lake Tanganyika Water Management) supported a project that rehabilitated a wastewater
                     analysis laboratory at this station and equipment to monitor the station's purification performance. Currently,
                     wastewater can be analyzed at the inlet and outlet of the Buterere Treatment Plant.
                     The proposed project will be implemented in urban/rural (Bujumbura city and surrounding areas of Gatumba), in an FCV
                     context of Burundi as characterized by the World Bank, with no presence of Indigenous Peoples or other minorities. It is
                     expected to be implemented likely close to the Protected Area (Rusizi Nature Reserve).
                     Bujumbura is the economic capital of Burundi, a locked East African country, without access to the sea, but with a wide
                     coastline on Lake Tanganyika, located in the Great Lakes region and surrounded by the Democratic Republic of Congo to
                     the west, Rwanda to the North and Tanzania to the Eastern southern. Its political capital is, since February 4, 2019,
                     Gitega province. Bujumbura has an area of 127 square kilometers with a population density of 9,647 inhabitants per
                     square kilometer, i.e. a population of 1,225,169 (ISTEEBU projections of 2021).
                     This proposed project shall be implemented in Bujumbura, the economic capital of Burundi situated in the Congo Basin.
                     This city is built along Lake Tanganyika which borders the DRC to the west. To the northwest of the city is the Ruzizi
                     Delta sector (15km from Bujumbura City), the second sector of the Ruzizi Nature Reserve after the Palmeraie sector of
                     Rukoko (Umuko, endemic species). The Rusizi River, one of the largest rivers flowing into Lake Tanganyika, connects it to
                     Lake Kivu further north between Rwanda and the DRC. The Rusizi River, which crosses the Gatumba area, often causes
                     recurrent seasonal floods (rainy seasons) to the surrounding populations of this area. Other rivers cross the city of
                     Bujumbura including the Mutimbuzi, Ntahangwa, Muha, and Kanyosha rivers. All these rivers cross the city of
                     Bujumbura and are in the Congo Basin where all water of the hydrological network flows into Lake Tanganyika. It should
                     be noted that the city of Bujumbura is built on a width of 20km on average (from East to West) and from North to South
                     (30-40km). To the East of this town, the altitude (770m) changes abruptly to rise gradually to the Congo-Nile divide
                     (about 1200m in the Bugarama area) which separates the two basins (Congo and Nile


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                    Page 3 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Urban Resilience Emergency Project (P177146)



                     The overall drainage and wastewater management system in Bujumbura is not functioning effectively. The drainage
                     system dates from the colonial era around the 1940s and today the inhabitants of the different neighborhoods have
                     triple or quadruple. The Buterere wastewater treatment plant has a wastewater absorption capacity of 40,000 cubic
                     meters per day, but however, it only receives less than 22,000 cubic meters of wastewater per day. A Region
                     organization LATAWAMA (Lake Tanganyika Water Management) supported a project that rehabilitated a wastewater
                     analysis laboratory at this station and equipment to monitor the station's purification performance. Currently,
                     wastewater can be analyzed at the inlet and outlet of the Buterere Treatment Plant.
                     The proposed project will be implemented in urban/rural (Bujumbura city and surrounding areas of Gatumba), in an FCV
                     context of Burundi as characterized by the World Bank, with no presence of Indigenous Peoples or other minorities. It is
                     expected to be implemented close to the Protected Area (Rusizi Nature Reserve).
                     Project activities relevant to the ESF requirements include mostly component 1 with flood infrastructure construction
                     and rehabilitation investments for inhabitants and critical social infrastructure, flood protection and resilience, and
                     implementation of adequate operation and maintenance activities. These shall ensure the built social infrastructure is
                     resilient to future climate shocks and can occur and shall use labor-intensive public works to comply with labor
                     Management procedures in the intervention areas of the proposed project. Component 2 on Capacity building and
                     institutional strengthening for urban management, flood risk reduction, emergency preparedness and response, and
                     climate-resilient delivery of critical basic services at the National and Local levels. Component 3 Project management
                     and Scaling up which includes management costs for implementing agencies, implementation of ESF, social analysis and
                     evaluation, and other expenses related to ES Standards measures, (Gender / SEA action plan, GRM, citizen engagement,
                     communication, etc..). Component 4 The contingency Emergency Response Component shall provide funding for
                     immediate response in the event of an eligible crisis or emergency to be defined at the time by all stakeholders.




Public Disclosure
                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts

                     As an existing PIU shall manage the proposed project under MIESH, these shall be appropriately strengthened by ESF
                     training staff for supporting the effective monitoring and management of the environment, social, health, and safety
                     risk management, and SEA/SH’s risk of the project.
                     This ministry and the PIU are not experienced in managing E&S aspects and complying with ESF requirements.
                     The Project Preparation Advance (PPA) is envisioned to support the preparation of key ESF instruments (ESCP, SEP, LMP,
                     ESMF, and RPF) which are consulted, reviewed, and disclosed on both sides (Client and the Bank) before the appraisal
                     phase. The MIESH/PIU is already fully staffed with relevant E&S positions, there are already an environmental
                     specialist, a social development specialist, and a gender-based violence specialist for TRTRP but additional staff if
                     needed shall be recruited to supplement those already exist for URP


                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                      Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                               Substantial
                     The Environmental Risk rating is “Substantial” at this stage. The environmental risks and impacts are anticipated to
                     result mainly from civil works of flood infrastructure construction planned under component 1 for the construction of


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                   Page 4 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Urban Resilience Emergency Project (P177146)



                     Climate Resilient infrastructure to reduce urban flood risk in Bujumbura. Component 1 will finance investments in
                     three prioritized catchments (Mutimbuzi, Ntahangwa, and Ruzizi) to mitigate flood risks and prepare for future
                     climate shocks, reducing direct negative socio-economic impacts on the population and avoiding damage to urban
                     infrastructure. Investments include, inter alia: (a) upstream catchment and channel restoration to attenuate fluvial
                     risk and reduce erosion and siltation of storage/drainage facilities in Ntahangwa and Gasenyi catchment; (b)
                     lakeshore restoration and protection along Lake Tanganyika; (c) riverbank restoration and protection; (d) nature-
                     based solutions and investments to support infiltration and manage pluvial flood risks; (e) protection and
                     rehabilitation of at-risk urban service infrastructure; and (f) drainage across prioritized areas, including conveyance
                     management of channels and bridges. The implementation agency (MIESH-PIU), and the government sectorial
                     agencies involved, have limited capacity to carry out the interventions under component 2 where investments in
                     infrastructure, equipment, and technology shall be considered. Reforms shall be considered by integrating/using
                     technical assistance for the proper execution of the project under these components. In this regard, policy dialogue to
                     identify priority actions and institutional improvements to increase resilience to floods and droughts is considered in
                     the process implementation phase, under Component 2, including the development of zoning, land use plans, and
                     Operations & Maintenance (O&M) instruments, considering E&S risks and impacts. All these mentioned impacts and
                     risks under components 1 &2 shall be addressed by appropriated mitigation measures contained through all
                     elaborated draft ESF instruments (ESMF, RPF, SEP, and LMP) which are prepared with the Client, reviewed, approved,
                     and disclosed on both sides (the Bank and client) before this appraisal phase. The project activities shall be
                     implemented in densely populated and under-serviced urban environments with significant risks of adverse impacts
                     to community health and safety, all those E&S issues are being considered during the preparation of ESF instruments.
                     In addition, the project is anticipated to result in adverse risks and impacts at the construction scale related to




Public Disclosure
                     occupational health and safety; disposal and management of construction and hazardous waste; nuisances related to
                     air and noise, GHG emissions; stormwater runoff; land disturbance; wastewater effluent which may flow downstream
                     along the coastline of Lake Tanganyika. The risk of soil erosion in targeted areas is also considered and ecosystem
                     services alongside the Lake Tanganyika coastline shall also be affected. However, this MIESH-PIU and related
                     government agencies team members shall follow a session of ESF training to be able to manage environmental and
                     social risks consistent with the Bank’s ESSs Policies. Risk factors related to low capacity shall be mitigated via capacity-
                     building activities/TA activities through the PIU/ MIESH and government agencies.
                                                                                                                                      Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     65. The Social Risk rating is “Substantial”, driven primarily by the likely physical or economic displacements of people
                     in a relatively dense urban setting due to project activities and the expected scope of civil works. The project has
                     prepared and disclosed an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) on April 26th and a
                     Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) on April 15th. They were approved by the Bank and disclosed both on client
                     and Bank sites. These frame instruments will guide the preparation of ESIA, (Environmental and Social Impact
                     Assessments) and RAP (Resettlement Action Plans) when needed. Other applicable instruments, were prepared,
                     approved and disclosed in client’s website and in the Bank portal as the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) on April
                     15th, 2024, and Labor Management Procedures (LMP) on April 25th, 2024.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards



                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                        Page 5 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Urban Resilience Emergency Project (P177146)



                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                  Relevant

                      ESS1 is relevant for this operation due to the environmental and social, including SEA/SH, risks and impacts identified
                      about the proposed infrastructure investments for construction in component 1 and investments in infrastructure,
                      equipment, and technology (e.g. the installation of hydromet equipment) under component 2. Key environmental
                      and social issues related to the above-proposed project activities are waste management and disposal, community
                      and occupational health and safety risks during the implementation activities, soil erosion, road safety, and traffic
                      interruptions due to urban infrastructure construction activities. Specifically, erosion and occupational health and
                      safety (OHS) issues shall be addressed at the early stage of the project, and the design of the project
                      facilities/infrastructures accounts for specific measures that aim at minimizing erosion and OHS risks during both the
                      construction and operation phases. Noise may likely be generated from the use of construction machinery and
                      vehicle movement depending on the scale and scope of project activities, and this may cause disturbance to nearby
                      businesses and homes in urban areas. The assessment of cumulative impacts shall be considered the size of the small
                      scale of close urban implementation activities. Based on the scope of the Project’s activities, which includes sector
                      reforms, technical assistance, capacity building, and infrastructure interventions for which the exact locations and
                      extent of the civil works are not yet known, the Borrower has prepared and disclosed before this appraisal phase an
                      Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) in line with the World Bank’s Environmental and Social
                      Standards, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and the World Bank Group Environment, Health, and Safety (EHS)
                      Guidelines and security assessment plan. In addition, a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) has been prepared and
                      disclosed before the appraisal stage. The Borrower has prepared before appraisal a draft Environmental and Social
                      Commitment Plan (ESCP) which covers all measures and material actions needed to ensure compliance with the ESF
                      requirements, the Bank’s directive on addressing risks and impacts to disadvantaged and vulnerable groups, and the



Public Disclosure
                      Project’s environmental and social instruments as well as implementation details, monitoring, and reporting
                      activities. The preparation of the ESMF instrument for the project covers an environmental and social baseline of the
                      project such as a review of relevant national policies, a review of relevant institutional and regulatory frameworks,
                      and an analysis of environmental and social risks/impacts and mitigation measures. It also includes a description of
                      project coordination and implementation arrangements; plans for capacity building and training; a description of the
                      environmental and social screening process; and a description and assessment of security issues in the project areas.
                      This instrument also contains a Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment (SEA SH) Action Plan oriented
                      to address related risks of the sub-projects consistent with ESS1. Furthermore, a sample for Terms of reference for
                      the preparation of various ESIA/ESMP instruments for each known subproject is being developed by the PIU. During
                      project implementation, site-specific environmental and social standards instruments such as ESIAs, ESMPs, and/or
                      Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) shall be prepared, as required in ESS1 and ESS5 respectively, and other instruments
                      as needed. A gendered social assessment (SA) to look at potential gender impacts and recommendations for social
                      and gender inclusion shall be also included as part of the ESMF, along with an assessment of urban refugees and
                      returnees, Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs), people living with disabilities and other vulnerable groups. The project
                      needs a strong focus on social inclusion to ensure that no one is left behind as movement online is encouraged, by
                      actively seeking to close any gendered, geographical, or age-based digital divides. The project’s Labor Management
                      Procedure (LMP) as required in ESS2, and SEP, as required in ESS10, indicate how social inclusion of marginalized or
                      vulnerable groups (returnees, refugees, albinos,) are enabled, through communications and outreach to related
                      groups to ensure they are fully aware of project opportunities and do not face social, cultural, linguistic, or other
                      barriers to participation in project training, financing, and digital access schemes, as well as related opportunities. A
                      GBV risk assessment will be undertaken for the Project, including an analysis of SEA/SH risks under the project. Based


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                      Page 6 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Urban Resilience Emergency Project (P177146)



                      on this assessment, the Project will produce a SEA/SH Prevention and Response Action Plan, as an annex to the ESMF,
                      to ensure that risks emerging from project interventions, especially in the context of labor use are adequately
                      addressed. A code of conduct for all workers and project personnel, addressing SEA/SH and outlining applicable
                      sanctions, is expected to be in place. The social assessment shall cover the identification of potentially affected
                      groups and mitigation measures to avoid adverse impacts and support equal access/benefits in a culturally
                      appropriate manner. Technical Assistance activities: The development of zoning and land use plans considering the
                      flood risks of Bujumbura is essential insofar as these activities shall facilitate the implementation of project activities,
                      such as the rainwater drainage system in Bujumbura, the construction of flood control infrastructures, the protection
                      of the shepherds of the rivers crossing Bujumbura, as well as all the necessary support for executing agencies/MIESH.
                      The risks of TA activities shall be managed under ESMF and also E&S instruments related to them.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                         Relevant

                      A Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) was developed and disclosed prior to Appraisal and include both a summary of
                      the stakeholder engagement activities that have been undertaken as part of the preparation of the project to date ,
                      as a plan for further engagement during preparation and implementation. Public consultations have been done
                      during preparation of the ESMF, in the period between May, 29 to June 02, 2023, including main stakeholders as
                      Agence de Developpement du Burundi, community members (including specific focus - groups with women, youth,
                      other vulnerable groups), municipal leaders, the mayor of Bujumbura, NGOs, and line ministries. These consultations
                      have been done as part of the preparation and during implementation and must cover the most areas which will be
                      concerned by project activities (Collines, sous- collines, ) and will help in understanding and perception of the project
                      by the stakeholders which will help engagement in the project process, understand major environmental and social



Public Disclosure
                      challenges. The key questions and concerns of the participants of the stakeholder engagement activities e.g. Limited
                      access to infrastructure and will be adressed by the employment during the implementation of project activities.
                      Cannot read or write will be adressed by literacy activities during the implementation of the project. ….. The Borrower
                      will need to continue engaging in meaningful consultations with all stakeholders throughout the project life cycle
                      paying particular attention to the inclusion of vulnerable and disadvantaged groups. These vulnerable groups and
                      individuals may need additional attention to ensure that they participate in consultations and their specific concerns
                      and needsare addressed and that supplemental measures are put into place to ensure they have full access to project
                      benefits. Consultations with women will be held independently in safe and confidential spaces and will remain
                      focused on understanding women’s and girls’ experiences as a whole, their wellbeing, health, and safety concerns; no
                      inquiries regarding personal experiences of abuse and violence will be made. Consultations with women will also
                      provide an opportunity to identify and confirm safe and accessible reporting channels for SEA/SH complaints. The SEP
                      includes a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) sensitive to SEA/SH to collect, address and solve issues faced by
                      beneficiaries, stakeholders and other interested parties. The GRM focuses on the inclusion of vulnerable and
                      marginalized individuals or groups, and it will include specific measures to ensure the ethical and safe intake and
                      management of SEA/SH-related complaints, including response and information-sharing protocols for timely service
                      referrals and reporting. Additional information about the GRM and the stakeholder engagement process can be
                      found in the SEP.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                               Relevant

                      ESS2 is relevant to the project. Direct workers and contracted Workers and community workers are anticipated to be
                      hired mainly under components 1 &2. Anticipated labor risks and impacts are mainly expected in relation to flood


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                         Page 7 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Urban Resilience Emergency Project (P177146)



                      construction and rehabilitation investments that shall generate social impacts and risks. There is a risk of child labor
                      associated with the use of local labor contracted by companies. This risk will be managed through measures included
                      in the LMP instrument for the project, which includes the requirement for project workers to be at least 18 years old .
                      The Borrower must provide appropriate measures for the protection of vulnerable project workers, such as women
                      and people with disabilities, and care shall be given to both categories to ensure inclusion. Among skilled workers
                      targeted by the project, the majority of those involved shall be existing government civil servants. Meanwhile, most
                      of the unskilled workers employed through project-financed direct and indirect contracts shall be sourced from
                      targeted project sites in the areas of Bujumbura city but are also likely to require some skilled workers from outside
                      of the project areas. These individuals shall, however, be subject to the requirement of ESS2 in relation to labor and
                      working conditions including occupational health and safety (OHS) and grievance mechanisms. Likewise, any technical
                      consultants contracted by the project shall also need to adhere to such standards. Some key OHS risks related to the
                      Project have been included in the LMP, like : (i) construction activities which include risks of falls (if any) ; (ii) handling
                      of heavy loads; (iii) electric shocks; (iv) failure to use proper protective equipment during construction; (iv)
                      procedures for safety measures in relation to physical and chemical hazards in the workplace; (v) emergency
                      preparedness and response procedures; (vi) training and incident monitoring; and (vii) references to measures to
                      address any potential risks and impacts that may arise from the interaction between project workers and local
                      communities. OHS risks were assessed before the preparation and have taken in account of the LMP, ESMF, and will
                      be taken in account in subsequent instruments. To ensure the health and safety of workers during the operational
                      phase of the project, the Borrower shall develop and implement a Health, Safety, and Environmental (HSE) plan that
                      will be included in the site-specific instruments, in line with World Bank Group Environment, Health, and Safety
                      Guidelines (EHSGs) and the EHSG for urbanization including Electrical safety for civil works, SEP, and any other




Public Disclosure
                      relevant instruments, including contractual provisions specific to address SEAH risks. The project shall require the
                      contractors (both local and international if needed) to develop their own labor-management procedures, consistent
                      with ESS2 and the LMP provisions, in a manner acceptable to the project and the Association. It will also be the
                      responsibility of the Contractor to ensure that all workers are fully aware of the terms of employment, remuneration,
                      grievance and other relevant factors as per the ESS2 and relevant to national laws. The project shall also include a
                      GRM including labor disputes among project workers. The plan shall include procedures on incident investigation,
                      recording and reporting of non-conformity, emergency preparedness, and response procedures, and continuous
                      training and awareness to workers. There shall need to be regular pieces of training on SEA/SH for all the workers
                      involved in the project, and the project shall develop a Code of Conduct (CoC) addressing SEA/SH, including sanctions
                      for related perpetrators. The signing of CoCs shall be a condition for employment for all workers. MIESH-PIU shall
                      ensure that the ESS2 requirements are incorporated in (a) the contracts between the PIU and the Contractor and any
                      entity supervising the project's civil works; and (b) the contracts between the Contractor and any sub-contractors. All
                      project staff shall be provided with information and documentation that clearly presents their terms and conditions
                      of employment. All terms of reference and final deliverables, for any technical assistance and studies to be carried
                      out under the project, shall be prepared, adopted, and completed in form and substance satisfactory with ESS2
                      requirements.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                                   Relevant

                      ESS3 is considered relevant to the project. Hazardous and nonhazardous wastes: The risks and impacts related to
                      pollution prevention and management, including component 1 investments on Climate climate-resilient
                      infrastructure construction that may contain various types of waste including dredging materials from drainage canals


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                           Page 8 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Urban Resilience Emergency Project (P177146)



                      and riverbeds. Therefore, the details of this ESS shall be further assessed during project implementation. The
                      management of impacts/risks during the implementation of the project activities shall be included in the ESMF as
                      activities identified to be associated with potential environmental pollution and shall be part of site-specific E&S risk
                      management instruments for relevant sub-projects. Plans shall be put in place within the ESMF and site-specific E&S
                      instruments to ensure an environmentally sound and safe manner following EHSG for water and sanitation
                      management. Material needed for the construction/rehabilitation works (sand, stones, timber, etc.) shall be obtained
                      from locally licensed suppliers. Soil erosion and runoff: During the implementation of the project activities, an
                      increase in the level of surface soil erosion is expected, which will lead to E&S impacts and risks in the intervention
                      areas, particularly in Bujumbura and towards the spillway that is Lake Tanganyika. Adequate mitigation measures to
                      curb the flow of surface waters are established through the ESF elaborated instrument before the appraisal phase.
                      Noise and vibration: It is expected during the implementation of the project activities that engine noise and vibrations
                      shall be generated during the infrastructure construction activities. These impacts and risks shall have to be managed
                      by providing PPE to the workers in the areas of the project activities to mitigate all these impacts. Mitigation
                      measures shall be reflected in ESF instruments already prepared by the Borrower. Climate risks and GHG emissions: if
                      needed, the borrower shall characterize and estimate the sources of air pollution mainly from engines and generators
                      during the construction related to the project activities. It is essential, if feasible, to estimate the gross GHG emissions
                      resulting from the project activities. Given the limited capacity of the Borrower in the use of estimating GHG
                      emissions and the complexity of the project, the Bank shall provide technical assistance to the Borrower in the use of
                      the methodologies established by the Bank, so the Borrower’s capacity is strengthened. Pesticides Management: if
                      the project involves the use of pesticides, the implementing agencies shall choose the appropriate means of
                      “integrated pest management or integrated vector management”. The government shall assess the nature and




Public Disclosure
                      magnitude of associated risks and impacts but the government shall not use any pesticides or pesticide products or
                      formulations prohibited in compliance with the EHSGs. This is reflected in the development of ESF instruments under
                      preparation for this project. The ESMF includes specific measures related to water and energy use efficiency during
                      the construction phase of all civil works as well as, during the operational phase. All terms of reference and final
                      deliverables for any technical assistance and studies to be carried out under this Project activities shall be prepared,
                      adopted, and completed in form and substance satisfactory with ESS3 requirements.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                                Relevant

                      ESS4 is considered relevant to the project at this appraisal stage. As noted above, most of the unskilled workers
                      employed through project-financed direct and indirect contracts shall be sourced from targeted project sites.
                      However, some skilled workers from outside of the project area may also be required. Due to the nature of these
                      activities, labor camps and the influx of labor are anticipated albeit at a small limited scale. These activities may have
                      risks and effects on the health and safety of the communities surrounding project-related work sites. Anticipated risks
                      and impacts include community health and safety risks associated with construction works, traffic safety, community
                      exposure to diseases (COVID-19, HIV/AIDS, etc.), risks related to SEA/SH, and hazardous materials. The other
                      potential community health risk is related to the potential for the spread of communicable diseases due to the influx
                      of people in search of work in the project sites. Also, civil works may cause some inconvenience to local communities
                      as access (particularly road and foot traffic) could be interrupted temporarily. In addition, community health and
                      safety issues are expected to include road safety and pedestrian safety during the digging of small trenches and
                      backfilling operations. Thus, as part of the ESMF and site-specific instruments, traffic and road safety management
                      plans may be developed as necessary to address these inconveniences. In addition, the Borrower/ PIU/MIESH and


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                         Page 9 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Urban Resilience Emergency Project (P177146)



                      government agencies shall be required to ensure public safety through appropriate signage and barriers. Ecosystem
                      services: The project’s direct and indirect impacts and risks on ecosystem services (rivers and Lake Tanganyika) may
                      result in adverse health and safety risks and impacts on affected communities. In this regard, the borrower shall
                      identify the project’s risks and potential impacts on those above-mentioned ecosystem services and implement
                      mitigation measures contained in the ESMF/ESMP instruments of the project. The management of community health
                      and safety issues is described in the Project's ESMF and shall be integrated into site-specific instruments. Contractors
                      shall be required in their C-ESMP to install a safety system (Fences and safety guards) around the project sites, as well
                      as place the construction equipment in secured storage. The PIU/MIESH and government agencies shall prepare site-
                      specific E&S risk management instruments, based on the ESMF, that include standard operating procedures and good
                      construction management practices, including those proposed in WB EHSGs and will likewise address SEAH/SH risk
                      management as well as response to SEAH-related claims. The ESMF/ESMP includes mitigation measures for these
                      risks and impacts, as well as other potential community health and safety issues to be identified during project
                      implementation. Except for the above risks and impacts (which will be managed through preparing and implementing
                      site-specific instruments), the project is generally expected to result in positive community health impacts,
                      specifically for urban communities and schools that will benefit from the flood urban resilient infrastructure. Possible
                      negative social impacts may include typical aspects of discrimination against vulnerable groups (, Albinos, people
                      living with disabilities, and other vulnerable groups). Mitigation measures to be incorporated into project design
                      include educational programs that engage communities. All these social risks and impacts shall be addressed through
                      Project SA’s instrument for this project. All terms of reference and final deliverables for any technical assistance and
                      studies to be carried out under the Project shall be prepared, adopted, and completed in form and substance
                      satisfactory with ESS4.




Public Disclosure
                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                  Relevant

                      ESS5 is considered relevant to the project activities. The project is expected to involve risks and impacts related to
                      land acquisition, restrictions on land use, and involuntary resettlement, with short and long term effects, since the
                      project will involve civil works connected to the deployment of urban infrastructure, particularly in Bujumbura for
                      canalization of surface water (as mentioned above). Most resettlement impacts are expected to be temporary and
                      largely economical. If restrictions on land use occur in legally designed Parks or Protected areas (for instance in the
                      Gatumba zone) a Process Framework shall be prepared in addition to the RPF Instrument. The client has prepared a
                      Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) which was disclosed both on client and Bank website before appraisal, which
                      shall provide guidance to the implementing agency (PIU/MIESH and government agencies involved) during project
                      implementation on how to deal with resettlement and land acquisition and land use restriction impacts on
                      livelihoods, in a manner consistent with ESS5.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                   Relevant
                      Resources

                      ESS6 is considered relevant at this stage. Infrastructure Investments are likely to be in already modified areas in
                      Bujumbura (near the aquatic habitat of Lake Tanganyika). The World Bank’s due diligence has identified Lake
                      Tanganyika, Kanyosha, and Muha, Ntahangwa rivers, as natural habitats in project areas of influence. By the
                      mitigation hierarchy, the ESMF includes public consultations with relevant stakeholders in targeted areas and specific
                      measures to avoid or minimize negative impacts on biodiversity or natural habitats. Primary suppliers: Construction
                      and rehabilitation materials (sand, stones, timber, etc.) shall be needed during the project implementation phase.


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                     Page 10 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Urban Resilience Emergency Project (P177146)



                      The borrower shall establish mechanisms and verification practices to make sure all supplies are coming from
                      certified associations/cooperatives by OBPE to exploit these materials. This shall ensure that the borrower’s primary
                      suppliers will not harm or significantly adversely impact those areas. The ESMF includes specific measures and
                      screening processes for all the above-mentioned activities to ensure that all infrastructure works do not occur near
                      environmentally sensitive areas, particularly in natural or critical habitats. These measures aim to avoid, minimize, or
                      mitigate potential impacts that may have any significant negative impact on biodiversity conservation and on the
                      sustainable management of living natural resources and shall be included in site-specific instruments as needed. All
                      terms of reference and final deliverables, for any technical assistance and studies to be carried out under the Project
                      shall be prepared, adopted, and completed in form and substance satisfactory with ESS6.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional               Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      ESS7 is not considered relevant in the context of this project. While there are Batwa populations who live in
                      Bujumbura, Buterere, and Quartier Mugaruro, they are fully integrated into the urban population and their
                      livelihoods are the same as those of other urban dwellers. Accordingly, these urban groups do not met the criteria
                      defined in ESS7 to be considered under this standard, particularly in relation to the lack of collective attachment to a
                      geographically distinct habitat. Also, they are locally considered as other regular Burundians who live among others in
                      the town and not perceived as a separate group. The consultation process conducted also provided information
                      about the specificity and organization of these populations, through separate focus groups with these vulnerable
                      groups, as well as with youth and women, which informed the determination of their status as vulnerable groups. The
                      ES instruments that are being prepared (ESCP, SEP, LMP, ESMF, RPF) for the project will consider them as vulnerable



Public Disclosure
                      people and will adopt measures so that they are taken into account and included during project preparation and
                      implementation.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                        Relevant

                      ESS8 is relevant at this stage. The relevance of this ESS8 was assessed during project preparation as part of the ESMF
                      process. The Project is not expected to have negative impacts on cultural tangible heritage, as all civil works are
                      expected to take place on existing infrastructure in urban areas and ROWs (Rights of Ways). Potential impacts and
                      risks on intangible cultural heritage shall be included in the ESMF as well. However, as good practice simple screening
                      criteria and generic Chance Finds Procedures are integrated with the ESMF process and, if relevant, shall be
                      developed in site-specific instruments as deemed necessary. All terms of reference and final deliverables, for any
                      technical assistance and studies to be carried out under the Project shall be prepared, adopted, and completed in
                      form and substance satisfactory with ESS8.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                  Not Currently Relevant

                      ESS9 is considered not relevant to the project at this stage. The project is not expected to involve any financial
                      intermediaries. However, this should be probed further during project preparation, if relevant to the setup of an
                      innovation fund for urban resilient infrastructure.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                     Page 11 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Urban Resilience Emergency Project (P177146)



                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                        Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                  No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                             No
                       The use of the Borrower’s framework is not considered for this project.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                No
                       There are no financing partners foreseen at this stage.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     The Client has prepared and disclosured, the following documents prior to appraisal: ESMF (including (SEAH/SH ), RPF,
                     SEP, LMP, and draft ESCP. Risks and mitigation measures have been integrated into them, Biodiversity Management
                     Plan
                     Other instruments expected during project implementation include:
                     - ESIAs/ESMPs and checklists
                     - Resettlement action plans, based on the RPF, for activities with impacts associated with ESS5.



Public Disclosure
                     - Process Framework, if it becomes confirmed that the project activities will create restrictions to natural resources in
                     legally designated RNP.
                     - ToRs for the TA component 3 activities in a manner aligned with the ESF.




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:      Diana Cristina Tello Medina              Title:          Urban Specialist

                      Email:                 dtellomedina@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:           Susanna Smets                            Job Title:      Senior Water Specialist

                      Email:                 ssmets@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT




                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                    Page 12 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Urban Resilience Emergency Project (P177146)



                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                            Diana Cristina Tello Medina, Susanna Smets

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                   Alexis Manirambona

                     ADM Social Specialist:                          Abdoul Wahabi Seini




Public Disclosure




                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                  Page 13 of 13
