Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Urban Resilience Emergency Project (P177146)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                           Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                     (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                       Date Prepared/Updated: 01/10/2024 | Report No: ESRSC04037




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Feb 07, 2025                                                                        Page 1 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Urban Resilience Emergency Project (P177146)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                  Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P177146                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)       Urban Resilience Project    2025

                     Operation Name            Urban Resilience Emergency Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries           Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Burundi                   Burundi                                  EASTERN AND                 Urban, Resilience and
                                                                                        SOUTHERN AFRICA             Land

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                 Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Board Date

                     Republic of Burundi       Ministry of Infrastructure, Equipment    22-Apr-2024                 01-Jul-2024
                                               and Social Housing

                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date



Public Disclosure
                                               113,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     To respond to the flood emergency, increase flood resilience, and improve climate-resilient urban management in
                     Bujumbura.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     Yes


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The project design is developed to respond to the most pressing identified issues in the urban landscape in Burundi and
                     the government’s policy priorities. The proposed project has four components: (1) Emergency Flood Response and
                     Climate Resilient Infrastructure, (2) Capacity Building and Institutional Strengthening for Urban Resilience, (3) Project
                     Management, and (4) Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC).


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                     Page 2 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Urban Resilience Emergency Project (P177146)



                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     Bujumbura is the economic capital of Burundi, a locked East African country, without access to the sea, but with a wide
                     coastline on Lake Tanganyika, located in the Great Lakes region and surrounded by the Democratic Republic of Congo to
                     the west, Rwanda to the North and Tanzania to the Eastern southern. Its political capital is, since February 4, 2019,
                     Gitega. Bujumbura has an area of 127 square kilometers with a population density of 9,647 inhabitants per square
                     kilometer, i.e. a population of 1,225,169 (ISTEEBU projections of 2021).
                     This present project shall be implemented in Bujumbura, the economic capital in the Congo Basin. This city is built along
                     Lake Tanganyika which borders the DRC to the west. To the northwest of the city is the Ruzizi DELTA (15km from
                     Bujumbura City), the second sector of the Ruzizi Nature Reserve after the Palmeraie sector de Rukoko (Umuko, endemic
                     species). This Protected Area is a RAMSAR Site and mainly hosts migratory birds, and amphibians (crocodiles and
                     hippopotami). It is not confirmed this area is part of the project intervention yet, this will be confirmed once the
                     interventions and investments are prioritized. The Rusizi River, which crosses the Gatumba area, often causes recurrent
                     seasonal floods (rainy seasons) to the surrounding populations of this area. Other rivers cross the city of Bujumbura
                     including the Mutimbuzi, Ntahangwa, Muha and Kanyosha rivers. All these rivers cross the city of Bujumbura and are in
                     the Congo Basin where all water of the hydrological network flows into Lake Tanganyika. It should be noted that city of
                     Bujumbura is built on a width of 20km on average (from East to West) and from North to South (30-40km). To the East
                     of this town, the altitude (770m) changes abruptly to rise gradually to the Congo-Nile divide (about 1200m in Bugarama
                     area) which separates the two basins (Congo and Nile).
                     The drainage system in Bujumbura is highly deficient. The drainage system dates from the colonial era around the

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts




Public Disclosure
                     The Ministry of Infrastructure, Equipment, and Social Housing (MIELS) has a policy and regulatory mandate in many
                     project's thematic areas and will lead the overall implementation of the project. MIELS has a lack of prior experience in
                     implementing World Bank-funded projects under ESF requirements. The Burundi Transport Resilient Project (P172988),
                     in the process of being declared effective) will be the first project applying the Environmental and Social Framework
                     (ESF) in the MIELS PIU (which has no prior experience in managing ESSs aspects under ESF Requirements), with the
                     Urban Resilience Project (P177146) being the second project under the same MIELS PIU to apply this Framework. ESF
                     training as well as ongoing direct hands-on support shall be provided to the MIELS PIU to ensure the requirements of
                     the ESF are satisfied. All ESSs aspects of the project preparation shall be managed by the MIELS/Transport Resilient
                     project PIU, which is also selected by the Government to oversee and implement the URP. Three E&S specialists are
                     being hired (environment specialist, social specialist, and GBV specialist) through this Transport Resilient project PIU and
                     will ensure all specific capacities related to ESF requirements are in place at this stage of the operation. It is expected
                     that the PIU team members will be fully staffed and operational by May 10, 2023. If needed, additional specialists shall
                     be recruited and the MIELS PIU shall receive ESF training mainly on ESSs requirements. This shall apply to all different
                     central and local agencies involved in the activities of the proposed project at various ministries and government
                     institutions such as the MIELS, the Ministry of Interior, Community Development, and Public Security; the Ministry of
                     Water, Energy and Mining; the Ministry of Environment, Agriculture, and livestock; Bujumbura’s Local Government, and
                     REGIDESO, the national water and energy utility concerning critical basic services. A detailed capacity assessment

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                         Substantial


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                       Page 3 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Urban Resilience Emergency Project (P177146)




                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                     Substantial
                     The Environmental Risk rating is “Substantial” at this stage of the concept. The risks and impacts are anticipated to
                     result mainly from civil works of infrastructure construction planned under component 1 for the construction of
                     Climate Resilient infrastructure to reduce urban flood risk in Bujmbura. These civil works of infrastructure
                     construction and targeted nature-based solutions and tree plantation (native species) shall include (i) upstream
                     catchment restoration to mitigate fluvial risk and reduce erosion and siltation of storage/drainage facilities; (ii)
                     lakeshore restoration and protection along Lake Tanganyika; (iii) river bank restoration and protection, with
                     differentiated interventions considering the two main rivers in Bujumbura and smaller rivers; (iv) drainage in
                     prioritized areas of the cities, including conveyance management of channels and bridges; (v) nature-based solutions
                     and investments (e.g. swales, upstream check dams) to support infiltration and manage pluvial flood risk; and (vi)
                     protecting and rehabilitating at-risk critical infrastructure, such as water service infrastructure and roads/bridges in
                     hotspot areas. Some of the proposed TA activities under Component 2 will lead to limited potential downstream
                     direct and indirect environmental impacts when implemented through future investments, the elaboration of risk-
                     informed zoning and land use plans, the support to the government in applying tools to areas of expansion in
                     Bujumbura, the implementation of hydrometeorological Early Warning Systems in Bujumbura (investment in
                     infrastructure, equipment, and technology, etc.) These project activities shall be implemented in densely urban
                     populated and under-serviced urban environments with substantial risks of adverse impacts on community health
                     and safety. In addition, the project is anticipated to result in adverse risks and impacts at the construction scale
                     related to occupational health and safety; disposal and management of construction a
                                                                                                                                       Substantial



Public Disclosure
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risk rating is considered “Substantial”. Activities under component 1, Climate Resilient infrastructure to
                     reduce urban flood risk in Bujumbura, civil works (e.g. drainage, bank restoration, and protections, lakeshore
                     restoration, protecting and rehabilitating at-risk critical infrastructure, etc.…). Some of these activities may result in
                     temporary and permanent resettlement of populations in Bujumbura and will include both physical and economic
                     displacement. The project will have to ensure that terms of reference for these are consistent with the ESF
                     requirements. Likewise, all technical assistance activities carry similar risks, which will have to be mitigated in a similar
                     manner. For those under component 2, related to Capacity building and institutional strengthening for urban
                     resilience, the key risk may be the exclusion of some categories within civil servants like women, youth, etc. A
                     resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared by the project to provide guidelines for the elaboration of
                     possible eventual Resettlement Action Plans (RAP). Community-led initiatives in civil works or in High labor intensity
                     under the same component also carry risks that include those related to labor (child labor, forced labor, labor
                     disputes, etc.). The project shall be required to prepare Labor Management Procedures to address these risks. The
                     project will ensure that the activities will be done in secured areas, so a screening will be done before each
                     investment. The client shall prepare a Security Personnel Management Plan to address the security risk in case
                     security personnel is needed during the project implementation activities.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards



                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                          Page 4 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Urban Resilience Emergency Project (P177146)



                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                  Relevant

                      ESS1 is relevant for this operation due to the environmental and social risks and impacts identified in relation to the
                      proposed infrastructure investments for construction in component 1 and potentially related to the installation of
                      hydromet equipment under component 2. Key environmental and social issues related to the above-proposed project
                      activities in component 1 are waste management and disposal, community and occupational health and safety risks
                      during the implementation activities, soil erosion, road safety, and traffic interruptions due to urban implementation
                      activities. . Specifically, erosion and occupational health and safety (OHS) issues shall be addressed at the early stage
                      of the project, and the design of the project facilities/infrastructures accounts for specific measures that aim at
                      minimizing erosion and OHS risks during both the construction and operation phases. Noise may likely be generated
                      from the use of construction machinery and vehicle movement depending

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                       Relevant

                      A Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) shall be developed and disclosed as early as possible and prior to Appraisal and
                      will include both a summary of the stakeholder engagement activities that have been undertaken as part of the
                      preparation of the project to date, as a plan for further engagement during preparation and implementation.
                      Consultations shall be led during preparation of the ESMF including main stakeholders, Agence de Developpement du
                      Burundi, community members (including specific focus groups with women, youth, other vulnerable), municipal
                      leaders, the mayor of Bujumbura, NGOs, and line ministries. These consultations shall be done as part of the
                      preparation and during implementation and must cover the most areas which will be concerned by project activities
                      (Collines, sous- collines, ) and will help in understanding and perception of the project by the stakeholders which will



Public Disclosure
                      help engagement in the project process, understand major environmental and social challenges in the

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                             Relevant

                      ESS2 is relevant to the project. Direct workers and indirect workers including contracted Workers and community
                      workers are anticipated to be hired mainly under components 1 &2 during the infrastructure construction and
                      rehabilitation. In component 1, there will be civil works of infrastructure construction to mitigate flood risk, reducing
                      direct negative risks and impacts on the population and avoiding damage to urban infrastructure. Component 2 will
                      build capacity and strengthen institutions at the local and central level to better manage resilient urbanization in
                      Bujumbura but some TA activities on Component 1 may lead to civil works. To implement all those project activities
                      under Components 1 &2, it is expected to hire community labor and contracted workers. The scale and scope of labor
                      needed to carry out these activities are anticipated and will require labor influx given that labor needed will be
                      founded near Bujumbura capital and surrounding areas. Child and forced labor ri

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                              Relevant

                      ESS3 is considered relevant to the project at this stage. Hazardous and nonhazardous wastes: The risks and impacts
                      related to pollution prevention and management, including component 1 investments on Climate Resilient
                      Infrastructure construction that may contain various types of waste including dredging materials from drainage canals
                      and riverbeds. Therefore, the details of this ESS shall be further assessed during project preparation as part of the
                      ESMF process. The management of impacts/risks during the implementation activities shall be included in the ESMF
                      as activities identified to be associated with potential environmental pollution and shall be part of site-specific E&S
                      risk management instruments for relevant sub-projects. Plans shall be put in place within the ESMF and site-specific

                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                       Page 5 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Urban Resilience Emergency Project (P177146)



                      E&S instruments to ensure an environmentally sound and safe manner following EHSG for water and sanitation
                      management. Material needed for the construction/rehabilitation works (sand, stones, tim

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                               Relevant

                      ESS4 is considered relevant to the project at this concept stage. As noted above, most of the unskilled workers
                      employed through project-financed direct and indirect contracts shall be sourced from targeted project sites.
                      However, some skilled workers from outside of the project area may also be required. Due to the nature of these
                      activities, labor camps and the influx of labor are anticipated albeit at a small limited scale. These activities may have
                      risks and effects on the health and safety of the communities surrounding project-related work sites. Anticipated risks
                      and impacts include community health and safety risks associated with construction works, traffic safety, community
                      exposure to diseases (COVID-19, HIV/AIDS, etc.), risks related to SEA/SH, and hazardous materials. The other
                      potential community health risk is related to the potential for the spread of communicable diseases due to the influx
                      of people in search of work in the project sites. Also, civil works may cause so

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                   Relevant

                      ESS5 is considered relevant to the project activities. The project’s risks and impacts related to land acquisition,
                      restrictions on land use, and involuntary resettlement are both direct and indirect since the fact of the project will
                      involve civil works connected to the deployment of urban infrastructure, particularly in Bujumbura town for
                      canalization of surface water (as mentioned above). It is expected that some activities shall involve restrictions on
                      land use and expropriation. Resettlement impacts are mainly expected to be temporary and largely economical. If




Public Disclosure
                      restrictions on land use occur in Legally designed Parks or Protected areas (for instance in the Gatumba zone) a
                      Process Framework shall be prepared in addition to the RPF document. The client shall prepare a Resettlement Policy
                      Framework (RPF) before appraisal that shall provide guidance to the implementing agency (PIU/MIELS and
                      government agencies involved) during project implementation on how to deal with resettlement

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                    Relevant
                      Resources

                      ESS6 is considered relevant as well to the project at this stage of concept. Infrastructure Investments under
                      Component 1 are likely to be in already modified areas in Bujumbura’s economic capital (near the aquatic habitat of
                      Lake Tanganyika). The World Bank’s due diligence has identified Lake Tanganyika, Kanyosha, and Muha, Ntahangwa
                      rivers, as natural habitats in the project area of influence. In accordance with the mitigation hierarchy, the site-
                      specific ESMP shall include public consultations with relevant stakeholders in targeted areas and specific measures to
                      avoid or minimize the negative impacts and risks on biodiversity or those natural habitats. Ecosystem services: The
                      project’s direct and indirect impacts and risks on ecosystem services (rivers and Lake Tanganyika) may result in
                      adverse health and safety risks and impacts on affected communities. In this regard, the borrower shall identify the
                      project’s potential risks and impacts on those above-mentioned ecosystems and imp

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      ESS7 is not considered relevant in the context of this project. There are Batwa who live in Bujumbura, Buterere, and
                      Quartier Mugaruro, but they are integrated into the urban population. They are considered as other Burundians who


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                        Page 6 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Urban Resilience Emergency Project (P177146)



                      live among Bantu in the town. Above that, in Mugaruro, the project shall lead specific consultations first in the
                      preparation phase of the project and during the implementation and they must take in account the specificity and
                      organize focus groups specially for these vulnerable, youth and women. The ES instruments to be prepared (ESCP,
                      SEP, LMP... ) must take in account this aspect of question which there are IP as inhabitants too, even if the national
                      law considers them like all Burundians citizens. However, the project will consider them as vulnerable people and will
                      be taken in account in project process from preparation to implementation.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                             Relevant

                      ESS8 is considered relevant to the project. The relevance of this ESS8 shall be assessed further during project
                      preparation as part of the ESMF process that the construction works will include the excavation of grounds. An
                      assessment of nearby cultural heritages shall be carried out to confirm whether there will be risks and impacts on
                      cultural heritages. Potential impacts and risks on intangible cultural heritage shall then be included in the Social
                      Assessment and addressed in the ESMF as needed during the project preparation. As good practice, simple screening
                      criteria and generic Chance Finds Procedures shall be integrated into the ESMF process and, if relevant, shall be
                      developed in site-specific instruments as deemed necessary. All terms of reference and final deliverables, for any
                      technical assistance and studies to be carried out under the Project, shall be prepared, adopted, and completed in
                      form and substance satisfactory with ESS8.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                     Not Currently Relevant

                      ESS9 is not relevant to the project activities at this stage. The project is not expected to involve any financial




Public Disclosure
                      intermediaries.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                              Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                        No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                                   No
                       The use of the Borrower’s framework is not considered for this project.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                      No
                       There are no financing partners foreseen at this stage.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?




                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                            Page 7 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Urban Resilience Emergency Project (P177146)



                     The Client/Borrower shall prepare and disclosure, in the required time, the following documents prior to appraisal:
                     ESMF (including (SEAH/SH ), RPF, SEP, LMP and draft ESCP and Gendered Social Assessment (SA) to look at potential
                     gender impacts and recommendations for social and gender inclusion. Risks and mitigation measures identified through
                     the SA shall be integrated into the ESMF, RPF, SEP, and LMP and shall determine project design.
                     The Capacity Assessment and Action Plan, a Social Assessment beyond gender issues as indicated in ESS1 and TORs for
                     the TA Component 2 as part of the ESMF as well as possibly a Process Framework and Biodiversity Management Plan
                     and at least the Security Risk Assessment be completed by Appraisal.




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Diana Cristina Tello Medina           Title:         Urban Specialist

                      Email:                  dtellomedina@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Susanna Smets                         Job Title:     Senior Water Specialist

                      Email:                  ssmets@worldbank.org




Public Disclosure
                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                               Diana Cristina Tello Medina, Susanna Smets

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                      Alexis Manirambona

                     ADM Social Specialist:                             Abdoul Wahabi Seini




                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                Page 8 of 8
