Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Malawi: Water and Sanitation Project - 1 (P178954)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                             Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                       (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                         Date Prepared/Updated: 01/25/2023 | Report No: ESRSA02528




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Jan 25, 2023                                                                          Page 1 of 16
                               The World Bank
                               Malawi: Water and Sanitation Project - 1 (P178954)



                     BASIC INFORMATION

                     A. Basic Project Data

                     Country                       Region                           Project ID                     Parent Project ID (if any)

                     Malawi                        EASTERN AND SOUTHERN             P178954
                                                   AFRICA

                     Project Name                  Malawi: Water and Sanitation Project - 1

                     Practice Area (Lead)          Financing Instrument             Estimated Appraisal Date       Estimated Board Date

                     Water                         Investment Project               1/25/2023                      3/29/2023
                                                   Financing

                     Borrower(s)                   Implementing Agency(ies)

                     Ministry of Finance and       Blantyre Water Board
                     Economic Affairs


                     Proposed Development Objective



Public Disclosure
                     To increase access to improved water supply and safely managed sanitation services in Blantyre Metropolitan Area,
                     and to enhance the operational and financial efficiency of the Blantyre Water Board.


                     Financing (in USD Million)                                                                                          Amount

                      Total Project Cost                                                                                                     127.00



                     B. Is the project being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project [including overview of Country, Sectoral & Institutional Contexts and
                     Relationship to CPF]
                     The Proposed project aims to improve service delivery capacity for water supply and sanitation in Blantyre City and
                     promote sustainable improvement in the financial, technical, and operational performance of BWB. The project
                     interventions are expected to contribute to improved access to water and sanitation for the residents of Blantyre,
                     thus improving the city's health outcomes and enabling the business environment and quality of life. The project will
                     finance five main components:



                    Jan 25, 2023                                                                                                        Page 2 of 16
                              The World Bank
                              Malawi: Water and Sanitation Project - 1 (P178954)



                     Component 1 - Water supply improvements (US$ 74.5 million equivalent of which US$ 72.8 million IDA financing and
                     US$ 1.7 million counterpart financing). Under this component, the project will finance investments to improve water
                     production, stabilize and improve network operational efficiency, reduce water losses, increase energy efficiency,
                     improve water supply service quality, and expand water access to unserved areas, thereby lowering GHG emissions,
                     increasing energy efficiency, and boosting water access. Key interventions include (i) Rehabilitation and upgrade of
                     Mudi intake and water treatment plant, and priority dam safety measures at Mudi Dam, (ii) priority water supply
                     transmission network upgrade – 20.54km of transmission pipeline from Chileka to Blantyre and four associated
                     reservoirs with a combined capacity of 40,000m3 to increase the storage capacity and BWB drought resilience, and
                     eight solar-powered boosters; (iii) distribution network upgrade with around 266km pipe replacement and upgrade
                     pressure management systems to recover water leaks, and (iv) distribution network expansion in selected zones,
                     including 60 smart water kiosks.

                     Component 2 - Priority Sanitation Investments (US$ 34 million equivalent, of which US$ 32.18 million IDA financing
                     and US$ 1.82 counterpart financing). This component involves several interventions to increase access to safely
                     managed sanitation and reduce environmental pollution that has public health impacts. Key investments include (i)
                     The rehabilitation and upgrade of 50km of sewer network and connections and treatment works in the Blantyre, and
                     Soche sewerage catchments, including interceptors to collect leaking sewers into river streams and reduce
                     environmental pollution and methane capture to reduce emissions from the WWTP; (ii) technical assistance,
                     equipment and tools to improve solid waste sorting and collection at the source with business development support
                     and integration of private sector and waste pickers, and the construction of a new solid waste recycling plant and
                     landfill in Chigumula, and (iii) construction and upgrade of public sanitation facilities for ten schools, five health




Public Disclosure
                     centers, and five markets to reduce the incidence of open defecation in public places.

                     Component 3 - Institutional Capacity Strengthening (US$ 21.0 million equivalent, of which 20.51 million IDA financing
                     and US$ 0.49 counterpart financing). This component will finance a set of institutional development activities aimed
                     at (i) enhancing BWB's financial efficiency and governance systems through a performance-based grant, (ii) improving
                     BCC's capacity to manage sanitation services, and (iii) supporting the water sector investment planning and policy
                     development to enhance the sustainability of water and sanitation services.

                     Component 4 - Technical Assistance and Project Management Support (US$ 4.50 million equivalent – IDA financing).
                     This component will finance TA activities designed to support the project implementing unit and the incremental
                     operating costs for project management, including safeguards, communications, and project monitoring and
                     evaluation. The project will also finance relevant training to enhance the FM, procurement, and safeguards capacity
                     for the implementing entities.

                     Component 5 – Contingency Emergency Response (CERC- US$ 0). This component will provide preparedness and rapid
                     response measures to address disaster, emergency and/or catastrophic events, in accordance with the applicable
                     CERC Manual. Following an eligible crisis or emergency, the Borrower may request the Bank to re-allocate project
                     funds to support emergency response and reconstruction. This component would draw from the uncommitted
                     loan/credit/grant resources under the project from other project components to cover emergency response.




                    Jan 25, 2023                                                                                                    Page 3 of 16
                              The World Bank
                              Malawi: Water and Sanitation Project - 1 (P178954)


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1. Detailed project location(s) and salient physical characteristics relevant to the E&S assessment [geographic,
                     environmental, social]
                     Blantyre City, the largest commercial and industrial capital of Malawi, is in the Shire Highlands and geographical
                     centre of the Southern Region of the country with a population of 900,000. The city has a good number of hills,
                     plateau and ridge, and the natural drainage system. The main hills are the headwaters of several rivers and streams
                     that originate and radiate from the city, forming a natural drainage system with nine distinct catchment areas:
                     Likhubula, Lunzu, Mombezi and Khombwi, which drain the northern part of the city, and Mudi, Chisombezi, Limbe,
                     Luchenza and Mwampanzi draining the middle and southern parts. Because of the hilly topography, these natural
                     drainage channels are narrow and have steep sides and gradients. Blantyre is surrounded by Mount Soche, Ndirande
                     mountain, Chiradzulu mountain and Michiru Mountain, which constitute the Michiru Mountain Conservation Area.
                     The geology of the city consists of two principal types of rocks of pyro and syenitic gneiss accounts for about 40
                     percent. In their unweathered state, both rock types are impervious hence poor aquifers, but they provide a valuable
                     resource for road and building construction. Blantyre City is on the eastern edge of the southern branch of the
                     Eastern African Rift, and thus some prominent faults occur within and in the vicinity of the city rendering it prone to
                     earthquakes. The main faults and associated zones of deeply fractured bedrock run from the north of the city in a
                     southwesterly direction and are potential aquifers for groundwater.

                     Blantyre city is a transport communications node with road, rail and air links to all parts of the country and
                     neighbouring countries of Mozambique, Zimbabwe, South Africa, Zambia and Tanzania. It covers an area of 228
                     square km.




Public Disclosure
                     The plateau and ridge comprises all the land that is suitable for urban development including extensive relatively flat
                     land, the mountain piedmonts and plains, and long narrow watersheds and strips of land that separate the rivers and
                     streams. The city is generally cool with mean monthly temperatures ranging from 19 °C during the cool season (May
                     to July) to 26 °C.

                     Settlements are categorized as formal, informal and traditional housing areas with most settlements being informal
                     covering 70%, which only 10% are formal. The project will impact negatively high density areas as they do not have
                     enough land for expansion of network and to pile construction materials during toilets construction. However, they
                     are the most benefiting communities once the projects are completed, as they do not have access to potable water
                     and good sanitation services.

                     D. 2. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity
                     The project will be implemented by Blantyre Water Board (BWB) and Blantyre City Council (BCC). BWB will be the lead
                     implementing agency. BCC has four staff with environmental health, EHS and environmental management capacity
                     together. BWB has one environmental safeguards specialist, two water quality and Environmental Officers. All
                     institutions do not have staff on social aspects and gender. Despite enough personnel, the existing wastewater
                     treatment plants are poorly managed due to varied reasons. Some waste water treatment plants are not receiving
                     waste water, because sewerage networks are broken and discharging in rivers and environment untreated waste
                     water. For operational waste water treatment plants, discharge is usually above threshold of the parameters being
                     measured. BCC is also responsible for Mzedi dumpsite which pose many risks to communities, workers and women
                     groups that are producing compost. The dumpsite receive all wastes, including hazardous and e-wastes, yet no
                     management plans exist. Both institutions have experience with World Bank safeguards policies through participating

                    Jan 25, 2023                                                                                                     Page 4 of 16
                              The World Bank
                              Malawi: Water and Sanitation Project - 1 (P178954)



                     in implementation of Malawi Watershed Improvement Project (active) by BCC and National Water Management
                     Project (closed) by BWB but none has experience with the new Environmental and Social Framework. The
                     implementing agencies will require capacity strengthening interventions to enable them prepare and implement
                     environmental and social safeguards instruments in accordance with ESF requirements.

                     A Project Management Unit will be established under the lead implementing agency, BWB, while a Project Support
                     Team (PST) will be established under BCC. The project will hire within its PIU an Environmental and Health and Safety
                     Specialist, and a Social and Gender Specialist. Both agencies will second Social and Gender Officers into the PMU and
                     PST to understudy and for entrenchment of social safeguards capacities within the two utilities. The World Bank will
                     continue to assess this arrangement, adequacy of the personnel and technical expertise versus project risks involved
                     and advise routinely. The assessment will be done during project implementation to ascertain adequacy of capacity
                     the preparation of sub-project specific environmental and social risk management instruments and supervision during
                     their implementation.


                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                     Substantial


                     Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                  Substantial
                     The project design is aimed at implementing activities that have environmental benefits by improving access to



Public Disclosure
                     potable water, improved sanitation and hygiene in public places and high dense populations in Blantyre and improved
                     solid waste and wastewater management with the city. However negative impacts/risk such as occupational, health
                     and safety, community health and safety, land, water and air pollution, biodiversity risks emanate from both
                     construction and operation stages of project implementation activities. The identified risks are likely to generate a
                     wide range of significant adverse risks and impacts on human populations or the environment emanating from sewer
                     lines breaking, landfill operational impacts including failed designs and risks of Mudi dam safety and probability of
                     serious effects from human exposure to hazardous wastes. Cumulative impacts and environmental liabilities such as
                     waste water spillage, contamination of drinking water, contamination of land and rivers from waste water discharge
                     and /or leachate including heavy metals, expose both humans and environment to significant risks. Climate
                     vulnerability impacts such as flooding, land slides, earthquakes, fire and operational emergencies can exacerbate the
                     risks. Details of specific risks at specific stage of project activities has been assessed under ESS1. The operation
                     activities require consideration of ESS1, ESS2, ESS3, ESS4 ESS5, ESS6, ESS8 and ESS10 in conducting an environmental
                     risk assessment and preparation of mitigation measures. The ESCP that includes commitments in management of
                     environmental risks has been prepared and agreed upon. In as much as the water distribution network sewer
                     network and landfill sites are indicatively known, details of some activities especially performance-based grants
                     activities, actual siting and size of recycling plant and landfill are not yet known. An ESMF has been drafted in
                     accordance with requirements of ESS1. Though both institutions do not have ESF experience, their safeguards policy
                     experience is a good starting point in upgrading their knowledge and skills to ESF requirements. There is considerable
                     anticipated significant risks/ impact on water bodies, land and human population due to water supply investments,
                     landfill and sanitations investments, environmental liabilities and any Mudi dam safety impacts. The environmental
                     risk has been classified as Substantial, with guidance from Environmental and Social Directive for Investment Project
                     Financing, risk classification section.

                    Jan 25, 2023                                                                                                   Page 5 of 16
                              The World Bank
                              Malawi: Water and Sanitation Project - 1 (P178954)



                     Social Risk Rating                                                                                            Substantial
                     The project is expected to generate positive economic and social results for the residents of Blantyre City. This is
                     consequently expected to lead to improved access to water and sanitation in addition to improvement of health and
                     the reduction of incidences of diseases. The social risks identified include construction related health and safety risks
                     to communities and workers; risks associated with labor management; labor influx related risks including the spread
                     of infectious and sexually transmitted diseases such as HIV, COVID 19 and other communicable diseases and eruption
                     of diseases which would affect workers and communities such as typhoid, dysentery and cholera due to exposure to
                     fecal matter and sludge ; child labor; exacerbation of Gender-Based Violence/Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and
                     Sexual Harassments (GBV/SEA/SH) particularly where public facilities will be constructed in select schools, health
                     centers and markets, as well as in poorer neighborhoods; including the negative impacts related to physical
                     displacement, restricted land use and rights, negative impacts of economic displacement on formal and informal
                     businesses on employees, business profitability and viability. While the project’s impact area is geographically small,
                     the project will be implemented in multiple sites in a city that is built up and compact consequently impacting a large
                     number of the city residents. Furthermore, the implementing parties, BWB and BCC, have no experience
                     implementing World Bank funded projects (BWB has experience implementing projects funded by AfDB), therefore
                     capacity strengthening in managing Environmental and Social safeguards under the ESF will be required. As such, the
                     anticipated risks suggest a social risk rating of Substantial.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESSs) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1. General Assessment



Public Disclosure
                     ESS1 Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     Overview of the relevance of the Standard for the Project:
                     The activities have positive environmental and social impacts such as improved access to potable water, improved
                     sanitation and hygiene, improved waste management, clean energy access, improved household economy, improved
                     city aesthetic and reduced gender vulnerabilities for women and girls due to long distances taken to fetch water.
                     There is an opportunity to improve existing enterprises in the organic manure value chain that will go along way to
                     support economic needs of some households and respond to good practices for soil management. However, there
                     are risks that emanate from construction related activities. For example, during construction of water supply
                     infrastructure such as water intake from Mudi Dam reservoir, Mudi water treatment plant upgrading and
                     rehabilitation, water distribution network rehabilitation and expansion, water storage tanks upgrading, water
                     pumping station rehabilitation and solar powered boosters installation, the following risks are anticipated;
                     occupational health and safety risks, risk of working on water, water pollution, land and air pollution, road traffic
                     safety risks, working on trenches, soil erosion, noise pollution, possibility of asbestos contamination of land;
                     handling, removal and disposal of existing asbestos pipes, working on heights, land clearing and all safety of dams
                     risks that is in close proximity to Mudi Water treatment plant and the Intake. Mudi dam is around 19 meters deep
                     with 1.5 million m3 volume as per design but operating at not more than 60% volume. The upgrading works are only
                     planned for the intake infrastructure.

                     During construction of waste water treatment infrastructure such as sewer network rehabilitation and expansion and
                     construction of public toilets, the following risks apply: occupational health and safety, traffic management risks,


                    Jan 25, 2023                                                                                                      Page 6 of 16
                              The World Bank
                              Malawi: Water and Sanitation Project - 1 (P178954)



                     land, water and air pollution, sewerage spillage from pipe breaking due to excavations during sewer network
                     expansion and rehabilitation, land clearing, erosion, community health and safety, noise and dust pollution.

                     Construction of solid waste infrastructure such as small engineered landfill (that will treat wastes including industrial
                     and hazardous wastes), recycling and composting plant involve the following risks: occupational health and safety,
                     land clearing, soil erosion, dust emissions, land, water and air pollution. Main industries include breweries and food
                     processing that discharge chemical wastewater while medical wastes include sharp objects, laboratory reagents,
                     infectious blood contaminated materials/equipment that can be categorized as hazardous. Hazardous waste risks
                     include exposure at handling, transporting, storage, treatment and disposal. The actual landfill size will be defined
                     once the designs are completed and agreed, however, the available allocated resource can only finance a small
                     landfill.

                     During operation, water supply activities mentioned above have potential OHS risks for operation and maintenance
                     of water distribution pipes, reservoir and water treatment plant; water pollution, flooding of water treatment plant
                     due to failed designs or adverse weather impacts, water-borne disease outbreak, storage and disposal of solar
                     batteries, Mudi dam overflow, sedimentation of the dam, downstream impacts; Wastewater treatment operation
                     risks include OHS risks for operation and maintenance of sewer lines, wastewater treatment plants, public and school
                     toilets, odor due to inappropriate handling of fecal sludge or failed design; contamination of drinking water; eruption
                     of infectious diseases (e.g., infectious diseases including cholera, dysentery, typhoid, hepatitis, ascariasis, and
                     schistosomiasis) within the communities and among the project workers emanating from fecal sludge collection
                     conducted not in accordance with safe standards or due to an accident or a weather event; degradation of the local




Public Disclosure
                     environment due to accidental leakage from fecal sludge management plant releasing fecal material into water
                     courses and open ground, safety of workers and communities during transportation of sewerage from septic tanks,
                     non-compliance on discharge thresholds, bursting of sewerage pipes, and environmental liabilities such as
                     eutrophication in rivers, biodiversity alterations.
                     During operation of recycling plant and landfill, the following risks are anticipated: OHS risks for recycling and landfill
                     operation and maintenance, degradation of the local environment, leachates, odor, safety of workers and
                     communities during transportation of solid wastes to recycling plant and landfill etc. Potential private enterprises
                     such as manure making from sludge, biogas digesters from landfill, pit emptier come with waste handling and
                     hazardous waste exposure risks, safety of compost, cumulative impacts of hazardous gases, explosions, risk of
                     infections odor amongst others. Currently, some environmental liabilities have been confirmed through scientific
                     studies of the existing Mzedi dumpsite, such as land contamination with heavy metals that find their way to
                     agricultural crops due to permeable boundaries and non existent buffer zone that maize production close to the
                     dumpsite
                     (https://www.researchgate.net/publication/342550233_'Blurred_Lines'_Agricultural_Production_on_the_Margins_of
                     _a_Dumpsite_in_Blantyre_Malawi/download).

                     Accidents or breaking of the infrastructure, environmental liabilities that may come with heavy winds and flooding,
                     taking sludge to the rest of flooded area and stream, risk of waste contact by any unauthorized entry in case of
                     compromised site management, management of a scenario when there is shortage in recommended PPE, possible
                     landslides due to geographical features of the city, financial preparedness for any emergency such as breakage are
                     potential emergency risks during construction and operation. The impact of topographic and geological features of
                     the area, exposure of infrastructure to adverse weather effects will be assessed further during preparation of specific


                    Jan 25, 2023                                                                                                       Page 7 of 16
                              The World Bank
                              Malawi: Water and Sanitation Project - 1 (P178954)



                     ESIA/ESMPs and mitigation measures will be included in the ESMPs. There could be cumulative impacts on
                     biodiversity, community health and safety, traffic management risks, dust pollution, land clearing, soil erosion,
                     especially due to construction of a new water treatment plant and transmission main from Shire River to be financed
                     by Exim Bank and network upgrading and expansion in Limbe zone to be financed by AfDB from 2024. Some of the
                     risks include dam design failure, water overflow and dam safety risks and downstream impacts. Assessment of these
                     impacts will be included in specific ESIA/ESMP and mitigation measure will be considered in ESMPs.
                     Component 3 has performance-based grants and their activities are not yet known. Upon identification of such
                     activities, screening of potential risks and impacts will be done in accordance with ESMF and necessary instruments
                     will be prepared.

                     An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been drafted and has considered all known risks
                     and impacts and mitigation measures associated with ESS1, ESS2, ESS3, ESS4, ESS6, ESS8 and ESS10 and relevant
                     World Bank Guidelines such as EHS general guidelines, EHS Guidelines for Water and Sanitation, and EHS Guidelines
                     for Waste Management Facilities. All risks associated with land acquisition, resettlement, and economic loss, as
                     outlined under ESS5, have been considered in the draft Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The ESMF has included
                     risk of heavy winds, flooding, earthquakes and landslides and wind control/adaptive measures to guide the technical
                     design and operation of the engineered landfill and solar power installation. The ESMF has also considered the risks
                     and mitigation measures for Covid-19 and other communicable diseases. Sub-projects will be screened, and it will be
                     determined if an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or solely an ESMPs will be prepared prior to
                     contractors’ bidding phase. All contractors will be required to prepare Contractors’ ESMP (C-ESMP) based on projects’
                     ESMPs and ESF requirements. To avoid implementing sub-projects that cause significant adverse impacts, exclusion of




Public Disclosure
                     such activities will take precedence and where the need to still proceed with the activities is duly, assessments will
                     consider alternative sites and designs with technical-financial and socio-environmental aspects for infrastructure
                     subprojects. To mitigate labor risks, the project has prepared Labor Management Procedures (LMP), including a
                     worker Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM). The project’s GBV and SEA/SH risks have been rated moderate.
                     Measures to mitigate these risks will be including SEA/SH Prevention and Response Action Plan, and an Accountability
                     and Response Framework are included in the ESMF. The Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) has included the project
                     Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM). An Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) has been prepared,
                     setting out the substantive measures and actions required for the project to meet environmental and social
                     requirements over a specified period of time prior to project appraisal and will be agreed on with the borrower
                     during negotiations.

                     The proposed project will also ensure that the technical designs, consultancies, studies, capacity building, and any
                     other technical assistance activities under the Project including, inter alia, any environmental and social assessments
                     and related environmental and social instruments, are carried out in accordance with terms of reference acceptable
                     to the Bank that incorporate the relevant requirements of the ESSs. Any outputs from the technical assistance
                     activities, including, inter alia, any environmental assessment and related environmental and social instruments, shall
                     be consistent with the ESSs.



                     ESS10 Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure



                    Jan 25, 2023                                                                                                    Page 8 of 16
                              The World Bank
                              Malawi: Water and Sanitation Project - 1 (P178954)



                     Stakeholder Engagement will be critical for the project in ensuring that both beneficiaries and those who will be
                     impacted negatively by the project are consulted throughout the project cycle, especially at the design phase. A
                     Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) has been prepared to provide guidance in conducting these consultations, receipt
                     of feedback, and stakeholder and community engagement. The stakeholders have been identified as i) local
                     communities; ii) Other Utility Companies such as ESCOM, Telecom companies; iii) Malawi Housing Corporation and
                     other landlords within the City; iv) District councils; v) Roads Authority; vi) CBOs/NGOs and policy makers; vii) Private
                     Sector/Business Associations; viii) Schools/Markets/Health Centers; ix) Project Affected People; x) Users of Shire
                     River; and xi) National level government line ministries such as Ministry of Water and Natural Resources, Ministry of
                     Health, Ministry of Education, Ministry of Lands, Ministry of Local Government, Ministry of Transport, Ministry of
                     Finance and agencies of Directorate for Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) and Malawi Environmental Protection
                     Authority (MEPA); xii) Development Partners. Blantyre District Council is a key stakeholder because part of the
                     expansion of the water network will be implemented in their jurisdiction, while the Roads Authority and the Ministry
                     of Transport will be critical in appreciating future development plans especially along major roads where the mains
                     networks are likely to be laid. Stakeholder engagement will also be used to ensure that project activities do not
                     conflict with development plans of other key stakeholders such as ESCOM, and Roads Authority. With regard to
                     community engagement, the project will work with and strengthen existing structures at community level, and with
                     school and market associations to ensure community buy-in and awareness about the project.

                     The SEP has detailed methods of engagement including virtual and face to face meetings, questionnaires, etc., and
                     provided guidance as to how information disclosure will be undertaken before, during and after project
                     implementation. The consultations are expected to observe social, cultural norms in order to have meaningful




Public Disclosure
                     engagement with different members of the society.

                     The SEP has detailed a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) that will include Grievance Redress Committees (GRCs),
                     dedicated mobile phone and whatsapp line, toll free number and email address. The GRCs will be established at
                     ward/zone level and members will, represent various stakeholders including project-affected parties and local
                     communities. The primary objectives of creating GRCs are threefold: (i) to ensure that disputes related to preparation
                     and implementation of the Resettlement Action Plan are treated separately and on priority; (ii) to help project
                     proponents to ensure that project implementation timelines are not compromised due to delays in resolving
                     grievance; and (iii) to help cut down on lengthy and expensive litigation that PAPs might have to indulge.

                     The functionality of GRCs will be closely monitored by the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) and the supervising
                     consultant as applicable. These grievance redress committees will be expected to maintain a grievance log which will
                     be updated regularly. Further, the GRM will provide for appeals mechanism and anonymous reporting and the
                     information about the mechanism will be disseminated among local communities including a phone number where
                     grievances can be received.



                     B.2. Specific Risks and Impacts

                     A brief description of the potential environmental and social risks and impacts relevant to the Project.
                     ESS2 Labor and Working Conditions


                    Jan 25, 2023                                                                                                      Page 9 of 16
                              The World Bank
                              Malawi: Water and Sanitation Project - 1 (P178954)



                     The project will engage direct, contracted, primary supply and community workers at various sites who will provide
                     skilled and unskilled labour. The project anticipates that most of the labour will be sourced within Blantyre city,
                     except for highly skilled and specialized labour. Migrant workers will be accommodated in these communities. The
                     construction works will require the workers to work in steep, rocky and hilly terrain, at depth in trenches, at height
                     during construction of buildings and water reservoirs, and at sewerage treatment works that are operational. Labor
                     Management Procedures (LMP) have been prepared, which set out the way in which project workers will be
                     managed, in line with the ESF and Malawi National Laws and regulations.

                     The anticipated risks during project implementation and operationalization include occupational health and safety
                     (OHS) issues; risks related to workers rights leading to unfavorable employment terms and working conditions,
                     discrimination and abuse; transmission and spread of diseases such as HIV, STIs and COVID-19 and also likely eruption
                     of infectious diseases such as cholera, dysentery, due to inappropriate handling or contact with fecal matter and /or
                     sludge; child and forced labor; and SEA/SH risks in the workplace.

                     The LMP has ensured that mechanisms are in place to mitigate against these risks in line with ESS2. Provisions with
                     regard to Environment and Health and Safety (EHS) measures as well as World Bank Group EHS Guidelnes for water
                     and sanitation and waste management facilities and other relevant OHS standards will be incorporated into the
                     detailed design and civil works contracts in line with ESS2. Workers will be expected to sign contracts in line with
                     Malawian national laws and Code of Conducts that will be reviewed to ensure that risks related to SEA/SH properly
                     mitigated and penalties are clearly stipulated. The contracts and code of conducts will be in the local language to
                     ensure that the Workers understand their labour rights and penalties related to SH. The LMP will require the




Public Disclosure
                     establishment of Workers GRCs for each contractor to address workers grievances. The LMP will also ensure that
                     working conditions meet international and national standards in line with ESS2 and that measures are put in place to
                     mitigate against child labour and forced labour. The ESIA/ESMP will ensure that these mitigation measures are
                     included in the bidding documents and contractors contracts in particular mitigation measures related to
                     transmission of diseases such as HIV sensitization plan, and COVID prevention plan.



                     ESS3 Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management
                     During construction stage of water supply, wastewater and solid wastes treatment infrastructure, pollution may
                     come from oil spillages from vehicles and machines, dust, cement wash to water streams, etc. During operation,
                     pollution risks such as odor, contamination with water, air, soil and loss of aesthetic could come from waste
                     collection, storage, handling and transportation and anticipated health risks to communities such spreading of
                     infectious diseases (cholera, dysentery, typhoid, hepatitis, ascariasis, schistosomiasis and skin rash). Environmental
                     liabilities are anticipated regarding possible contamination of soils from recycling plant and landfill leachate and
                     asbestos containing pipes for water distribution, exposure of workers, community and environment to hazardous
                     material and heavy metals as is already a case with Mzedi dumpsite, water pollution impacts of ground and surface
                     water that may affect direct users, flora and fauna. The project will ensure that all potential pollution risks and
                     environmental liabilities are assessed, prevented and managed in accordance with ESS1, ESS3 provisions and World
                     Bank Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines for Water and Sanitation, Waste Management Facilities and as
                     stipulated in ESMF and later in ESIA/ESMP/C-ESMP.



                    Jan 25, 2023                                                                                                    Page 10 of 16
                              The World Bank
                              Malawi: Water and Sanitation Project - 1 (P178954)



                     Blantyre has five waste water treatment plants, of which three are partially functional. They are referred to as
                     partially functional because the sites are open to communities in the absence of perimeter fence hence have
                     experienced vandalism, full of aged infrastructure with most of its components that have outlived their lifespan and
                     overloaded system that require expansion to accommodate current wastewater volumes. Due to these challenges,
                     waste water leakage is a potential risk and comes with environmental liability. A thorough risk assessment of waste
                     treatment plants that will be rehabilitated will be conducted, and mitigation measures in accordance with World
                     Bank EHS general guidelines and World Bank EHS guidelines on waste management facilities will be included in the
                     specific ESMPs.
                     During landfill and waste water treatment plant operation, pollution may result from leachates, noxious gas
                     emissions and wastewater effluent discharges. Malawi has more stringent standards on some effluent discharges
                     parameters, as compared to the World Bank EHS guidelines standards for effluent discharge from waste water
                     treatment facilities. However, Blantyre City Council only uses a sub-set of the standards and they have not been
                     compliant as their analyses results have been significantly above the standards. Since some parameters of effluent
                     discharge are strict under national standards while others are stricter under the World Bank standards, a hybrid
                     approach of both National and World Bank stricter standards for differentiated pollutants will be used. No national
                     standards are available for landfill leachates, hence World Bank EHS guidelines for waste management facilities will
                     guide this operation. All stringent standards for drinking water, treated waste water and landfill will be considered.

                     Construction and operation activities will also ensure that resources such as water are used efficiently. The project
                     will encourage use of rain or river water for construction in order to save portable water for drinking and home use.
                     The project will promote simple water harvesting techniques at construction sites and beneficiary household level to




Public Disclosure
                     reduce pressure on potable water. Blantyre is already experiencing inadequacies in the provision of portable water to
                     its residents and the project is design to address this problem by rehabilitation and upgrading of the water
                     distribution network to fix all water leakages hence improving efficiency in water supply to clients.

                     Construction materials will be assessed with respect to their environmental impact and social sustainability. Materials
                     that leave a significant environmental footprint will not be used in the project. The extraction of resources, such as
                     sand and quarry stone, will be done in accordance with national legislation and good international and industry
                     practices.
                     Solid wastes generated by project activities will be managed through measures to be included in the ESMF and later
                     in the in the ESIA/ESMPs/C-ESMPs through characterization and provision of management options.

                     Construction of solar powered pressure boosters in 8 pumping station, designed by the project, is a good way of
                     conserving energy. Malawi is currently experiencing heavy load shedding and investing in alternative clean energy
                     will ensure continuity of pumping water while reserving the scarce electricity energy for other users. However, risks
                     during construction such as land clearing and during operation such as disposal of batteries and solar panels are
                     anticipated. Though this operation is affected by supply chain issues including transportation of solar panels and
                     batteries, and high solar investment cost, their solutions are beyond scope of the project, however, the project will
                     ensure that solar equipment is bought (if imported) at once to reduce impact of transport emissions. The risks
                     associated with installation, operation and maintenance of solar powered boosters will be assessed in relevant
                     ESIA/ESMPs/C-ESMPs and mitigation measures will be included in the ESMP/C-ESMP.




                    Jan 25, 2023                                                                                                    Page 11 of 16
                              The World Bank
                              Malawi: Water and Sanitation Project - 1 (P178954)



                     ESS4 Community Health and Safety
                     The public sanitation construction sites will be undertaken in schools, health centres and markets; Recycling plant
                     and engineered landfill construction will take place at Blantyre City Council-owned land in Chigumula area, that is
                     20km away from Blantyre city, and currently being used by farmers to plant seasonal crops; Water distribution intake
                     rehabilitation activities at Mudi dam; while the rehabilitation and expansion of water distribution mains works and
                     sewerage network will be undertaken along road reserves and in residential communities, commercial and industrial
                     properties. The residents will be potentially exposed to heavy machine operations; loading and off-loading of
                     construction materials and equipment; restricted access to roads and paths for businesses, homes and public
                     facilities; and noise and air pollution and unpleasant odour. Construction works will require working in depths and at
                     height, therefore, exposing communities to risk of falling objects and/or falling in excavated trenches. Sewerage pipes
                     breakage during rehabilitation or compost structures collapsing or releasing leachates is likely to contaminate water
                     sources, especially in informal settlements.
                     Operational phase risks include pollution from effluent discharge, unsafe transportation of solid wastes, including
                     hazadous wastes and odor. The project workers will be accommodated and will also interact with local communities.
                     These interactions could have a negative impact on the social fabric, particularly in informal settlements where
                     income levels are lower than the workers income levels exposing particularly women and young girls to SEA/SH. The
                     mitigation measures are stipulated in the ESMF and will be extensively addressed in site-specific ESIAs/ESMPs. The
                     mitigation measures will be expected to form part of the bidding documents and contractors contracts, that is:
                     Community Engagement Plan, COVID-19 Prevention Plan, Codes of Conduct (CoC); HIV/AIDS Mitigation Plan and
                     Gender Action Plan. The project will therefore prepare necessary mitigation measures commensurate with the
                     moderate GBV/SEA risk rating for the project. However, in some sites—particularly in schools, public markets and



Public Disclosure
                     health centres—the GB/SEA/SH risk is high and therefore the mitigation measures for these sites will take this into
                     account.

                     Infrastructure design and safety: Infrastructure designs will consider climatic and topographic conditions of the city to
                     ensure safety of users during operation stage. During the design phase, mitigation measures will include
                     incorporating views of the communities sourced through the consultations, taking into account the needs and
                     challenges faced by various categories of project beneficiaries including Persons with Disability, the elderly and
                     women in the construction of public facilities. Content and scope of the plans according to the different identified
                     risks have been described in the ESMF and later ESIA/ESMP(s). To mitigate these risks, the project will: (i) undertake
                     community safety awareness campaigns conducted through various platforms which will align with the Stakeholder
                     Engagement Plan that will be developed under ESS10; (ii) involve appropriate experts and other government agencies
                     such as occupational health and safety officers to assist in assessing risk and mitigation planning; (iii) put up project
                     relevant signage; and iv) ensure preparation of operation and maintenance manuals. In the recent past, some areas
                     within Blantyre have experienced impacts of cyclone including heavy rainfalls, high winds, flooding, earthquakes, etc.
                     Landslides pose a risk to communities in informal settlements, based on past cyclone experience, and will be further
                     analyzed during preparation of site specific ESIA/ESMPs and mitigation measures will be included in the ESMPs.
                     World Bank ESH guideline on Waste Management provide guidance on landfill siting and its provisions will be
                     considered in this project. Infrastructure designs will also consider development of emergency preparedness and
                     response plan to respond to natural disasters, landfill operation emergencies, disease outbreaks and any other
                     emergencies.




                    Jan 25, 2023                                                                                                     Page 12 of 16
                              The World Bank
                              Malawi: Water and Sanitation Project - 1 (P178954)



                     Dam Safety: Though the project will not construct or rehabilitate a dam, there are existing dams that the project will
                     draw water from for distribution but the foreseen works will not modify the reservoir surface and downstream flows
                     from the dam. Additionally, the water intake infrastructure will be upgraded. The dam lowest point is around 19
                     meters deep and has a volume of 1.5 million m3 though reduced to capacity of 60% due to cumulative heavy
                     siltation, and considered as a large dam. Though no works will be done on the dam, its proximity to investments of
                     this operation pose potential risks, yet it is not an associated facility. The associated risks may include overflow,
                     downstream impacts, sedimentation, eutrophication. The dam itself does not have operational manual, dam safety
                     plans and emergency preparedness plans. A preliminary virtual assessment of the dam has been done by the World
                     Bank dam safety experts and physical assessment initial assessment by Dam Watch consultant, just to indicatively
                     understand the condition of the dam for decision making moving forward. Both assessments have agreed on the risks
                     due to inadequate flood handling capacity of spillway, no reliable draw down facility, Anti-hills that are growing on
                     the embankment, lack of maintenance and no proper recording of dam activities. The dam embarkment though is
                     confirmed stable and solid. It is recommended therefore that an independent dam safety specialist or an engineering
                     company with dam expertise be hired to carry out a comprehensive dam safety assessment and develop plan on
                     activities that need to be done to uphold the safety of the dam. The dam safety assessment will include : (i) inspect
                     and evaluate the safety status of the existing dam, its appurtenances, and its performance history; (ii) review and
                     evaluate the owner’s operation and maintenance procedures; and (iii) provide a written report of findings and
                     recommendations for any remedial work or safety related measures necessary to upgrade the existing dam to an
                     acceptable standard of safety (iv) consider if the dam could cause significant safety risks, such as an unusually large
                     flood-handling requirement, location in a zone of high seismicity, or potential for significant downstream impacts, in
                     order to verify if additional requirements for large dams should be applied; (v) hydrological studies will be needed as




Public Disclosure
                     the dam was design with hydrological data of the 1950 but the hydrology of the area has significantly changed within
                     the period. The results of the assessment report will be used to develop dam safety plan and a dam safety expert
                     (generalist) will be hired to ensure quality control. Dam safety measures have been included in the ESMF and further,
                     Dam safety plan, Emergency Preparedness Plan and operation and maintenance manual will be developed. The client
                     has committed to implement dam safety measures to safeguard water supply investments under this operation.

                     Traffic and road safety: Construction works will impact traffic flow and road safety for pedestrians, cyclists and
                     motorists increasing the risks of accidents during project implementation. Since works will be implemented in
                     residential, commercial and industrial areas, close to and in public places such as schools, markets and health centres,
                     traffic safety risk is considerably high. Traffic and road safety risks will be assessed and mitigated in all revelant ESIA
                     and ESMPs. The contractors will be required to prepare and implement Traffic/Road Safety Management Plans which
                     will be included C-ESMP.

                     Community exposure to health issues: The solid waste landfill is likely to attract waste pickers which will result in
                     exposure to health and safety risks. The proximity of the landfill to neighboring communities will lead to odour, noise
                     and heavy traffic related risks including risks to pedestrians and motorists due to the heavy traffic from trucks moving
                     in and out of the landfill. The treatment works sites currently do not have perimeter fencing. There are community
                     paths in these sites that connect communities to each other and markets, schools and other public facilities. The
                     project aims to build perimeter fences at the treatment works, therefore alternative paths will have to be provided
                     and factored into the infrastructure design phase. Engagements with community will be strengthened under ESS10 to
                     agree on alternative paths and impacts and risks of such alternative paths will be included in relevant ESIA and or
                     ESMPs.


                    Jan 25, 2023                                                                                                      Page 13 of 16
                              The World Bank
                              Malawi: Water and Sanitation Project - 1 (P178954)




                     Security: The project will not directly hire security personnel; however, contractors may engage security personnel to
                     guard construction materials and other equipment. In such a case, the contractor will ensure safety of communities
                     as set out under ESS4 requirements. Principle of proportionality, Good International Industry Practices and applicable
                     laws will guide client in relation to hiring, rules of conduct, training, equipping and monitoring such workers.
                     Necessary measures will be covered in the relevant ESMP.

                     Emergency management: Emergency procedures will be included in specific activities to address risk of fire, dam
                     flooding, sewerage pipe breaking, accidents among other emergencies.



                     ESS5 Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement
                     The expansion of networks, both sewerage and water pipelines, is expected to require additional land take leading to
                     loss of assets such as land, structures and other assets such as trees. Project activities are likely to negatively impact
                     land rights and usage rights, and economic activities, hence negatively impacting livelihoods. There is likely to be
                     physical displacement of project affected people leading to involuntary resettlement, mainly of residential property
                     and business premises. Vulnerable and disadvantaged groups—such as female headed households, physically
                     challenged, and the poor and ultra-poor households—are also likely to be negatively impacted by the project.
                     Construction of a solar PV pumping station however, will not require any land acquisition because it will be
                     constructed on BWB legally owned premises. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be developed to guide the




Public Disclosure
                     development of the Resettlement Action Plans for the various sites and Livelihood Restoration Plans where
                     applicable. The RPF will frame the entitlements for compensation taking into account the various types of land
                     tenure within the city; usage rights; loss of other assets; the vulnerability criteria to determine which
                     households/PAPs will be provided with special assistance; and livelihood interventions for economically displaced,
                     vulnerable and disadvantaged groups paying special attention to gender aspects, and their needs while ensuring that
                     interventions are provided in a transparent, consistent and equitable manner. There is anticipated loss of livelihood
                     for waste pickers working at the current dumping site (which is conveniently located within close proximity from
                     Blantyre Central Business District (CBD) and industrial areas). The RAP will address the measures that will be
                     undertaken to mitigate loss of income due to the relocation of the dumping site to a new location considerable
                     distance its current location. These measures will be incorporated in the livelihood restoration measures in the RAP.
                     A grievance redress mechanism will be set up to address any resettlement grievances that arise during resettlement
                     activities. The GRM will be detailed in the Stakeholder Engagement Plan that will be developed under ESS10.


                     ESS6 Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources
                     The project will contribute positively to the conservation of biodiversity by promoting organic manure. Construction
                     work carried out for subprojects, such as construction of solar PV pumping station, sewer network rehabilitation,
                     water distribution network rehabilitation and expansion, engineered landfill construction may involve risks to natural
                     habitats and biodiversity. All subprojects will be screened using the ESMF for risks to biodiversity and ecosystem
                     services. Any sub-projects located in areas where adverse impacts on protected areas such as zoo and graveyards,
                     natural and critical habitats are possible, are to be screened out . Where adverse impacts are not expected, an ESIA



                    Jan 25, 2023                                                                                                      Page 14 of 16
                              The World Bank
                              Malawi: Water and Sanitation Project - 1 (P178954)



                     or an ESMP will be prepared that clearly applying the mitigation hierarchy in the management of biodiversity risks
                     and impacts, and development of biodiversity management plans where necessary.


                     ESS7 Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional Local Communities
                     Malawi does not have any Indigenous people hence the standard does not apply and the project as it is being
                     implemented in urban areas with no communities meeting the criteria in ESS 7.


                     ESS8 Cultural Heritage
                     Construction activities due to the expansion of water and sewer networks will require excavations at various project
                     sites. Therefore, there is a possibility that physical assets of religious, cultural, historical, social or economic value will
                     be negatively impacted. During analysis of alternative project sites, cultural heritage sites will be avoided. These
                     impacts will be managed in accordance with provisions of cultural heritage standard, ESS8. The mitigation measures
                     to address the impacts on cultural heritage and possible impacts on intangible cultural heritage will be addressed in
                     the project ESIA/ESMPs. These will identify appropriate mitigation measures including the adoption and
                     implementation of Chance Find Procedures for possibility of future finds during project implementation. Chance Find
                     Procedures will form part of the contractual obligation of the contractors in the project.


                     ESS9 Financial Intermediaries




Public Disclosure
                     There are no FI involved in the project


                     C. Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                     OP 7.50 Projects on International Waterways                                                                                 Yes


                     OP 7.60 Projects in Disputed Areas                                                                                          No




                    B.3. Reliance on Borrower’s policy, legal and institutional framework, relevant to the Project risks and impacts

                     Is this project being prepared for use of Borrower Framework?                                                               No


                     Areas where “Use of Borrower Framework” is being considered:
                     None


                     IV. CONTACT POINTS

                     World Bank

                    Jan 25, 2023                                                                                                           Page 15 of 16
                              The World Bank
                              Malawi: Water and Sanitation Project - 1 (P178954)



                     Contact:             Odete Duarte Muximpua              Title:           Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                              Specialist

                     Telephone No:        5394+3230 / 265-1-770611           Email:           omuximpua@worldbank.org

                     Contact:             Francis Samson Nkoka               Title:           Senior Disaster Risk Management
                                                                                              Specialist

                     Telephone No:        5394+3225 / 265-1-770-611          Email:           fnkoka@worldbank.org

                     Borrower/Client/Recipient
                     Borrower:              Ministry of Finance and Economic Affairs

                     Implementing Agency(ies)
                     Implementing Agency: Blantyre Water Board



                     V. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000


Public Disclosure
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     VI. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):               Francis Samson Nkoka, Odete Duarte Muximpua

                     Practice Manager (ENR/Social)      Helene Monika Carlsson Rex Cleared on 24-Jan-2023 at 15:24:1 GMT-05:00

                     Safeguards Advisor ESSA            Julia Bucknall (SAESSA) Concurred on 25-Jan-2023 at 11:59:17 GMT-05:00




                    Jan 25, 2023                                                                                                 Page 16 of 16
