Public Disclosure Authorized
                                         The World Bank
                                         Malawi: Water and Sanitation Project - 1 (P178954)

                                f




Public Disclosure Authorized



                                                      Project Information Document (PID)



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                      Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 25-Jan-2023 | Report No: PIDA34832




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Jan 08, 2023                                                                                         Page 1 of 14
          The World Bank
          Malawi: Water and Sanitation Project - 1 (P178954)



   BASIC INFORMATION

 OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA
  A. Basic Project Data

   Country                                       Project ID                Project Name             Parent Project ID (if any)
   Malawi                                        P178954                   Malawi: Water and
                                                                           Sanitation Project - 1
   Region                      Estimated Appraisal Date                    Estimated Board Date     Practice Area (Lead)
   EASTERN AND SOUTHERN AFRICA 25-Jan-2023                                 29-Mar-2023              Water

   Financing Instrument                          Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency
   Investment Project Financing                  Ministry of Finance and   Blantyre Water Board
                                                 Economic Affairs

   Proposed Development Objective(s)

   To increase access to improved water supply and safely managed sanitation services in Blantyre Metropolitan Area,
   and to enhance the operational and financial efficiency of the Blantyre Water Board.

   Components
   Water Supply Improvements
   Priority Sanitation Investments
   Institutional Capacity Strengthening
   Technical Assistance and Project Management Support
   Contingency Emergency Response



   PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

  SUMMARY                    -NewFin1




   Total Project Cost                                                                                                   134.00
   Total Financing                                                                                                     134.00
                             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                         130.00
   Financing Gap                                                                                                           0.00


  DETAILS      -NewFinEnh1




   World Bank Group Financing

      International Development Association (IDA)                                                                       130.00


Jan 08, 2023                                                                                                          Page 2 of 14
          The World Bank
          Malawi: Water and Sanitation Project - 1 (P178954)



         IDA Grant                                                                                                                            130.00

   Non-World Bank Group Financing

      Counterpart Funding                                                                                                                       4.00
         Borrower/Recipient                                                                                                                     4.00

   Environmental and Social Risk Classification
   Substantial

   Decision
   The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate


   Other Decision (as needed)


   B. Introduction and Context

   Country Context
  1.     Poverty remains stubbornly high in Malawi. With over half of its population living below the national poverty
  line, which has remained virtually unchanged in the last decade, Malawi remains one of the poorest countries in the
  World. Between 2010 and 2019, Real Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth per capita remained largely flat and has had
  a very limited impact on poverty reduction.1 Malawi ranked 169 out of 189 countries on the United Nations Human
  Development Index2 and 142 out of 173 on the World Bank's Human Capital Index3 in 2021. Although Malawian
  households have diversified to other sources, such as short-term labor (ganyu),4 agriculture has remained the main
  income source over the last ten years, albeit with persistently low returns. The transition from agriculture to higher-
  return activities has been slowed, partly due to a lack of access to financing, market constraints, skill gaps, and high
  vulnerability to shocks.
  2.      Malawi is highly vulnerable to exogenous shocks. According to the Malawi Poverty Assessment (MPA), for every
  three Malawians that moved out of poverty between 2010 and 2019, four fell back due to the impact of weather shocks.
  The high vulnerability is driven by an overreliance on natural resource-intense economic activities, limited infrastructure,
  high population density, and the associated catchment degradation. Climate change scenarios suggest that Malawi will
  see increasing climatic variability, higher temperatures, longer dry periods, and more erratic and intense rainfall events.5
  While the country was still recovering from Cyclone Idai of 2019, tropical storms Ana and Gombe hit parts of the country
  in early 2022, directly affecting close to one million people, with USD 326.0 million in damages and economic loss.6 The


           1 World Bank (2022) Malawi Poverty Assessment
           2 UN Human Development Index tables
           3 https://datacatalog.worldbank.org/int/
           4 A type of labor hired on a daily basis or other short-term period, in a form of piecework weeding or ridging on other people’s

           farms or in non-farm sectors, such as construction or gardening.
           5 Government of Malawi (2017). Strategic Program for Climate Resilience: Pilot Program on Climate Resilience (PPCR).
           6 From GRADE Assessment



Jan 08, 2023                                                                                                                              Page 3 of 14
          The World Bank
          Malawi: Water and Sanitation Project - 1 (P178954)


  combined effects of floods and droughts have caused losses estimated at 1.7 percent of Malawi's GDP annually.7 Further,
  the global COVID-19 pandemic dampened Malawi's medium-term growth prospects. Economic growth fell from 5.4
  percent in 2019 to 0.8 percent in 2020 before partially rebounding to 2.2 percent in 2021.8 Amid uncertainties following
  a number of severe shocks, including the impacts of the Russia-Ukraine war, economic growth is projected to decline in
  2022 but increase modestly in the medium term.
  3.      Women face disproportionate disadvantages in accessing services, affecting their performance in different
  economic activities. For instance, in the presence of low access to electricity and water, women also tend to spend more
  time than men collecting firewood and water.9 In 85 percent of Malawian households, women are responsible for
  collecting water.10 Similarly, the lack of WASH facilities is particularly challenging for girls, who, in many cases, are forced
  to stay at home during the menstrual period due to the absence of adequate sanitation facilities in their schools. This
  limits school attendance and retention for girls, which in turn limits their future livelihood opportunities. Among the key
  policy actions proposed by the Malawi Poverty Assessment to enhance economic growth is the need to address
  determinants of unequal opportunity, especially low completion rates for secondary education, by keeping girls in school
  much longer, through improved water sources and sanitation facilities at schools.
  4.      Urbanization has slowed down over the past decade, limiting the country's opportunities for economic growth.
  Whereas cities are known as productive engines for growth where labor is matched with employment opportunities,
  Malawi has experienced a deceleration of urbanization in contrast to its regional peers.11 The proportion of urban
  inhabitants increased only by one percent between 2010 and 2019, which correlates to the country's poverty reduction
  trends. A key driver for urbanization in Malawi relates to job opportunities. In the past decade, about 39 percent of the
  internal migrants from rural to urban areas were seeking job or business opportunities.12 However, cities suffer from
  inadequate access and reliability of most basic infrastructure services, which add to production costs and weaken the
  competitiveness of Malawi's private sector. The availability of services and utilities, such as water supply and sewerage,
  in built-in city footprints, can significantly contribute to agglomeration economies and densification of services and
  reduce urban sprawling, a major challenge affecting the productivity of Malawian cities.13 Addressing the urban
  infrastructure and service gaps is therefore critical to boosting urban productivity and supporting structural
  transformation for Malawi.
  5.      Unreliable services and lagging infrastructure development are significantly hindering the private sector's
  growth. According to the World Bank's global study14 on the economics of water scarcity, a single water interruption in
  an urban firm can reduce its revenue by more than eight percent. And if that firm is in the informal sector, as many are
  in developing countries, sales decline by 35 percent, ruining livelihoods and stagnating economic growth. As part of the
  2014 World Bank Enterprise Survey (WBES)15 in Malawi, firms reported experiencing an average of 6.7 electricity outages
  lasting about 3.5 hours. Firms also reported 5.3 days of insufficient water in a typical month, which is the highest
  amongst comparable countries in the region and more than double the regional average for countries in Sub-Saharan
  Africa (1.8 days in a typical month). Water outages were reported more prominently by enterprises in Blantyre compared
  to the other parts of the country. Except for the capital city, Lilongwe, much of the existing water supply infrastructure

           7 https://www.gfdrr.org/en/feature-story/reducing-impact-natural-disasters-malawi
           8 World Bank (2022) Malawi Economic Monitor June 2022.
           9 World Bank (2022) Malawi Poverty Assessment
           10 National Statistics Office of Malawi (2021) Malawi Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey 2019-20, Survey Findings Report
           11 https://databank.worldbank.org/source/world-development-indicators
           12 National Statistics Office of Malawi (2020) The Fifth Integrated Household Survey 2020 Report
           13 Government of Malawi (2019) National Urban Policy
           14 Damania, R. et al (2017). Uncharted Waters: The New Economics of Water Scarcity and Variability. Washington DC, The

           World Bank
           15 https://microdata.worldbank.org/index.php/catalog/2358



Jan 08, 2023                                                                                                                         Page 4 of 14
          The World Bank
          Malawi: Water and Sanitation Project - 1 (P178954)


  in the country is aged and operating significantly below the optimum efficiency levels. Furthermore, the water and
  electricity utilities are failing to cope with the population growth and increased demand. Major donor-financed
  programs were unable to adequately address the infrastructure deficit, given the focus on expansion and less on
  improving the operational efficiency of the systems. Even where investments were made, these have not translated into
  improved services due to the weak institutional capacity of the service providers, highlighting the need for a more
  comprehensive approach towards the provision of sustainable, green, affordable, reliable services to businesses;
  through a combination of enabling infrastructure and service delivery reforms.
  6.     Blantyre City, the second-largest urban center in Malawi, needs urgent infrastructure interventions. With close
  to 900,000 inhabitants, and an average growth rate of 2.8 percent per annum, the city has struggled to accommodate
  its growing population in a planned manner, despite its vibrant urban economy and historical and cultural heritage.
  Nearly 70 percent of the city's population lives in unplanned, informal settlements characterized by high poverty rates,
  overcrowding, poor road access, and limited access to basic services, such as electricity, water, and sanitation. Low and
  unreliable energy and water supply access have also been among the key constraints to private sector development, in
  addition to unstable macroeconomic conditions and limited access to financing, thus, limiting the city's capacity to
  further contribute to the country's economic growth.16
   Sectoral and Institutional Context

  7.      Water and sanitation service reliability is a major challenge in Malawi. With 70 percent access to basic water
  supply and 27 percent access to sanitation, 17 the country is significantly off-track to achieving the SDG for water.18 19
  Despite appearing to be better off than some of its regional peers, the absolute number of unserved people has
  increased in the last ten years (by 0.9 million for water supply and 1.4 million for sanitation), and official access figures
  often mask the poor quality of services. Globally, Malawi ranked 5 out of the top 10 countries (with a population greater
  than 1 million) with the highest proportion of people at risk of frequent water shortages and 3 for the highest proportion
  of people lacking sanitation. 20 Although there is an established service delivery framework for water supply in urban
  centers and small towns, all the urban water utilities struggle with high operational inefficiencies, with close to 50
  percent non-revenue water (NRW); limited coverage, particularly in the peri-urban areas where the poor and vulnerable
  reside; and the high operating expense ratio, at more than 1.5 and low revenue collection efficiency at less than 80
  percent on average. Service provision for sanitation in general and rural water supply is less clear. Rural communities
  rely mostly on boreholes operated through community management structures, most of which lack the technical and
  managerial skills to sustainably manage its operations. Between 2016/17 and 2017/18, water point functionality fell
  from 77 to 71 percent, mostly due to a lack of preventive maintenance.21 Efforts to improve functionality in rural areas
  have only been centered on training area mechanics and linking these to shop partners who stock parts. Further, the
  sector's lack of gender diversity undermines the performance of these institutions, particularly in responding to the
  needs of a diverse customer base. Currently, women are underrepresented in the Malawian water sector, particularly
  in decision-making roles, with less than 10 percent of supervisory and managerial staff being female in water utilities.




           16 UN-Habitat(2011) Blantyre City Profile
           17 https://washdata.org/data/household#!/mwi
           18 https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/memberstates/malawi
           19 https://dashboards.sdgindex.org/profiles/malawi accessed on November 29, 2022
           20 Sadoff, C. et all (2015). Securing Water, Sustaining Growth: GWP/OECD Task Force on Water Security and Sustainable

           Growth, University of Oxford, UK
           21 GoM (2022) Malawi Climate Resilience WASH Financing strategy



Jan 08, 2023                                                                                                                       Page 5 of 14
          The World Bank
          Malawi: Water and Sanitation Project - 1 (P178954)


  8.     The impacts of poor water supply and sanitation on public health are severe. The Ministry of Health estimates
  an average of 13 million cases of diarrhea per year in children under five,22 with about 90 percent caused by poor water,
  sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) services. About 37 percent of the children under age five in Malawi are short for their
  age due to the long-term effects of poor sanitation, consequent diarrhea, and malnutrition, and 20 percent are severely
  stunted.23Unsafe water and sanitation have exacerbated the impacts of the Covid-19 pandemic, and the country is
  currently racing to contain a Cholera outbreak due to poor access to water and sanitation since the aftermath of Tropical
  Storm Ana. As of January 3, 2023, there were 18,676 reported cases, with 625 deaths across the country since the
  outbreak, with Blantyre District registering the highest number of cases. Emergency response support is being provided
  by multiple partners, including the World Bank, following the Government appeal. World Bank response includes US$
  100 million to provide emergency support and enable the continued delivery of essential health services in Malawi under
  the Emergency Project to Protect Essential Health Services (P180231), and US$ 17 million for essential medicines under
  the Malawi COVID-19 Emergency Response and Health Systems Preparedness Project (P173806) CERC activations. These
  interventions provide life-saving health services for Cholera treatment. However, a longer-term approach is needed to
  address the structural WASH service delivery gaps that lead to Cholera outbreaks, particularly in high-risk areas such as
  Blantyre City.
  9.     The recently established Ministry of Water and Sanitation (MoWS) oversees the water sector, including water
  resources management, water supply and sanitation. Urban and small-town water supply is under the responsibility of
  the two city water boards (Lilongwe and Blantyre) and the three regional water boards (Northern, Central, and
  Southern). The water boards report to MoWS on technical matters and to the Department of Statutory Corporations
  (DSC)—under the Office of President and Cabinet—on policy issues (such as financial, administrative, and managerial
  oversight). The Water Works Act, the National Water Policy and the Sanitation Policy are currently under review to
  enhance the sector policy framework and accelerate investments to cover the access gap. However, further reforms are
  required to enhance the governance of urban water utilities, including establishing a regulatory function to incentivize
  service delivery efficiency improvements, transparency, and customer engagement, implementing cost-recovery tariffs,
  mobilizing financing, and enabling the expansion of services to close the gap. Moreover, a clearer and more robust
  service delivery framework is needed to manage rural WASH services more efficiently, with a potential expansion of the
  Boards services to enhance the sustainability of services.
  10.     Addressing the WASH challenges in Malawi would require a strategic approach to the sector's structural
  challenges preventing further improvements in access and quality of services. The GoM is committed to providing
  adequate, reliable, and sustainable water and sanitation services to Malawi's urban, peri-urban, and rural populations.
  The Water Sector Public Sector Expenditure Review (PER) of 2020 indicates that despite limited fiscal space, GoM has
  increased budget allocations to water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) from 0.39 percent of total government
  expenditure in 2014/15 to 0.49 percent in 2018/19. These improvements come as a result of the GoM recognition that
  investments in water supply and sanitation (WSS) have the potential to harness human capital and enhance productivity
  in the country. However, the sector faces two major interrelated challenges – a lack of investment financing to match
  needs and the inefficiency of the water utilities and service providers, which is exacerbated by their weak corporate
  governance. Firstly, there is a need to shift from the traditional water source/production expansion into prioritizing and
  fast-tracking investments that result in rapid improvements in the reliability and resilience of water production and
  distribution services. Second, enhance the support to water service providers with incentives to reduce operational
  inefficiencies by linking public financing for capital expenditure and tariff reviews to verifiable improvements in
  efficiency, governance, and innovation. Third, the Government should play its part in strengthening the financial position
  of water utilities by minimizing the accumulation of unpaid utility bills through the adoption of prepaid services for all

           22 https://www.health.gov.mw/index.php/diarrhoel-diseases
           23 NPC (2021) Cost-benefit analysis of interventions to reduce the prevalence of stunting in Malawi - Technical Report



Jan 08, 2023                                                                                                                        Page 6 of 14
          The World Bank
          Malawi: Water and Sanitation Project - 1 (P178954)


  Government agencies and departments. Finally, the water service providers can adopt greener and more efficient
  processes to build resilience to external shocks and contribute to the country's environmental sustainability.
  11.     The MoWS prepared a water sector development program concept24to improve access to water and sanitation
  services, enhance climate resilience, promote economic growth, and support poverty alleviation. The concept builds
  upon the key country and sector planning instruments: (i) the Malawi Vision 2063 (MW2063), which aims to transform
  Malawi into a wealthy and self-reliant industrialized 'upper-middle-income country' by the year 2063,25 (ii) the national
  climate resilience financing strategy (2022 -2032) which outlines the path to cover the financing gap and ensure
  sustainability considering the climate change scenarios, (iii) water sector investment plan (2012-2030) which targets full
  water supply coverage and at least 40 percent sanitation coverage by 2030, and (iv) the water utility reform agenda
  initiated in 2020 to enhance the operational efficiency and quality of service of the water boards. The program design
  relies on key lessons from the National Water Development Projects (NWDP) I (P001667) and II (P096336), and the
  Lilongwe Water and Sanitation Project (LWSP - P163794), where investments in operational efficiency and targeted
  infrastructure have resulted in significant service quality improvement and expansion, with Lilongwe Water Board, fully
  covering its city boundaries and moving into the settlements in the surrounding areas. As a sequence to the LWSP, the
  concept proposes Blantyre City as the next priority in the urbanization strategy outlined in the MW2063, in parallel with
  performance-based financing for small towns and rural growth centers water supply schemes in an accelerated
  investment path to: (i) gradually reduce the infrastructure deficit, (ii) improve service delivery capacity, and (iii) close
  the gap to achieve universal access to water supply in urban areas by 2030. Key proposed reforms include (i) incentivizing
  the water utilities to improve operational and financial efficiency through performance-based financing; (ii) instituting
  a tariff framework that covers recurrent and replacement of short-life assets; and (iii) investing in sector capacity
  building to enhance investment planning and monitoring, and technical and advisory support to the water utilities.
  12.    Blantyre City's water supply system is under strain and is expected to worsen with increasing climate change
  impacts. Walkers’ Ferry (WF) on the Shire River is the city's main water source, accounting for 80 percent of the water
  supplied to Blantyre. The other 20 percent comes from Mudi Dam and Likhubula River. The average water production
  (88,700 m3/d) only covers two-thirds of the current estimated demand. The city is already facing water shortages, and
  these are expected to become severe over time with the increased intensity of climate-related events such as floods
  and droughts. Blantyre water supply is highly vulnerable to water shocks, with frequent water supply interruptions due
  to high sediment load, deteriorating water quality, and aging infrastructure. In February 2022, in the aftermath of
  Cyclone Ana, Blantyre residents were left without water for more than three days, as both sources at Shire and Mudi
  were loaded with sediments from the flooded waters.
  13.      Blantyre Water Board (BWB),26 the city's water supply utility, is facing major operational and financial
  challenges. With an existing reticulation system of about 1,407 km, the water supply system currently meets a total
  average water consumption of 42,000 m3/day. This services around 87 percent of the population through about 67,000
  individual connections, 830 water kiosks (for communal supply), and 1,900 commercial and industrial connections. The
  utility is experiencing financial and operational stress resulting from the technical complexities and high energy costs
  relating to high head pumping, with long rising mains and pipe aging that is leading to elevated operational costs and
  NRW. Energy costs currently account for 46 percent of the total operating costs, and NRW is estimated at 53 percent.
  BWB's financial performance remains highly unstable, with working ratios above 1.4 over the past five years,
  representing a continuous erosion of equity and reserves. Collection rates have been stagnant at around 95 percent.



           24 Ministry of Water and Sanitation (2022) National Water and Sanitation Development Program (2023-2030) concept Note
           25 https://npc.mw/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/ENGLISH-VERSION.pdf
           26 BWB is a statutory corporation established in 1995 with responsibility for water and sewerage services in Blantyre City



Jan 08, 2023                                                                                                                            Page 7 of 14
          The World Bank
          Malawi: Water and Sanitation Project - 1 (P178954)


  14.     Poor sanitation is among the key public health issues and significantly affects the quality of life of Blantyre
  residents. The provision of sanitation services is currently under the responsibility of the Blantyre City Council (BCC),
  which lacks the financial and technical muscle to adequately maintain the services. The sewerage infrastructure covers
  about 16 percent of the population, while the majority rely on onsite sanitation systems. Most of the sewage generated
  in the city ends up in the environment without any treatment, either through leaks in the sewer lines or discharges from
  the five wastewater treatment sites to several streams across the city. Recorded BOD effluent values for Soche, Blantyre,
  and Limbe indicate discharge values of 130mg/l, 382mg/l, and 86mg/l, respectively, against Malawi's Standard discharge
  value of 20mg/l. This situation is exacerbated by poor solid waste management. Less than 50 percent of the city's 472
  tons of solid waste generated daily27 is collected and partially disposed of in an open dumping space, while the remaining
  waste ends up in the open spaces in peri-urban areas, streams, roadsides, and drains. The heavy pollution of rivers and
  streams has led to breeding disease vectors, loss of aquatic life and recreation activities, and a poor general outlook of
  the city. The updated National Determined Contribution highlights the rehabilitation and reconstruction of wastewater
  treatment plants (WTPs) in Blantyre as a mitigation priority with adaptation benefits.28
  15.     BWB and BCC29 are embarking on an investment program to enhance the city's water supply and sanitation
  services. Both institutions have traditionally been implementing small interventions to minimize the critical operational
  and service delivery challenges. However, these have resulted in limited progress so far, primarily due to limited financial
  resources. A new package of investments includes a series of interventions designed to address the immediate and
  medium-term water security and sanitation needs and support a long-term solution with the following sub-projects: the
  construction and upgrade of the water sources, construction of independent power sources, network upgrade and
  efficiency improvement, sewerage system upgrade and solid waste management improvements. The Blantyre Water
  and Sanitation Program is estimated at US$ 610 million (Table 1) and is expected to benefit one million people, with
  complementary but independent interventions to close the access gap. So far, US$ 150 million have been secured from
  India Exim Bank for the upgrade of the water source and associated infrastructure on the Shire River and the
  construction of a new solar power plant, which will cover the energy requirements at the water production level. An
  additional US$ 30 million are under preparation from the African Development Bank (AfDB) to finance a partial network
  upgrade and expansion. Further, US$ 130 million are being proposed for IDA financing, with construction works planned
  to commence in early 2024. With this planned financing, the program is short of US$ 305 million, required to ensure
  universal access to the Blantyre residents and outskirts, further diversify the energy source, and enhance solid waste
  management.

   C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

  Development Objective
  16.   To increase access to improved water supply and sanitation services in Blantyre Metropolitan Area and to
  enhance the operational and financial efficiency of the Blantyre Water Board.

   Key Results
  17.     The achievement of the project development objectives will be monitored and measured by the following key
  results indicators:

           27 https://africancleancities.org/assets/data/Organization/Blantyre_EN.pdf
           28 Malawi: Updated National Determined Contribution, Government of Malawi, July 2021
           29 . The local Government Act of 1998, as amended in 2010, and the National Decentralization Policy of 1998, mandates

           Blantyre City Council to govern and manage the City of Blantyre.

Jan 08, 2023                                                                                                                       Page 8 of 14
          The World Bank
          Malawi: Water and Sanitation Project - 1 (P178954)


           •     People provided with an improved water source
           •     People provided with access to an improved sanitation facility.
           •     Reduced non-revenue water in water-stressed areas.
           •     Working ratio for BWB.

   D. Project Description

  18.      Building upon the experience and lessons from the ongoing water supply service delivery efficiency
  improvements in Lilongwe and the recently developed concept by MoWS, a Series of Projects (SOP) is proposed to
  improve urban water supply and sanitation access and to support the development of a comprehensive national
  water program for the country. GoM's vision is to leverage World Bank support in a manner that aligns with the
  MW2063, building upon the experience and lessons from the ongoing water supply service delivery efficiency
  improvements in Lilongwe, and be aligned with the Water Sector Investment Plan and the Malawi Climate Resilience
  WASH Financing strategy. The SoP signals the commitment of both parties to a programmatic set of investments in the
  water sector, with sustained support contingent on overall implementation performance and achievement of results,
  and is justified by the following reasons. First, the SoP is built on a strong foundation of tested approaches and tools to
  enhance utility efficiency and access to water and sanitation services and provides an opportunity for evidence-based
  learning. Second, it incentivizes the GoM to remain focused on effective reforms to turn around non-performing water
  utilities into profit-making entities, thus reducing the fiscal burden on the central government. Third, it allows for long-
  term support for institutional strengthening, which is critical for the sustainability of water supply and sanitation
  services.
  19.     The overarching objective of the program is to improve access to safely managed water and sanitation in
  Malawi. In the medium and long term, the SoP is expected to contribute to improving the quality of life and
  competitiveness of urban and rural growth centers in Malawi. By the end of the program, in 2030, the GoM expects to
  (i) upgrade and expand water supply and sanitation reticulation systems and deliver improved access to water and
  sanitation to over 3.5 million people, (ii) improve the resilience of water supply systems by investing in greener water
  infrastructure, non-revenue water reduction, energy-efficient facilities and explore innovative solutions for improving
  water supply efficiency, (iii) enhance the investment planning and asset management capacity of the water boards and
  other water service providers in the country, and (iv) strengthen skills capacity for providing water and sanitation
  services. The program will also support the sector regulation to strengthen governance, increase service delivery and
  financial efficiency, and enhance resilience against external shocks such as climate, financial and health-related shocks.
  20.    The program will consist of a combination of financing instruments to maximize investment efficiency and
  incentives for strengthening institutional capacity, operational and financial efficiency, and service quality. Over the
  next eight years (Table 2), the GoM intends to mobilize US$ 700 million (US$ 200 million for phases I and II each, and
  US$300 for phase III) to finance water and sanitation infrastructure, with a proposed envelope of US$ 475 million IDA
  financing.
                                 Table 1 - Proposed SoP for Water and Sanitation Investments in Malawi

                   2023       2024        2025          2026           2027       2028         2029             2030
               SoP-1: Blantyre Water and Sanitation investments
                                     SoP-2: Water utility efficiency improvements
                                                                SoP-3: National water development project


Jan 08, 2023                                                                                                        Page 9 of 14
            The World Bank
            Malawi: Water and Sanitation Project - 1 (P178954)


      21.     SoP-1 will use an Investment Project Financing (IPF) to commence with the urgent and critical water supply
      efficiency improvements and priority sanitation interventions in Blantyre (similar to ongoing infrastructure
      investments in Lilongwe) and a set of technical assistance (TA) activities to prepare for the subsequent phases. The
      infrastructure investments will be coupled with an operational and financial turnaround program for the BWB supported
      through a performance-based financing mechanism (PBFM), focusing on staff productivity, climate-resilient planning,
      and operational systems to gradually improve its service delivery capacity. Along with the Blantyre investments, SoP-1
      will finance a set of preparatory TAs to improve the readiness of the next generation of priority investments for water-
      scarce areas, the establishment of a water regulation function for water and sanitation services, and policy dialogue and
      tools for the establishment of a performance-based investment financing mechanism. By the end of SoP-1, BWB is
      expected to have achieved a working ratio below 1 and shown a consistent improvement in its key operational and
      financial indicators, while MoWS is expected to have defined a clear roadmap, including priority reforms and financing
      tools to cover the service gap in rural and small towns. Under SoP-1, the GoM will also implement priority Cholera
      response activities to contain the outbreak in the priority hotspots. Beyond the IDA financing, GoM intends to mobilize
      additional resources from other development partners, to address urgent needs in priority small towns. The proposed
      project costs and financing is presented in Table 3.
                                                  Table 2 –Project Costs and Financing

               Components                                                   Estimated Cost         Financing (US$ million)
                                                                              (US$ Million)   IDA Grant   Counterpart financing
               1   Water supply improvements                                   74.50             72.81            1.69
               2   Priority Sanitation Investments                             34.00             32.18            1.82
               3   Institutional Capacity Strengthening                        21.00             20.51           0.49*
               4   Technical Assistance and Project Management                 4.50              4.50             0.00
               5   Contingency Emergency Response                              0.00              0.00             0.00
                                                                 Total        134.00            130.00            4.00
                   *BWB contribution
      22.     SoP-2 will sequentially expand support to other water boards on priority service gaps investments in selected
      small towns and performance improvements using an IPF with PBGs. The estimated IDA envelope is US$ 150 million
      and will cover small towns and growth centers. Under this SoP, the MoWS is expected to consolidate the reforms
      initiated at BWB, with continued financing and institutional support required for the utility to reach long-term financial
      sustainability and develop the legal framework and tools and facilitate the dialogue to enable the water boards to enter
      service delivery agreements with selected rural growth centers, where technically and financially feasible to construct,
      upgrade and expand small, piped schemes. Rural schemes with clearly defined management mechanisms and climate-
      friendly and innovative interventions will be given priority. The second phase is expected to cover about 1 million people
      with improved access to water and sanitation services and set up the institutional framework to sustainably expand
      investments into the rural areas.
      23.    SoP-3 will focus on supporting a comprehensive service delivery framework to expand access (possibly using a
      wholesale program for results-PforR instrument), extending the mandate of the regional water boards to support rural
      growth centers using a Green, Resilient and Inclusive Development (GRID) approach. The estimated IDA financing is US$
      200 million. Access to financing will be linked to clearly defined and verifiable targets on coverage, operational efficiency
      (NRW, hours of supply, pressure, operational water points, etc), and financial efficiency. Water boards will be
      encouraged to explore innovative technology and greener interventions to enhance their resilience and to expand
      partnerships and service delivery to the rural growth centers. This phase shall also cover rural areas where access to
      clean water and sanitation is still a challenge and is expected to benefit about 2 million people.
  .


Jan 08, 2023                                                                                                             Page 10 of 14
          The World Bank
          Malawi: Water and Sanitation Project - 1 (P178954)


  .
  Legal Operational Policies
                                                                        Triggered?

   Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                          Yes

   Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60                                   No


  Summary of Assessment of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
  .

  24.     The project overall risk is rated Substantial. The activities have positive environmental and social impacts such as
  improved access to potable water, improved sanitation and hygiene, improved waste management, clean energy access,
  improved household economy, improved city aesthetic and reduced gender vulnerabilities for women and girls due to
  long distances taken to fetch water. Negative environmental and social impacts and risks are anticipated and these are
  occupational health and safety risks, community health and safety risks, soil erosion, waste management risks, the
  pollution of air, water, and soil, biodiversity, water-borne diseases; COVID 19 and other communicable and
  noncommunicable diseases, waste and solid waste handling, water related vector borne diseases, possible hazardous
  gasses, risks related to losing land and other assets, and loss of income and reduction of economic activity, risk of
  restricting access to land and other assets during construction, pollution of water stream and natural habitats,
  sedimentation, climate vulnerability risks, environmental liabilities and increased run-off and Gender Based
  Violence/Sexual Exploitation and Abuse-Sexual Harassment (GBV/SEA-SH, release of odors due to inappropriate
  handling of fecal sludge, solid waste and sewerage; eruption of infectious diseases (e.g. infectious diseases including
  cholera, typhoid, hepatitis, ascariasis, and schistosomiasis), within the communities and among the project workers
  emanating from fecal sludge collection conducted not in accordance with safe standards or in case of an accident or a
  weather event; contamination of water during maintenance of water pipes; traffic safety management during
  transportation of waste; degradation of the local environment due to accidental leakage from landfill; composting/fecal
  sludge management plant releasing fecal material into water courses and open ground; accidents or breaking of the
  infrastructure, heavy winds and flooding hence taking away all sludge to the rest of flooded area and stream, risk of
  waste contact by any unauthorized entry in case of compromised site management, management of a scenario when
  there is shortage in recommended PPE, safety of compost, financial preparedness for any emergency such as breakage
  etc.
  25.    Both Blantyre Water Board and Blantyre City Council have institutional capacity on environmental management
  but not social and gender. BWB has three environmental management personnel while BCC has four in different
  departments. Both institutions have experience with World Bank safeguards policy. PIU will be established and will have
  environmental and Health and Safety specialist and Social and Gender Specialist who will be supported by institution
  personnel.
  26.    The project will take the framework approach since some of the sites are not yet known and other activity details
  are not yet available. Environmental and Social management Framework (ESMF) with therefore be prepared to manage
  the above risks associated with ESS1, ESS2, ESS3, ESS4, ESS6, ESS8 and ESS10 and include a screening procedure and
  guidance on the development of site- specific ESIA and/or ESMPs while Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be
  prepared to manage all risks associated with ESS5. The RPF will deliniate the content of the RAPs which will be prepared
  once the sites are known with more certainty. All RAPs will be accompanied by a set of targeted livelihood restoration
  measures for the PAPs as well as waste pickers, if available. Other instruments that will be prepared include Labor

Jan 08, 2023                                                                                                       Page 11 of 14
            The World Bank
            Malawi: Water and Sanitation Project - 1 (P178954)


      Management Procedures (LMP), including a worker Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM); the Stakeholder Engagement
      Plan (SEP) will include project Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM); and an Environmental and Social Commitment Plan
      (ESCP) that will be agreed on with the borrower and will set out the substantive measures and actions required for the
      project to meet environmental and social requirements over a specified period of time prior to project appraisal. The
      project’s GBV and SEA/SH risks have been rated moderate and SEA/SH Prevention and Response Action Plan, and an
      Accountability and Response Framework will be included in the ESMF.

      E. Implementation

      Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

      27.    BWB will be the implementing entity for SoP-1. A project implementation unit (PIU) has been established at
      BWB, under the Directorate of Technical Services, which is responsible for managing capital projects for BWB,
      including the proposed project. The PIU has a dedicated team of specialists comprising a Project Manager, a financial
      management specialist, a procurement officer, five civil and hydraulic engineers, an environmental officer, a social
      development officer, a monitoring and evaluation officer, and a communications specialist. A Project Support Team
      (PST) has also been established at BCC to coordinate the implementation of sanitation activities. The PST has a project
      coordinator, a sanitation specialist, a community development specialist, and an environmental and social officer. The
      Bank has assessed the current PIU setup and concluded that it meets the basic requirements for implementing a project
      of this scale. However, to mitigate risks to the project, BWB has agreed to strengthen the PIU in the areas of
      procurement, environmental and social safeguards, and communications, through the recruitment of additional staff
      and/or consultants as needed.
      28.     At the national level, the Ministry of Water and Sanitation (MoWS) will provide overall policy direction and
      oversight of the Project. Further, a small project coordination team will be established at MoWS, comprising technical
      staff from the Department of Water Supply and Sanitation and the Department of Planning to lead the institutional
      development and capacity-building activities, as well as the proposed reforms and program design and monitoring.
      29.    A Water and Sanitation Task Force (WSTF, which will also act as the Project’s Steering Committee) will be
      established to facilitate the dialogue on key policy issues and reforms. The WSTF will comprise relevant departments
      and ministries, including Finance and Economic Affairs, Education, Health, Gender, Forestry & Natural Resources, Lands,
      Local Government, Malawi Environmental Protection Authority (MEPA), and Justice & Constitutional Affairs. Key reforms
      and policy dialogue to be led by the WSTF include the development of the sanitation planning and monitoring capacity
      within MoWS and related reforms, the development of a tariff framework and regulatory function, and the expansion
      of the water board services into the rural areas. To facilitate its oversight role, the MoWS will coordinate and chair
      meetings of WSTF.
      30.     Project implementation will be governed by a set of four agreements. The World Bank will sign a financing
      agreement with the Ministry of Finance and Economic Affairs (MoFA) as the recipient of the IDA credit/grant. MoFA will,
      in turn, sign a subsidiary financing agreement with BWB, with terms and conditions acceptable to the World Bank. The
      World Bank will also sign a project agreement with BWB as the lead implementing entity. BWB will sign an
      implementation agreement with BCC, with terms acceptable to the World Bank. All project operational modalities will
      be detailed in a Project Implementation Manual (PIM) to be prepared and adopted prior to effectiveness.

  .




Jan 08, 2023                                                                                                       Page 12 of 14
          The World Bank
          Malawi: Water and Sanitation Project - 1 (P178954)



   CONTACT POINT

   World Bank

   Odete Duarte Muximpua
   Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

   Francis Samson Nkoka
   Senior Disaster Risk Management Specialist

   Borrower/Client/Recipient
   Ministry of Finance and Economic Affairs
   Nations Msowoya
   Director Debt and Aid
   nmsowoya@naosupportmw.org
   Implementing Agencies

   Blantyre Water Board
   Robert Hanjahanja
   Chief Executive Officer
   rhanjahanja@bwb.mw


   FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT


   The World Bank
   1818 H Street, NW
   Washington, D.C. 20433
   Telephone: (202) 473-1000
   Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects



   APPROVAL


                                          Odete Duarte Muximpua
   Task Team Leader(s):
                                          Francis Samson Nkoka

   Approved By

   Practice Manager/Manager:

   Country Director:                      Hugh Riddell            25-Jan-2023

Jan 08, 2023                                                                    Page 13 of 14
          The World Bank
          Malawi: Water and Sanitation Project - 1 (P178954)




Jan 08, 2023                                                   Page 14 of 14
