Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                   The World Bank
                                                                   NEPAL GREEN, RESILIENT AND INCLUSIVE PROGRAMMATIC DPC 2 (P178687)




Public Disclosure Authorized        Public Disclosure Authorized

                                                                                  Program Information Document
                                                                                               (PID)



                    For Official Use Only
                                                                                  Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 27-Jan-2023| Report No: PIDC35382




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                                                             Page 1 of 6
                             The World Bank
                             NEPAL GREEN, RESILIENT AND INCLUSIVE PROGRAMMATIC DPC 2 (P178687)


                        BASIC INFORMATION


                        A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE

                        Country                        Project ID                     Project Name                   Parent Project ID (if any)
                        Nepal                          P178687                        NEPAL GREEN, RESILIENT         P177776
                                                                                      AND INCLUSIVE
                                                                                      PROGRAMMATIC DPC 2
                                                                                      (P178687)
                        Region                         Estimated Board Date           Practice Area (Lead)           Financing Instrument
                        SOUTH ASIA                     Jul 08, 2024                   Environment, Natural           Development Policy
                                                                                      Resources & the Blue           Financing
                                                                                      Economy
                        Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency




For Official Use Only
                        Nepal                          Ministry of Finance



                        Proposed Development Objective(s)

                         The development objective is to improve the enabling environment for Nepal's green, climate-resilient, inclusive
                         development pathway.

                        Financing (in US$, Millions)
                         FIN_SUMM_PUB_TBL
                        SUMMARY

                         Total Financing                                                                                              100.00

                        DETAILS   -NewFin3




                        Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                               100.00
                           World Bank Lending                                                                                          100.00


                        Decision



                        B. Introduction and Context

                         Country Context
                        The Second Nepal Green, Resilient, and Inclusive (GRID) Programmatic Development Policy Credit (DPC-2) is part of a
                        three-operation DPC series, which is a catalyst for Nepal’s on-going transition to a GRID path. The series is a key
                        instrument for Nepal to operationalize GRID across the economy. This ambition is articulated in the 2021 Kathmandu
                        Declaration on GRID and Nepal’s emerging GRID Strategic Action Plan (SAP), which identifies US$10 billion of on-going
                        and pipeline investments for 10 key transitions over the next 10 years. Sixteen Development Partners (DPs) back this


                                                                                                                                     Page 2 of 6
                              The World Bank
                              NEPAL GREEN, RESILIENT AND INCLUSIVE PROGRAMMATIC DPC 2 (P178687)


                        effort and coordinate operationally via Nepal’s GRID partnership platform on policy and investment. GRID DPC-2 builds
                        on GRID DPC-1 to programmatically support Nepal’s transition to a greener and more resilient growth path that leaves
                        no one behind.

                        Nepal’s political situation remains fluid. A new coalition government of the ten-party alliance was formed in March
                        2023. It followed a second vote of confidence by the Prime Minister. Local elections were conducted in May 2022
                        followed by federal and provincial elections in November 2022. At the sub-national level, a growing set of functions,
                        funds, and staff continue to be managed by the seven provinces and 753 local governments for which legislation, policies,
                        institutions, and administrative procedures are in the process of being formalized as per the 2015 Constitution. This
                        process of federalization is supported by this DPC series.

                        Nepal’s macroeconomic policy framework is adequate for development policy financing. The risk of debt distress
                        remains low and the Government of Nepal remains committed to sustaining fiscal sustainability, as evidenced by
                        relatively stable macro-economic and fiscal indicators during the pandemic and in the subsequent year.

                        Relationship to CPF




For Official Use Only
                        GRID DPC-2 helps to operationalize World Bank’s overarching transition towards the GRID agenda to support Nepal’s
                        long-term development trajectory, as identified in the 2022 Performance and Learning Review (PLR) of the Nepal
                        Country Partnership Framework (CPF) FY19-24. The operation is consistent with all three Pillars of the CPF—(a) public
                        institutions, (b) private sector-led jobs and growth, and (c) inclusion and resilience. The CPF’s first pillar, “Public
                        institutions” targets to strengthen institutions for public sector management and service delivery. The second Pillar
                        “Private sector-led jobs and growth” emphasizes the need to (i) improve regulatory environment for competitiveness,
                        and (ii) improve income opportunities for farmers, women, and disadvantaged youth. The third Pillar “Inclusion and
                        resilience” aims to (i) improve access to services and support for the well-being of the vulnerable groups including access
                        to water and sanitation, (ii) increase resilience to health shocks, natural disasters, and climate change, and (iii) improve
                        adaptation of sustainable natural resources, to enable more sustainable, efficient, resilient, and inclusive growth. The
                        GRID DPC series will directly contribute to these CPF targeted outcomes.

                        C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
                        The development objective is to improve the enabling environment for Nepal's green, climate-resilient, inclusive
                        development pathway. The objective is supported by two pillars: Pillar 1 aims to embed GRID principles in strategic
                        development planning across sectors. Pillar 2 aims to support sectoral transitions to green, resilient, and inclusive
                        development pathways.

                        Key Results
                        The results of Pillar 1 are: (a) increased percentage of electric passenger vehicles registered, (b) increased percentage of
                        imported internal combustion engine vehicles that meet the new vehicle standards, (c) adoption of an effective, inclusive,
                        and transparent land classification, mapping, and planning framework, (d) automatic hydrological monitoring stations
                        and radar that are fully operational in additional locations, and (d) increased number of Strategic Environmental and
                        Social Assessments carried out for public policies, programs, and strategic plans.

                        The results for Pillar 2 are: (a) Tourism concession contracts issued under the National Parks and Wildlife Conservation
                        Regulation (b) increased land covered by an approved forest management plan in line with the Forest Regulation, (c)
                        increased percentage of forest users’ groups annual income spent on women empowerment and female
                        entrepreneurship activities, (d) usage of at least one social protection program’s delivery system to provide relief and
                        recovery in response to a shock, (e) increased proportion of sectoral spending at the federal and provincial levels for


                                                                                                                                           Page 3 of 6
                              The World Bank
                              NEPAL GREEN, RESILIENT AND INCLUSIVE PROGRAMMATIC DPC 2 (P178687)


                        climate smart agriculture investments, (f) River Basin Offices established at the river basin level to promote integrated
                        management of water resources, (vii) improved collection of WASH data using the National WASH Management
                        Information System at the Palika level to improve service quality, and (g) increased investment flows to Solid Waste
                        Management at federal and local levels, from both public and private sources.

                        D. Concept Description
                        The Government of Nepal (GON), recognizing the need for an enhanced development model to adequately address
                        the overlapping and interrelated crises, adopted the GRID agenda. Since the 2021 Kathmandu Declaration on GRID, the
                        GON has taken significant steps to transition to a GRID development pathway, as evidenced by the Second Nationally
                        Determined Contribution (NDC), several budgets, and the GRID SAP. The DPC series anchors Nepal’s shift to GRID through
                        an integrated reform program for 10 key multi-sectoral transitions. Under its two pillars, the DPC supports measures to
                        decrease in net greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions through sustainable forest management, climate-smart agriculture,
                        better land use, biodiversity conservation, cleaner transport, green buildings, and solid waste management. Each of these
                        actions also deliver a double dividend of greater climate adaptation and resilience. The DPC also addresses exclusion by
                        strengthening decision-making by local people on benefit sharing, access to resources, assets, and services, and
                        encourages private sector investment across the reform program. The DPC is a substantive step to implement GRID by




For Official Use Only
                        building partnerships to develop and align policy and leverage associated new public and private investment. It is backed
                        by recommendations from the Nepal Climate Change Development Report (CCDR).

                        Under DPC-2 Pillar 1, Prior Actions by the GoN include: (a) adoption of stronger emission standards for new vehicles, (b)
                        approval of the Land Use Implementation Directive (Nirdeshika) to implement the land use planning framework of the
                        2022 Land Use Regulation, (c) approval of the Hydromet Policy to provide hydro-meteorological services to support the
                        delivery of sector-specific weather, water, and climate data, and improve decision making, and (d) amendment to and
                        adoption of the amendment of the Environmental Protection Rules 2020 to specify stronger parameters for conducting
                        Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment and Environmental Impact Assessment including public disclosure and
                        consultation requirements.

                        Under DPC-2 Pillar 2, Prior Actions by the GoN include: (a) approval of National Parks and Wildlife Conservation
                        Regulation that would enable conservation partnerships with private sector entities by regulating the operation of
                        tourism concessions in protected areas, (b) approval of Provincial Forest Regulations that promote training,
                        employment, and economic opportunities for women and Indigenous People and Local Communities through equitable
                        benefit sharing mechanisms in two provinces, c) approval of legally binding guidelines for shock-responsive social
                        protection, (d) adoption of the National Irrigation Policy that defines roles and responsibilities among three tiers of the
                        government, strengthens capacity to ensure participation by women and marginalized farmers and boosts the
                        sustainability of the irrigation systems. (e) approval of (i) National Drinking Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene Policy 2023,
                        (ii) Drinking Water and Sanitation Act 2022, and (iii) the Water Supply and Sanitation Regulation 2023, and (f) enactment
                        of the Solid Waste Management Act.

                        E. Poverty and Social Impacts, and Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects
                        Poverty and Social Impacts
                        The GRID DPC series aims to contribute to reduce poverty and improve inclusion. DPC-2 is expected to support
                        delivery of several benefits for poor and marginalized communities, including enhanced resilience to climate shocks,
                        improved environmental health, natural resource health, strengthened social protection, and improved land use
                        planning. However, there may also be detriments associated with these GRID transitions. The detailed poverty and social
                        impact assessment now underway will analyze these tradeoffs and assess the likely impacts.



                                                                                                                                           Page 4 of 6
                                 The World Bank
                                 NEPAL GREEN, RESILIENT AND INCLUSIVE PROGRAMMATIC DPC 2 (P178687)


                        Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects
                        The policy measures supported by this operation aim to, and would likely, have significant beneficial effects on
                        environmental health, forests, natural resources, and climate. The environmental analysis now underway will include
                        institutional capacity aspects as well as an analysis of potential negative effects.
                        .
                            CONTACT POINT

                        World Bank
                            Stephen Danyo, George Joseph, Martin Heger
                            Sector Leader


                        Borrower/Client/Recipient
                            Nepal




For Official Use Only
                        Implementing Agencies

                            Ministry of Finance
                            The Secretary
                            Secretary, Ministry of Finance, Singha Durbar, Kathmandu
                            moev@mof.gov.np


                            FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                            The World Bank
                            1818 H Street, NW
                            Washington, D.C. 20433
                            Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                            Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects



                            APPROVAL

                            Task Team Leader(s):                     Stephen Danyo, George Joseph, Martin Heger

                        Approved By
                        APPROVALTBL
                            Country Director:




                                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 6
                        The World Bank
                        NEPAL GREEN, RESILIENT AND INCLUSIVE PROGRAMMATIC DPC 2 (P178687)




For Official Use Only




                                                                                            Page 6 of 6
