Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P178954)




Public Disclosure Authorized

                                               Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                             Concept Stage


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                       (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                         Date Prepared/Updated: 09/09/2022 | Report No: ESRSC02882




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Sept 09, 2022                                                                         Page 1 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P178954)



                     BASIC INFORMATION

                     A. Basic Project Data

                     Country                       Region                           Project ID                     Parent Project ID (if any)

                     Malawi                        EASTERN AND SOUTHERN             P178954
                                                   AFRICA

                     Project Name                  Urban Water and Sanitation Project

                     Practice Area (Lead)          Financing Instrument             Estimated Appraisal Date       Estimated Board Date

                     Water                         Investment Project               12/13/2022                     4/21/2023
                                                   Financing

                     Borrower(s)                   Implementing Agency(ies)

                     Ministry of Finance and       Blantyre Water Board
                     Economic Affairs


                     Proposed Development Objective



Public Disclosure
                     To improve access to water supply and safely managed sanitation services in Blantyre City and to enhance the service
                     delivery capacity of the Blantyre Water Board.


                     Financing (in USD Million)                                                                                          Amount

                      Total Project Cost                                                                                                     130.00



                     B. Is the project being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project [including overview of Country, Sectoral & Institutional Contexts and
                     Relationship to CPF]
                     The Proposed project aims to improve service delivery capacity for water supply and sanitation in Blantyre City and
                     promote sustainable improvement in the financial, technical, and operational performance of BWB. The project
                     interventions are expected to contribute to improved access to water and sanitation for the residents of Blantyre,
                     thus improving the city's health outcomes and enabling the business environment and quality of life. The project will
                     finance five main components:
                     i.       Water supply improvements (US$ 75 million) will finance investments to improve network operational
                     efficiency, reduce water losses, and improve the quality of water supply services. priority water supply network

                    Sept 09, 2022                                                                                                       Page 2 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P178954)



                     upgrade, including 24km of transmission pipeline, five associated storage reservoirs with a combined capacity of
                     55,000m3, about 300km distribution network upgrade and pressure management system in selected areas.
                     ii.      Priority Sanitation Investments (US$30 million) include several interventions to increase access to safely
                     managed sanitation and reduce environmental pollution, including rehabilitation and upgrade of 50km of sewers in
                     the Blantyre sewerage catchment to reduce environmental pollution, minor upgrades to the existing trickling filters
                     wastewater treatment plants at Zingwangwa and Soche; improvements in solid waste collection, and the construction
                     of a new engineered landfill for urban solid waste.
                     iii.     Institutional Capacity Strengthening (US$ 26.5 million). This component will finance a set of institutional
                     development activities aimed at enhancing BWB's financial efficiency and governance systems. The project will also
                     finance priority interventions to improve BCC's capacity to manage sanitation services and support the water sector
                     investment planning and policy development to enhance the sustainability of urban water services.
                     iv.      Technical Assistance and Project Management Support (US$ 18.5 million). This component will finance
                     technical assistance (TA) activities designed to support the preparation and supervision of all infrastructure
                     investments planned under the project and the incremental operating costs for project management.
                     v. Contingency Emergency Response (CERC- US$ 0) - This component will provide immediate response to an Eligible
                     Crisis or Emergency, as needed. This would finance emergency works in the case of another disaster event by
                     including a 'zero-dollar' CERC.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1. Detailed project location(s) and salient physical characteristics relevant to the E&S assessment [geographic,
                     environmental, social]



Public Disclosure
                     Blantyre City, the largest commercial and industrial capital of Malawi, is in the Shire Highlands and geographical
                     centre of the Southern Region of the country with a population of 900,000. The city has a good number of hills,
                     plateau and ridge, and the natural drainage system. The main hills are the headwaters of several rivers and streams
                     that originate and radiate from the city, forming a natural drainage system with nine distinct catchment areas:
                     Likhubula, Lunzu, Mombezi and Khombwi, which drain the northern part of the city, and Mudi, Chisombezi, Limbe,
                     Luchenza and Mwampanzi draining the middle and southern parts. Because of the hilly topography, these natural
                     drainage channels are narrow and have steep sides and gradients. Blantyre is surrounded by Mount Soche, Ndirande
                     mountain, Chiradzulu mountain and Michiru Mountain, which constitute the Michiru Mountain Conservation Area.
                     The geology of the city consists of two principal types of rocks of pyro and syenitic gneiss accounts for about 40
                     percent. In their unweathered state, both rock types are impervious hence poor aquifers, but they provide a valuable
                     resource for road and building construction. Blantyre City is on the eastern edge of the southern branch of the
                     Eastern African Rift, and thus some prominent faults occur within and in the vicinity of the city rendering it prone to
                     earthquakes. The main faults and associated zones of deeply fractured bedrock run from the north of the city in a
                     southwesterly direction and are potential aquifers for groundwater.

                     Blantyre city is a transport communications node with road, rail and air links to all parts of the country and
                     neighbouring countries of Mozambique, Zimbabwe, South Africa, Zambia and Tanzania. It covers an area of 228
                     square km.

                     The plateau and ridge comprises all the land that is suitable for urban development including extensive relatively flat
                     land, the mountain piedmonts and plains, and long narrow watersheds and strips of land that separate the rivers and


                    Sept 09, 2022                                                                                                    Page 3 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P178954)



                     streams. The city is generally cool with mean monthly temperatures ranging from 19 °C during the cool season (May
                     to July) to 26 °C.

                     Settlements are categorized as formal, informal and traditional housing areas with most settlements being informal
                     covering 70%, which only 10% are formal. The project will impact negatively high density areas as they do not have
                     enough land for expansion of network and to pile construction materials during toilets construction. However, they
                     are the most benefiting communities once the projects are completed, as they do not have access to potable water
                     and good sanitation services.

                     D. 2. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity
                     The project will be implemented by Blantyre Water Board (BWB) and Blantyre City Council (BCC). BCC has four staff
                     with environmental health, EHS and environmental management capacity together. BWB has one environmental
                     safeguards specialist, two water quality and Environmental Officers. All institutions do not have staff on social
                     aspects and gender. Despite enough personnel, the existing waste treatment plants are poorly managed due to varied
                     reasons. Both institutions have experience with World Bank safeguards policies through participating in
                     implementation of Malawi Watershed Improvement Project (active) by BCC and National Water Management Project
                     (closed) by BWB but none has experience with the new Environmental and Social Framework. The implementing
                     agencies will require capacity strengthening interventions to enable them prepare and implement environmental and
                     social safeguards instruments in accordance with ESF requirements.

                     A PIU under establishment within BWB to implement an AfDB funded project is considered to manage the Urban




Public Disclosure
                     Water and Sanitation project as well. The project will hire within its PIU an Environmental and Health and Safety
                     specialist, and a Social and Gender specialists who will be supported by both institutions designate environmental
                     and social specialists. The World Bank will assess how the arrangement can work, adequacy of the personnel and
                     technical expertise versus project risks involved and advise accordingly. The assessment will also be done during
                     implementation to ascertain adequate capacity to prepare specific environmental and social risks management
                     instruments and provide enough supervision at field level.
                     The project instruments will have to be reviewed and approved by the Malawi Environmental Protection Agency as
                     required by the Environment Management Act (2017). MEPA will continue to monitor and supervise compliance
                     during implementation of the project.




                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                     Substantial


                     Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                  Substantial
                     The project design is aimed at implementing activities that have environmental benefits by improving access to
                     potable water, improved sanitation and hygiene in public places and high dense populations in Blantyre and improved
                     solid waste and wastewater management with the city. There is an opportunity to improve existing enterprises in the
                     organic manure value chain that will go along way to support economic needs of some households. However, there
                     are risks that emanate from construction related activities such as Occupational Health and Safety, land clearing, soil

                    Sept 09, 2022                                                                                                   Page 4 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P178954)



                     erosion, dust pollution, land, water and air pollution during preparation and construction of an engineered landfill for
                     urban wastes (including industrial and medical wastes) on a 15ha land including buffer, toilets, water distribution
                     network and sewer network rehabilitation and expansion, etc. There are also potential risks during operation and
                     maintenance of the landfill, sewer network, water distribution network and manure making process such as release
                     of odors due to inappropriate handling of fecal sludge or failed design; contamination of drinking water; eruption of
                     infectious diseases (e.g., infectious diseases including cholera, dysentery, typhoid, hepatitis, ascariasis, and
                     schistosomiasis) within the communities and among the project workers emanating from fecal sludge collection
                     conducted not in accordance with safe standards or due to an accident or a weather event; and traffic safety
                     management during transportation of waste to the site; degradation of the local environment due to accidental
                     leakage from composting/fecal sludge management plant releasing fecal material into water courses and open
                     ground. Due to topographic and geological features of the area, the infrastructure may be exposed to heavy winds
                     and increased runoff risk, landslides, earthquakes and flooding. The activities require consideration of ESS1, ESS2,
                     ESS3, ESS4 ESS5, ESS6, ESS8 and ESS10 in conducting an environmental risk assessment and preparation of mitigation
                     measures. The ESCP that includes commitments in management of environmental risks will be prepared and agreed
                     upon. In as much as the water distribution network and sewer network may be known, details of some activities and
                     actual site for landfill and other activities are not yet known. An ESMF will therefore be prepared in accordance with
                     requirements of ESS1. Though both institutions do not have ESF experience, their safeguards policy experience is a
                     good starting point in upgrading their knowledge and skills to ESF requirements. The environmental risk is rated
                     Substantial.
                     Social Risk Rating                                                                                           Substantial
                     The project is expected to generate positive economic and social results for the residents of Blantyre City. This is



Public Disclosure
                     consequently expected to lead to improved access to water and sanitation and consequently improvement of health
                     and the reduction of incidences of diseases. Initial screening undertaken considers the main potential social risks to
                     include construction related health and safety risks to communities and workers; risks associated with labor
                     management and failure to demand local employment; labour influx related risks including the spread of infectious
                     and sexually transmitted diseases such as HIV, COVID 19 and other communicable diseases; child labour; exacerbation
                     of Gender-Based Violence/Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassments (GBV/SEA/SH); as well as the
                     negative impacts related to land acquisition, restricted land use and/or involuntary resettlement such as loss of
                     incomes and assets. While the project’s impact area is small geographically, the project will be implemented in
                     multiple sites and therefore communities/neighborhoods, and consequently impact a large number of the residents.
                     Furthermore, the implementing parties, BWB and BCC, have no experience implementing World Bank funded projects
                     (BWB has experience implementing projects funded by AfDB) therefore capacity strengtheinig in managing
                     Environmental and Social safegurads under the ESF will be required. Therefore, the potential social risks suggests a
                     social risk rating of Substantial.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESSs) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1. General Assessment

                     ESS1 Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     Overview of the relevance of the Standard for the Project:



                    Sept 09, 2022                                                                                                    Page 5 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P178954)



                     The activities have positive environmental and social impacts such as improved access to potable water, improved
                     sanitation and hygiene, improved waste management, clean energy access, improved household economy, improved
                     city aesthetic and reduced gender vulnerabilities for women and girls due to long distances taken to fetch water.

                     There are however negative environmental and social impacts and risks such as construction and rehabilitation
                     related risks including occupational health and safety risks, community health and safety risks, soil erosion, waste
                     management risks, the pollution of air, water, and soil, biodiversity, water-borne diseases; COVID 19 and other
                     communicable and noncommunicable diseases, waste and solid waste handling, water related vector borne diseases,
                     possible hazardous gasses, Traffic safety during construction, cumulative risks or impacts from other present or
                     future investments, risks related to losing land and other assets, and loss of income and reduction of economic
                     activity, risk of restricting access to land and other assets during construction, pollution of water stream and natural
                     habitats, sedimentation, and increased run-off and Gender Based Violence/Sexual Exploitation and Abuse-Sexual
                     Harassment (GBV/SEA-SH.
                     Potential environmental and social risks during operation and maintenance of the facility include release of odors due
                     to inappropriate handling of fecal sludge, solid waste and sewerage; eruption of infectious diseases (e.g., infectious
                     diseases including cholera, typhoid, hepatitis, ascariasis, and schistosomiasis) within the communities and among the
                     project workers emanating from fecal sludge collection not conducted in accordance with safe standards or in case of
                     an accident or a weather event; contamination of water during maintenance of water pipes or due to effluent
                     discharge from the wastewater treatment plant; traffic safety management during transportation of waste;
                     degradation of the local environment due to accidental leakage from landfill and potential impacts from improper
                     treatment of landfill leachate; air emissions, composting/fecal sludge management plant releasing fecal material into




Public Disclosure
                     water courses and open ground; accidents or breaking of the infrastructure, heavy winds and flooding hence taking
                     away all sludge to the rest of flooded area and stream, risk of waste contact by any unauthorized entry in case of
                     compromised site management, management of a scenario when there is shortage in recommended PPE, safety of
                     compost, possible landslides due to geographical features of the city, financial preparedness for any emergency such
                     as breakage etc. Potential private enterprises such as manure making from sludge, biogas digesters from landfill, pit
                     emptiers come with cumulative impacts of hazardous gases, explosions, risk of infections odor amongst others.

                     Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will generally address all known risks and impacts
                     associated with ESS1, ESS2, ESS3, ESS4, ESS6, ESS8 and ESS10 while all risks associated with land acquisition,
                     resettlement, and economic loss, as outlined under ESS5, will be mitigated through the preparation of a Resettlement
                     Policy Framework (RPF), considering that the site locations and affected people will only be known during project
                     implementation. The ESMF will address the risk of heavy winds, flooding, earthquakes and landslides and will include
                     wind control/adaptive measures to guide the technical design and operation of the engineered landfill and solar
                     power installation. The ESMF will also consider the risks and mitigation measures for Covid-19 and other
                     communicable diseases. Sub-projects will be screened, and it will be determined if an Environmental and Social
                     Impact Assessment (ESIA) or solely an ESMPs will be prepared. To avoid implementing subprojects that cause
                     significant adverse impacts, exclusion of such activities will take precedence and where the need to still proceed with
                     the activities is duly, assessments will consider alternative sites and designs with technical-financial and socio-
                     environmental aspects for infrastructure subprojects . To mitigate labor risks, the project will prepare Labor
                     Management Procedures (LMP), including a worker Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM). The project’s GBV and
                     SEA/SH risks have been rated moderate. Measures to mitigate these risks will be included in the ESMPs include a
                     SEA/SH Prevention and Response Action Plan, including an Accountability and Response Framework that will form


                    Sept 09, 2022                                                                                                    Page 6 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P178954)



                     part of the ESMF. The Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) will include the Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM). An
                     Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) will be agreed on with the borrower and will set out the
                     substantive measures and actions required for the project to meet environmental and social requirements over a
                     specified period of time prior to project appraisal.

                     The proposed project will also be ensure that the technical designs, consultancies, studies, capacity building, and any
                     other technical assistance activities under the Project including, inter alia, any environmental and social assessments
                     and related environmental and social instruments, are carried out in accordance with terms of reference acceptable
                     to the Bank that incorporate the relevant requirements of the ESSs. Any outputs from the technical assistance
                     activities, including, inter alia, any environmental assessment and related environmental and social instruments, shall
                     be consistent with the ESSs.

                     Areas where “Use of Borrower Framework” is being considered:
                     None


                     ESS10 Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure
                     Stakeholder Engagement will be critical for the project in ensuring that both beneficiaries and those who will be
                     impacted negatively by the project are consulted throughout the project cycle, especially at the design phase. A
                     Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) that will provide guidance on conducting consultations, feedback receipt and
                     stakeholder engagement will be prepared. The SEP will include methods of engagement including virtual and face to



Public Disclosure
                     face meetings, questionnaires, etc., and guide how information disclosure will be undertaken before, during and after
                     project implementation. The consultations will observe social, cultural norms in order to have meaningful
                     engagement with different members of the society. Preliminarily, the anticipated stakeholders have been identified
                     as i) local communities; ii) Other Utility Companies such as ESCOM, Telecom companies; iii) Policy makers; iv) District
                     councils; v) Roads Authority; vi) CBOs/NGOs; vii) Private Sector/Business Associations; viii) Schools; ix) Project
                     Affected People; x) Users of Shire River; and xi) National level government line ministries such as Ministry of Water
                     and Natural Resources, Ministry of Lands, Ministry of Local Government, Ministry of Transport, Ministry of Finance
                     and agencies of Directorate for Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) and Malawi Environmental Protection
                     Authority (MEPA). Detailed stakeholder identification and analysis is yet to be done and stakeholders will be
                     confirmed in the Appraisal ESRS. Stakeholder engagement will also be used to ensure that project activities do not
                     conflict with development plans of other key stakeholders such as ESCOM, and Roads Authority

                     The SEP will detail a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) that will include Grievance Redress Committees (GRCs),
                     dedicated mobile phone and whatsapp line, toll free number and email address. The GRCs will be established at
                     ward/zone level and members will, represent various stakeholders including project-affected parties and local
                     communities. The primary objectives of creating GRCs are threefold: (i) ensure that disputes related to preparation
                     and implementation of the Resettlement Action Plan are treated separately and on priority; (ii) help project
                     proponents to ensure that project implementation timelines are not compromised due to delays in resolving
                     grievance; and (iii) help cut down on lengthy and expensive litigation that PAPs might have to indulge.

                     The functionality of GRCs will be closely monitored by the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) and the supervising
                     consultant as applicable. These grievance redress committees will be expected to maintain a grievance log which will

                    Sept 09, 2022                                                                                                   Page 7 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P178954)



                     be updated regularly. Further, the GRM will provide for appeals mechanism and anonymous reporting and the
                     information about the mechanism will be disseminated among local communities including a phone number where
                     grievances can be received.



                     B.2. Specific Risks and Impacts

                     A brief description of the potential environmental and social risks and impacts relevant to the Project.
                     ESS2 Labor and Working Conditions
                     Labor Management Procedure (LMP) will be prepared in line with the ESF. The project will engage direct, contracted,
                     primary suppliers and communities at various sites who will be skilled and unskilled. The anticipated risks during
                     project implementation include occupational health and safety issues; risks related to workers rights; transmission
                     and spread of diseases such as HIV, STI and COVID-19; child and forced labor; and SEA/SH risks in the workplace. The
                     LMP will ensure that mechanisms are in place to mitigate against these risks in line with ESS2. Provisions with regard
                     to Environment and Health and Safety (EHS) measures as well as World Bank Group EHS requirements and other
                     relevant OHS standards will be incorporated into the detailed design and civil works contracts in line with ESS2. A
                     Grievance Mechanism for the workers will also be included in the LMP. The LMP will also ensure that project workers
                     are managed in line with national laws and ESS2. Contractors will be required to ensure that all workers sign a
                     standard Code of Conduct (CoC). The ESIA/ESMP will ensure that mitigation measures related to transmission of
                     diseases, child labor are included in the bidding documents and contractors contracts.




Public Disclosure
                     ESS3 Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management
                     During construction, pollution may come from oil spillages from vehicles and machines, dust, cement wash aways to
                     water streams, etc. During operation, pollution risks such as odor, contamination with water, air, soil and loss of
                     aesthetic could come from waste collection, storage, handling, transportation and health risks to communities such
                     spreading of infectious diseases (cholera, dysentery, typhoid, hepatitis, ascariasis, schistosomiasis and skin rash). The
                     project will ensure that all potential pollution risks are assessed, prevented and managed in accordance with ESS1,
                     ESS3 provisions and World Bank Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines for Waste Management Facilities and
                     as stipulated in ESMF.
                     During landfill and waste water treatment plant operation, pollution may result from leachates, noxious gas
                     emissions and wastewater effluent discharges. Malawi has more stringent standards on some effluent discharges
                     parameters, as compared to the World Bank EHS guidelines standards for landfills. However, Blantyre City Council
                     only use a sub-set of the standards and they have not been compliant as their analyzes results have been significantly
                     above the standards. Since some parameters are strict under national while others are stricter under the World Bank
                     standards, a hybrid approach of both National and World Bank stricter standards for differentiated pollutants will be
                     used.

                     Construction and operation activities will also ensure that resources such as water are used efficiently. The project
                     will encourage use of rain or river water for construction in order to save portable water for drinking and home use.
                     The project will promote simple water harvesting techniques at construction sites and beneficiary household level to



                    Sept 09, 2022                                                                                                     Page 8 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P178954)



                     reduce pressure on potable water. Blantyre is already experiencing inadequacies in the provision of portable water to
                     its residents.

                     Construction materials will be assessed with respect to their environmental impact and social sustainability. Materials
                     that leave a significant environmental footprint will not be used in the project. The extraction of resources, such as
                     sand and stone, will be done in accordance with national legislation and good international and industry practices.
                     Solid wastes generated by project activities will be managed through measures to be included in the ESMF and later
                     in the in the ESIA/ESMPs through characterization and provision of management options.

                     Construction of a solar PV pumping station, designed by the project, is a good way of conserving energy. Malawi is
                     currently experiencing heavy load shedding and investing in alternative clean energy will ensure continuity of
                     pumping water while reserving the scarce electricity energy for other users.



                     ESS4 Community Health and Safety
                     The project has a number of planned construction works that pose potential community health and safety risks, with
                     some of these works being undertaken in public places, in schools and/or in communities and neighborhoods
                     whereby residents will be potentially exposed to heavy machine operations, loading and off-loading of materials,
                     open trenches, restricted access to places amongst others. The mitigation measures will be stipulated in the ESMF
                     and later in specific ESIAs/ESMPs.




Public Disclosure
                     Traffic and road safety: Construction works will impact traffic flow and road safety for both pedestrians and motorists
                     increasing the risks of accidents during project implementation. Since works will be implemented in residential areas,
                     close to public places, traffic risk is considerably high. The contractors will be required to prepare and implement
                     Traffic/Road Safety Management Plans. The traffic management plans will be included in the ESMF and later in the
                     ESIA/ESMP. During operation, the solid waste landfill will attract waste pickers which will result in exposure to health
                     and safety risks. The proximity of the landfill to neighboring communities will lead to odor, noise and heavy traffic
                     related risks including risks to pedestrians and motorists due to the heavy traffic from trucks moving in and out of the
                     landfill.

                     Infrastructure design and safety: Construction works will also require working in depths and in some cases at height.
                     This will put the workers and communities at risk of falling objects and/or falling in excavated trenches, sewerage
                     pipes breakage or compost structures collapsing or releasing leachates. Infrastructure designs will also consider
                     climatic and topographic conditions of the city to ensure safety of users during operation stage. Content and scope of
                     the plans according to the different identified risks will be described in the ESMF and later ESIA/ESMP(s). To mitigate
                     these risks, the project will: (i) undertake community safety awareness campaigns conducted through various
                     platforms which will align with the Stakeholder Engagement Plan that will be developed under ESS10; (ii) involve
                     appropriate experts and other government agencies such as occupation health and safety officers to assist in
                     assessing risk and mitigation planning and (iii) put up project relevant signage and iv) ensure preparation of operation
                     and maintenance manual.. During the design phase, mitigation measures will include incorporating views of the
                     communities sourced through the consultations; taking into account the needs and challenges faced by various
                     categories of project beneficiaries including Persons with Disability, elderly and women in the construction of public
                     buildings.


                    Sept 09, 2022                                                                                                    Page 9 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P178954)



                     In the recent past, some areas within Blantyre experienced impacts of cyclone including heavy rainfalls, heavy winds,
                     flooding, earthquakes etc. Landslides are possible disaster that can happen, deducing from past cyclones experiences.
                     World Bank ESH guideline on Waste Management provide guidance on landfill siting and its provisions will be
                     considered in this project. Infrastructure designs will also consider development of emergency preparedness and
                     response plan to respond to natural disasters, landfill operation emergencies, disease outbreaks and any other
                     emergencies.

                     Labor Management: Labor risks are likely to occur during the implementation of the project. The risks associated with
                     a migrant labour coming into projected affected communities and also inclusion of community workers as part of the
                     labour force under the project include disease transmission and spread of HIV; potential for Gender Based
                     Violence/Sexual Exploitation and Abuse-Sexual Harassment (GBV/SEA-SH); and Violence Against Children; Child
                     labour; and risks related to workers rights. These risks will be determined during the ESIA/ESMP preparation and
                     necessary mitigation measures will be considered. The mitigation measures will be expected to form part of the
                     bidding documents and contractors contracts, that is: Community Engagement Plan; COVID-19 Prevention Plan;
                     Codes of Conduct (CoC); HIV/AIDS Mitigation Plan; Gender Action Plan. The project will therefore prepare a necessary
                     mitigation measures commensurate with the moderate GBV/SEA risk rating for the project.

                     Project Security Personnel: The project will not directly hire security personnel, however, contractors may engage
                     security personnel to guard construction materials and other equipment. In such a case, the contractor will ensure
                     safety of communities as set out under ESS4 requirements. Principle of proportionality, Good International Industry
                     Practices and applicable laws will guide client in relation to hiring, rules of conduct, training, equipping and




Public Disclosure
                     monitoring such workers. Necessary measures will be covered in the relevant ESMP.



                     ESS5 Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement
                     The expansion of networks, both sewerage and water pipe is expected to require additional land take leading to loss
                     of assets such as land, structures and other assets such as trees. Project activities are likely to negatively impact on
                     land rights and usage rights, and economic activities hence negatively impacting livelihoods. There is likely to be
                     physical displacement of project affected people leading to involuntary resettlement mainly of residential property
                     and business premises. Vulnerable and disadvantaged groups such as female headed households, physically
                     challenged, and the poor and ultra-poor households are also likely to be negatively impacted by the project. A
                     Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be developed to guide the development of the Resettlement Action Plans
                     for the various sites and Livelihood Restoration Plans where applicable. The RPF will frame the entitlements for
                     compensation taking into account the various types of land tenures within the city; usage rights; loss of other assets;
                     the vulnerability criteria to determine which households/PAPs will be provided with special assistance; and livelihood
                     interventions for economically displaced, vulnerable and disadvantaged groups paying special attention to gender
                     aspects, and their needs while ensuring that interventions are provided in a transparent, consistent and equitable
                     manner. A grievance redress mechanism will be set up to address any resettlement grievances that arise during
                     resettlement activities. The GRM will be detailed in the Stakeholder Engagement Plan that will be developed under
                     ESS10.


                     ESS6 Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources

                    Sept 09, 2022                                                                                                   Page 10 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P178954)



                     The project will contribute positively to the conservation of biodiversity by promoting organic manure. Construction
                     work carried out for subprojects, such as construction of solar PV pumping station, sewer network rehabilitation,
                     water distribution network rehabilitation and expansion, engineered landfill construction will involve risks to natural
                     habitats and biodiversity. All subprojects will be screened using the ESMF for risks to biodiversity and ecosystem
                     services. Any sub-projects located in areas where adverse impacts on protected areas, natural and critical habitats
                     are possible are to be screened out. Where adverse impacts are not expected, an ESIA or an ESMP will be prepared
                     that clearly applies the mitigation hierarchy in the management of biodiversity risks and impacts., and development
                     of biodiversity management plans where necessary.


                     ESS7 Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional Local Communities
                     Malawi does not have any Indigenous people hence the standard does not apply and the project as it is being
                     implemented in urban areas with no communities meeting the criteria in ESS 7.


                     ESS8 Cultural Heritage
                     Construction activities due to the expansion of water and sewer networks will require excavations at various project
                     sites. Therefore, there is a possibility that physical assets of religious, cultural, historical, social or economic value will
                     be negatively impacted. During analysis of alternative project sites, cultural heritage sites will be avoided. These
                     impacts will be managed in accordance with provisions of cultural heritage standard, ESS8. The mitigation measures
                     to address the impacts on cultural heritage and possible impacts on intangible cultural heritage will be addressed in




Public Disclosure
                     the project ESIA/ESMPs. These will identify appropriate mitigation measures including the adoption and
                     implementation of Chance Find Procedures for possibility of future finds during project implementation. Chance Find
                     Procedures will form part of the contractual obligation of the contractors in the project.


                     ESS9 Financial Intermediaries
                     There are no FI involved in the project


                     C. Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                     OP 7.50 Projects on International Waterways                                                                                 Yes


                     OP 7.60 Projects in Disputed Areas                                                                                          No



                     III. WORLD BANK ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL DUE DILIGENCE

                     A. Is a common approach being considered?                                                                                   No
                     Financing Partners
                     None


                    Sept 09, 2022                                                                                                          Page 11 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P178954)




                     B. Proposed Measures, Actions and Timing (Borrower’s commitments)
                     Actions to be completed prior to Bank Board Approval:
                     The following instruments should be prepared before appraisal
                     Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
                     Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
                     Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)
                     Labor Management Procedures (LMP)
                     Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)
                     Possible issues to be addressed in the Borrower Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP):
                     The Borrower will ensure retaining Environmental and Social safeguards staffing throughout the project
                     implementation and inclusion of ERP in ESMPs.
                     Project GRM preparation and operationalization to be committed in the plan
                     Preparation of management plans for sub-projects
                     Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIA) where applicable



                     C. Timing
                     Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage ESRS                                             17-Nov-2022



Public Disclosure
                     IV. CONTACT POINTS

                     World Bank
                     Contact:             Odete Duarte Muximpua               Title:           Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

                     Telephone No:        5394+3230 / 265-1-770611            Email:           omuximpua@worldbank.org

                     Borrower/Client/Recipient
                     Borrower:              Ministry of Finance and Economic Affairs

                     Implementing Agency(ies)
                     Implementing Agency: Blantyre Water Board



                     V. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT




                    Sept 09, 2022                                                                                                Page 12 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P178954)



                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     VI. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                 Odete Duarte Muximpua

                     Practice Manager (ENR/Social)        Iain G. Shuker Recommended on 16-Aug-2022 at 12:28:0 GMT-04:00

                     Safeguards Advisor ESSA              Peter Leonard (SAESSA) Cleared on 09-Sept-2022 at 16:06:4 GMT-04:00




Public Disclosure




                    Sept 09, 2022                                                                                               Page 13 of 13
