Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P178954)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                                         Project Information Document (PID)




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                        Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 09-Sep-2022 | Report No: PIDC34263




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Aug 13, 2022                                                                                         Page 1 of 11
         The World Bank
         Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P178954)


  BASIC INFORMATION


  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE

  Country                                        Project ID                 Parent Project ID (if any)   Project Name
  Malawi                                         P178954                                                 Urban Water and
                                                                                                         Sanitation Project
                                                                                                         (P178954)
  Region                                         Estimated Appraisal Date   Estimated Board Date         Practice Area (Lead)
  EASTERN AND SOUTHERN                           Dec 13, 2022               Apr 21, 2023                 Water
  AFRICA
  Financing Instrument                           Borrower(s)                Implementing Agency
  Investment Project Financing                   Ministry of Finance and    Blantyre Water Board
                                                 Economic Affairs

   Proposed Development Objective(s)

    To improve access to safely managed water supply and sanitation services in Blantyre City and to enhance the
    operational and financial efficiency of the Blantyre Water Board.

    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

   SUMMARY-NewFin1

   Total Project Cost                                                                                                    130.00
   Total Financing                                                                                                       130.00

                             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                           128.00
   Financing Gap                                                                                                            0.00

   DETAILS     -NewFinEnh1




   World Bank Group Financing

       International Development Association (IDA)                                                                       128.00
          IDA Grant                                                                                                      128.00

   Non-World Bank Group Financing

       Counterpart Funding                                                                                                  2.00
          Borrower/Recipient                                                                                                2.00



Aug 13, 2022                                                                                                           Page 2 of 11
         The World Bank
         Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P178954)




  Environmental and Social Risk Classification                                  Concept Review Decision
  Substantial                                                                  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to
                                                                               continue



  Other Decision (as needed)



  B. Introduction and Context

  Country Context
 1.      Poverty remains stubbornly high in Malawi. With over half of its population living below poverty which has
 remained virtually unchanged in the last decade, Malawi remains one of the poorest countries in the World. Between
 2010 and 2019, Real Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth per capita remained largely flat and has had a very limited
 impact on poverty reduction.1 Malawi ranked 174 out of 189 countries on the United Nations Human Development Index2
 and 142 out of 173 on the World Bank's Human Capital Index3 in 2020. Although Malawian households have diversified to
 other sources, such as short-term labor, over the last ten years, agriculture remains the main income source, albeit with
 persistently low returns. The transition from agriculture to higher-return activities has been slowed, partly due to a lack
 of access to financing, market constraints, skill gaps, and high vulnerability to shocks.
 2.       Malawi is highly vulnerable to exogenous shocks. According to the Malawi Poverty Assessment (MPA), for every
 three Malawians that moved out of poverty between 2010 and 2019, four fell back due to the impact of weather shocks.
 The high vulnerability is driven by an overreliance on natural resource-intense economic activities, limited infrastructure,
 high population density, and the associated catchment degradation. The 2018 Climate Vulnerability Index (CRI) by
 Germanwatch ranked Malawi with a CRI of 83.67, 80 globally, and 8 th in Sub-Saharan Africa.4 Climate change scenarios
 suggest that Malawi will see increasing climatic variability, higher temperatures, longer dry periods, and more erratic and
 intense rainfall events.5 While the country was still recovering from Cyclone Idai of 2019, tropical storms Ana and Gombe
 hit parts of the country in early 2022, directly affecting close to one million people, with USD 326.0 million in damages and
 economic loss.6 The combined effects of floods and droughts have caused losses estimated at 1.7 percent of Malawi's GDP
 annually.7 Further, the global COVID-19 pandemic dampened Malawi's medium-term growth prospects.8 Economic growth
 fell from 5.4 percent in 2019 to 0.8 percent in 2020 before partially rebounding to 2.2 percent in 2021.9 Amid uncertainties
 following a number of severe shocks, including the impacts of the Russia-Ukraine war, economic growth is projected to
 decline in 2022 but increase modestly in the medium term.


 1 World Bank (2022) Malawi Poverty Assessment
 2 UN Human Development Index tables
 3 https://datacatalog.worldbank.org/int/
 4 https://www.germanwatch.org/sites/germanwatch.org/files/20-2-01e%20Global%20Climate%20Risk%20Index%202020_14.pdf
 5 Government of Malawi (2017). Strategic Program for Climate Resilience: Pilot Program on Climate Resilience (PPCR).
 6 From GRADE Assessment
 7 https://www.gfdrr.org/en/feature-story/reducing-impact-natural-disasters-malawi
 8 World Bank (2020) Malawi Economic Monitor
 9 World Bank (2022, Forthcoming) Malawi Economic Monitor June 2022.



Aug 13, 2022                                                                                                                 Page 3 of 11
           The World Bank
           Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P178954)


 3.      Urbanization has slowed down over the past decade, limiting the country's opportunities for economic growth.
 Whereas cities are known as productive engines for growth where labor is matched with employment opportunities,
 Malawi has experienced a deceleration of urbanization in contrast to its regional peers.10 The proportion of urban
 inhabitants increased only by one percent between 2010 and 2019, which correlates to the country's poverty reduction
 trends. A key driver for urbanization in Malawi relates to job opportunities. In the past decade, about 39 percent of the
 internal migration from rural to urban areas were seeking job or business opportunities.11 However, cities suffer from
 inadequate access and reliability of most basic infrastructure services, which add to production costs and weaken the
 competitiveness of Malawi's private sector. Addressing the urban infrastructure and service gaps is therefore critical to
 boosting productivity, unlocking private capital, creating jobs, and supporting structural transformation for Malawi.
 4.        Unreliable services and lagging infrastructure development are significantly hindering the private sector's
 growth. According to the World Bank global study12 on the economics of water scarcity, a single water interruption in an
 urban firm can reduce its revenue by more than eight percent. And if that firm is in the informal sector, as many are in the
 developing countries, sales decline by 35 percent, ruining livelihoods and stagnating economic growth. As part of the 2014
 World Bank Enterprise Survey (WBES)13 in Malawi, firms reported experiencing an average of 6.7 electricity outages lasting
 about 3.5 hours. Firms also reported 5.3 days of insufficient water in a typical month, which is the highest amongst
 comparable countries in the region and more than double the regional average for countries in Sub Saharan Africa (1.8
 days in a typical month). Water outages were reported more prominently by enterprises in Blantyre compared to the
 other parts of the country. Except for the capital city, Lilongwe, much of the existing water supply infrastructure in the
 country is aged and operating significantly below the optimum efficiency levels. Furthermore, the water and electricity
 utilities are failing to cope with the growing population growth and increased demand. Major donor-financed programs
 were unable to adequately address the infrastructure deficit, given the focus on expansion and less on improving the
 operational efficiency of the systems. Even where investments were made, these have not translated into improved
 services due to the weak institutional capacity of the service providers.
 5.      Limited access to basic services is also undermining human development in Malawi. The 2020 voluntary national
 review of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) indicated that the country is only making significant progress on 29
 out of the 169 targets.14 For instance, access to basic water supply stands at 70 percent and access to sanitation at 27
 percent, 15 putting the country significantly off-track to achieving the SDG for water. Official access figures often mask the
 poor quality of services. The impacts on public health are severe. The Ministry of Health estimates an average of 13 million
 cases of diarrhea per year in children under five,16 with about 90 percent caused by poor water, sanitation, and hygiene
 (WASH) services. About 37 percent of the children under age five in Malawi are short for their age due to long-term effects
 of poor sanitation, consequent diarrhea, and malnutrition, and 20 percent are severely stunted.17Unsafe water and
 sanitation have exacerbated the impacts of the Covid-19 pandemic, particularly in the largest urban centers. The country
 is currently racing to contain a cholera outbreak due to poor access to water and sanitation in the aftermath of Tropical
 Storm Ana. As of July 1, 2022, there were 758 reported cases across the country since the outbreak in the aftermath of
 Cyclone Ana.
 6.    Women face disproportionate disadvantages in accessing services, affecting their performance in different
 economic activities. For instance, in the presence of low access to electricity and water, women also tend to spend more


 10
      https://databank.worldbank.org/source/world-development-indicators
 11 National Statistics Office of Malawi (2020) The Fifth Integrated Household Survey 2020 Report
 12 Damania, R. et al (2017). Uncharted Waters: The New Economics of Water Scarcity and Variability. Washington DC, The World Bank
 13 https://microdata.worldbank.org/index.php/catalog/2358
 14
      https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/memberstates/malawi
 15 https://washdata.org/data/household#!/mwi
 16 https://www.health.gov.mw/index.php/diarrhoel-diseases
 17 NPC (2021) Cost-benefit analysis of interventions to reduce the prevalence of stunting in Malawi - Technical Report



Aug 13, 2022                                                                                                                         Page 4 of 11
         The World Bank
         Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P178954)


 time than men collecting firewood and water.18 In 85 percent of Malawian households, women are responsible for
 collecting water.19 Similarly, the lack of WASH facilities is particularly challenging for girls, who, in many cases, are forced
 to stay at home during the menstrual period due to the absence of adequate sanitation facilities in their schools. This
 limits school attendance and retention for girls, which in turn limits their future livelihood opportunities. Among the key
 policy actions proposed by the Malawi Poverty Assessment to enhance economic growth is the need to address
 determinants of unequal opportunity, especially low completion rates for secondary education, by keeping girls in school
 much longer, through improved water sources and sanitation facilities at schools.
 7.      Investing in water supply and sanitation (WSS) has the potential to harness human capital and enhance
 productivity in Malawi. It is estimated that Malawi loses about US$3.8 per capita or 1.1 percent of the country's annual
 GDP due to poor health outcomes attributed to, among others, low access to safely managed sanitation services. 20 A
 recent study by the National Planning Commission (NPC) of Malawi shows a benefit-cost ratio of 22 ( meaning that every
 kwacha invested yields 22 kwacha in benefits) in Lilongwe City, with the increase in the availability of water for the
 residents of informal settlements which benefited from the network improvements and smart water kiosks under the
 Lilongwe Water and Sanitation Project (P163794).21 Benefits were assessed as a reduction in coping costs associated with
 water storage (by bucket), travel time, purchasing water from nearby sources which were still functioning, using streams
 for washing and laundry, and using a private borehole. For industrial and commercial customers, coping strategies
 included the construction of boreholes and storage facilities to minimize productivity losses due to unreliable water
 supply. Where such hurdles have been removed, there is wide evidence of benefits in health and burden of disease
 (seeking less health care, reduced losses of productive time due to disease, and a reduction in premature mortality),
 improved education outcomes, with higher school enrollment and attendance rate, income from more tourism and
 business investments, reduced pollution, among others.22 23
  Sectoral and Institutional Context

 8.      The recently established Ministry of Water and Sanitation (MoWS) oversees the water sector, including water
 resources management and water supply and sanitation. The National Water Resources Authority (NWRA) oversees
 water resources planning and management, including infrastructure development, operation, and water allocation. Urban
 and small-town water supply is under the responsibility of the two urban Water Boards (Lilongwe and Blantyre) and the
 three regional Water Boards (Northern, Central, and Southern). The Water Boards report to MoWS on technical matters
 and to the Department of Statutory Corporations (DSC)—under the Office of President and Cabinet—on policy issues (such
 as financial, administrative, and managerial oversight). Discussions are ongoing to explore NWRA mandate extension to
 cover the regulation of WSS in rider to improve the sector financing strategy and incentivize efficiency improvements in
 water service provision. This forms part of the ongoing Government of Malawi (GoM) initiatives to strengthen the
 corporate governance and institutional framework of water utilities. Further, the National Water Policy has been recently
 reviewed, and a sanitation act is being proposed to enhance investments in the sanitation sub-sector.
 9.      The GoM is committed to providing adequate, reliable, and sustainable water and sanitation services to the
 urban, peri-urban, and rural populations of Malawi. The Water Sector Public Sector Expenditure Review (PER) of 2020
 indicates that despite limited fiscal space, GoM has increased budget allocations to water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH)
 from 0.39 percent of total government expenditure in 2014/15 to 0.49 percent in 2018/19. However, high population

 18 World Bank (2022) Malawi Poverty Assessment
 19 National Statistics Office of Malawi (2021) Malawi Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey 2019-20, Survey Findings Report
 20 Water and Sanitation Program (2012). Economic impacts of poor sanitation in Africa. Water and Sanitation Program, The World Bank.
 21 NPC(2021) A Cost-Benefit Analysis of Interventions to Improve Water Service Reliability in Blantyre Malawi - Technical Report
 22 World Health Organization (2012) Global costs and benefits of drinking-water supply and sanitation interventions to reach the MDG target and

 universal coverage
 23
    The World Bank Group (2017) Injury Prevention Environmental Health

Aug 13, 2022                                                                                                                            Page 5 of 11
         The World Bank
         Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P178954)


 growth, dwindling water resources and climate change, lagging infrastructure development, and aging water systems with
 high levels of non-revenue water create large gaps between supply and demand, leading to unreliable services. Globally,
 Malawi is ranked number five out of the top countries (with a population greater than one million), with the highest
 proportion of the population at risk of frequent water shortages.24
 10.      Addressing the WASH challenges in Malawi would require a medium-term program, with a set of investments
 in infrastructure, policy, and institutional reforms to enhance the efficiency and resilience of water supply and
 sanitation services. The sector is faced with two major interrelated challenges – lack of investment financing to match
 needs and the inefficiency of the water utilities and service providers, which is exacerbated by their weak corporate
 governance. Firstly, there is a need to shift from the traditional water source/production expansion into prioritizing and
 fast-tracking investments that address the critical operational bottlenecks and water availability gaps, with interventions
 that result in rapid improvements in the reliability and resilience of water production and distribution services as a whole.
 Second, enhance the support to water service providers with incentives to reduce operational inefficiencies by linking
 public financing for capital expenditure and tariff reviews to verifiable improvements in efficiency, governance, and
 innovation. Third, the Government should play its part in strengthening the financial position of water utilities by
 minimizing the accumulation of unpaid utility bills through the adoption of prepaid services for all Government agencies
 and departments. Finally, the water service providers can adopt greener and more efficient processes to build resilience
 to external shocks and contribute to the country's environmental sustainability agenda.
 11.     Blantyre City, the second-largest urban center in Malawi, needs urgent water supply interventions. Poor access
 to water has reached a crisis level in Blantyre and is causing substandard living conditions for many of its inhabitants. With
 close to 900,000 inhabitants, and an average growth rate of 2.8 percent per annum, the city has failed to accommodate
 its growing population in a planned manner, despite its vibrant urban economy and historical and cultural heritage. Close
 to 70 percent of the city's population live in unplanned, informal settlements characterized by high poverty rates,
 overcrowding, poor road access, and limited access to basic services, such as energy, water supply, and sanitation. Low
 and unreliable energy and water supply access have also been among the key constraints to private sector development,
 in addition to unstable macro-economic conditions and limited access to financing; thus, limiting the city's capacity to
 further contribute to the country's economic growth.25
 12.     Blantyre City's water supply system is under strain and is expected to worsen with increasing climate change
 impacts. Walkers Ferry (WF) on the Shire River is the city's main source of water, which account for 80 percent of the
 water supplied to Blantyre. The other 20 percent come from Mudi and Likhubula dams. Current water production is
 estimated at 122,000m3/d against a demand of 140,000m3/d. The city is already facing water shortages, and these are
 expected to become severe over time with the increased intensity of climate-related events such as floods and droughts.
 Blantyre water supply is highly vulnerable to water shocks, with frequent water supply interruptions due to high sediment
 load, deteriorating water quality, and aging infrastructure. In February 2022, in the aftermath of Cyclone Ana, Blantyre
 residents were left without water for more than three days, as both sources at Shire and Mudi were loaded with sediments
 from the flooded waters.
 13.     Blantyre Water Board (BWB),26 the city's water supply utility, is facing major operational and financial
 challenges. With an existing reticulation system of about 1,407 km, the water supply system currently meets a total
 average water consumption of 95,395 m3/day. This services around 87 percent of the population through 64,809 individual
 connections, 827 water kiosks (for communal supply), and 1,940 commercial and industrial connections. The utility is
 experiencing financial and operational stress resulting from the technical complexities and high energy costs relating to

 24Sadoff C.W., et al (2015). Securing Water, Sustaining Growth: Report of the GWP/OECD Task Force on Water Security and

 Sustainable Growth, University of Oxford, UK, 180pp.
 25
    UN-Habitat(2011) Blantyre City Profile
 26 BWB is a statutory corporation established in 1995 with responsibility for water and sewerage services in Blantyre City



Aug 13, 2022                                                                                                                  Page 6 of 11
         The World Bank
         Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P178954)


 high head pumping, with long rising mains and pipe aging that is leading to elevated operational costs and Non-revenue
 Water (NRW). Energy costs currently account for 46 percent of the total operating costs, and NRW is estimated at 43
 percent. BWB's financial performance remains highly unstable, with operating ratios varying between 1.05–1.35 over the
 past five years, representing a continuous erosion of equity and reserves. Collection rates have been stagnant at around
 95 percent.
 14.      Poor sanitation is among the key public health issues and significantly affects the quality of life of Blantyre
 residents. The provision of sanitation services is currently under the responsibility of the Blantyre City Council (BCC), which
 lacks the financial and technical muscle to adequately maintain the services. The sewerage infrastructure covers about 16
 percent of the population, while the majority rely on onsite sanitation systems. Most of the sewage generated in the city
 ends up in the environment without any treatment, either through leaks in the sewer lines or discharges from the five
 wastewater treatment sites to several streams across the city. Recorded BOD effluent values for Soche, Blantyre, and
 Limbe indicate discharge values of 130mg/l, 382mg/l, and 86mg/l, respectively, against Malawi's Standard discharge value
 of 20mg/l. This situation is exacerbated by poor solid waste management. Less than 50 percent of the city's 472 tons of
 solid waste generated daily27 is collected and partially disposed of in an open dumping space, while the remaining waste
 ends up in the open spaces in peri-urban areas, streams, roadsides, and drains. The heavy pollution of rivers and streams
 has led to breeding disease vectors, loss of aquatic life and recreation activities, and a poor general outlook of the city.
 15.      BWB and BCC28 are embarking on an investment program to enhance the city's water supply and sanitation
 services. Both institutions have traditionally been implementing small interventions to minimize the critical operational
 and service delivery challenges. However, these have resulted in limited progress so far, primarily due to limited financial
 resources. A new package of investments includes a series of interventions designed to address the immediate and
 medium-term water security and sanitation needs and support a long-term solution with the following sub-projects: the
 construction and upgrade of the water sources, construction of independent power sources, network upgrade and
 efficiency improvement, sewerage system upgrade and solid waste management improvements. The Blantyre Water and
 Sanitation Program is estimated at US$ 613 million and is expected to benefit one million people. So far, US$ 150 million
 have been secured from India Exim Bank for the upgrade of the water source and associated infrastructure on the Shire
 River and the construction of a new solar power plant, which will cover the energy requirements at the water production
 level. Additional US$ 45 million are under preparation, of which US$ 30 million from the African Development Bank (to
 finance partial network upgrade and expansion) and US$ 15 million from the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA
 ) to finance the upgrade of the Mudi water treatment plant. With these commitments, the program is short of US$ 416
 million, required to enhance service quality, expand the WSS services to ensure universal access to the Blantyre residents
 and further diversify the source of energy and implement solid waste management upgrades.
  Relationship to CPF

 16.      The project aligns well with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF 2021-2025) for Malawi. The CPF focuses
 on three strategic objectives, (i) foundations for growth and accountability, (ii) promoting private sector-led jobs and
 livelihoods, and (iii) strengthening human capital development. The project is expected to contribute to Focus area 2,
 objectives 2.1 through supporting access to water supply services for micro, small, and medium enterprises, and 2.2 in
 increasing resilience in urban hotspots, and enhancing urban-rural linkages, with better access to water supply and
 sanitation services, thus making Blantyre city more attractive to rural migrants seeking entrepreneurship and job
 opportunities. The project is also expected to contribute to Focus area 3, objective 3.1 in enhancing the demographic
 dividend with improved access to WASH for women and children in early years, and objective 3.2 on improving learning

 27
   https://africancleancities.org/assets/data/Organization/Blantyre_EN.pdf
 28
   . The local Government Act of 1998, as amended in 2010, and the National Decentralization Policy of 1998, mandates Blantyre City Council to
 govern and manage the City of Blantyre.

Aug 13, 2022                                                                                                                          Page 7 of 11
           The World Bank
           Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P178954)


 outcomes for young girls with targeted school WASH interventions and menstrual hygiene management. Moreover, the
 project investments will contribute to the proposed CPF interventions to mitigate COVID-19-related impacts on livelihoods
 and build back better during the post-pandemic economic recovery phase.
 17.     The project is also consistent with the Government's priorities, as it directly aligns with Malawi's commitment
 to improving urbanization. The Malawi 2063 (MW2063) aims to transform Malawi into a wealthy and self-reliant
 industrialized 'upper-middle-income country' by the year 2063.29 MW2063 commits to developing world-class urban
 centers and tourism hubs across the country with requisite socio-economic amenities for a high-quality life. Further,
 MW2063 positions human capital development as pivotal in its aspirations to achieve a transformative economy, including
 access to water supply and sanitation.

  C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

 18.     The Project Development Objective is to improve access to safely managed water supply and sanitation services
 in Blantyre City and to enhance the operational and financial efficiency of the Blantyre Water Board.

  Key Results (From PCN)

 19.      The achievement of the project development objectives will be monitored and measured by the following key
 results indicators:
              a. People provided with improved access to water supply.
                b. Commercial and industrial facilities provided with improved access to water supply
                c. People provided with access to safely managed sanitation.
                d. Reduced physical losses.
                e. Operating cost coverage ratio for BWB.
  D. Concept Description

 20.      Building upon the experience and lessons from the ongoing water supply service delivery efficiency
 improvements in Lilongwe, a Series of Projects (SOP) is proposed to improve urban water supply and sanitation access
 and to support a comprehensive national water program. The SoP will anchor the longer-term Bank support in this
 subsector. In the medium and long term, the SoP is expected to contribute to improving the quality of life and
 competitiveness of urban and rural growth centers in Malawi. GoM's vision is to leverage World Bank support in a manner
 that aligns with the MW2063, building upon the experience and lessons from the ongoing water supply service delivery
 efficiency improvements in Lilongwe, and be aligned with the 2021 Water Sector Investment Plan and the national climate
 resilience financing strategy (under development). The program is estimated at US$ 700 million over the next ten years
 (US$ 200 million for phases I and II each, and US$300 for phase III) with a proposed envelope of US$ 400 million IDA. The
 program targets 2.1 million people with improved water and sanitation services. The program will also support the sector
 regulation to strengthen governance, increase service delivery and financial efficiency, and enhance resilience against
 external shocks such as climate, financial and health-related shocks.
 21.     The program will consist of a combination of financing instruments to maximize investment efficiency and
 incentives for strengthening institutional capacity, operational and financial efficiency, and service quality. SoP-1 will

 29
      https://npc.mw/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/ENGLISH-VERSION.pdf

Aug 13, 2022                                                                                                     Page 8 of 11
         The World Bank
         Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P178954)


 use an Investment Project Financing (IPF) to launch off with the urgent and critical water supply efficiency improvements,
 upgrading of water production and priority sanitation interventions in Blantyre (similar to ongoing infrastructure
 investments in Lilongwe) and a set of technical assistance (TA) activities to prepare for the subsequent phases. The
 infrastructure investments will couple with an operational and financial turnaround program for the BWB, focusing on
 climate-resilient planning and operational systems. SoP-2 will sequentially expand support to other regional water boards
 on priority service gaps investments in selected small towns and performance improvements using a Program for Results
 (PforR) approach. SoP-3 will focus on supporting a comprehensive service delivery framework to expand access (possibly
 using a wholesale PforR instrument), extending the mandate of the regional water boards to support rural growth centers
 using a Green, Resilient and Inclusive Development (GRID) approach.
 22.      The project scope consists of five components that contribute to the PDO. Below is a brief description of the
 activities. The preliminary set of interventions is presented in Annex 1.
 Component 1 - Water supply improvements (US$ 67.85 million equivalent)
 23.     This component will finance investments to improve network operational efficiency, reduce water losses, improve
 water supply service quality, and expand service access to unserved areas. Key interventions include priority water supply
 network upgrade, including 24km of transmission pipeline from Chileka to Blantyre and five associated storage reservoirs
 with a combined capacity of 55,000m3; around 300km distribution network upgrade, pressure management systems, and
 expansion in selected zones, including eight solar-powered pumping stations.
 Component 2 - Priority Sanitation Investments (US$23.5 million equivalent)
 24.     This component involves several interventions to increase access to safely managed sanitation and reduce
 environmental pollution. Key investments include (i) the rehabilitation and upgrade of 50km of sewers in the Blantyre
 sewerage catchment to reduce environmental pollution, minor upgrades to the treatment plants at Zingwangwa and
 Soche, (ii) improvements in solid waste collection, and the construction of a new solid waste landfill, and (iii) upgrade of
 sanitation facilities for 20 priority schools, health centers, and markets, enhanced with MHM facilities and training to
 enhance the retention of girls in schools and support female entrepreneurs in markets.
 Component 3 - Institutional Capacity Strengthening (US$ 20.8 million equivalent)
 25.      This component will finance a set of institutional development activities aimed at (i) enhancing BWB's financial
 efficiency and governance systems, (ii) improving BCC's capacity to manage sanitation services, and (iii) supporting the
 water sector investment planning and policy development to enhance the sustainability of urban water services. BWB
 activities, estimated at US$ 15 million, will be financed through a performance-based mechanism to incentivize
 improvements in (i) staff efficiency through performance management systems and cost reduction, (ii) investment in
 innovative solutions for asset management and operations, (iii) customer services, and (iv) tariff framework with sector
 ministry.
 Component 4 - Technical Assistance and Project Management Support (US$ 15.85 million equivalent)
 26.      This component will finance TA activities designed to support the preparation and supervision of all infrastructure
 investments planned under the project and the incremental operating costs for project management. The TA activities
 include consultancy services for engineering designs, procurement and supervision of water network and sanitation
 infrastructure planned under the project, and preparation and implementation support for safeguards instruments.
 Component 5 – Contingency Emergency Response (CERC- US$ 0)
 27.      This component will provide immediate response to an Eligible Crisis or Emergency, as needed. This would finance
 emergency works in the case of another disaster event by including a "zero-dollar" CERC. This would help recover damage
 to infrastructure, ensure business continuity, and enable early rehabilitation.


Aug 13, 2022                                                                                                       Page 9 of 11
         The World Bank
         Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P178954)




  Legal Operational Policies                                                             Triggered?
  Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                            Yes
  Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60                                                     No

  Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
  .
 The project overall risk is rated substantial. The activities have positive environmental and social impacts such as improved
 access to potable water, improved sanitation and hygiene, improved waste management, clean energy access, improved
 household economy, improved city aesthetic and reduced gender vulnerabilities for women and girls due to long distances
 taken to fetch water. Negative environmental and social impacts and risks are anticipated and these are occupational
 health and safety risks, community health and safety risks, soil erosion, waste management risks, the pollution of air,
 water, and soil, biodiversity, water-borne diseases; COVID 19 and other communicable and noncommunicable diseases,
 waste and solid waste handling, water related vector borne diseases, possible hazardous gasses, risks related to losing
 land and other assets, and loss of income and reduction of economic activity, risk of restricting access to land and other
 assets during construction, pollution of water stream and natural habitats, sedimentation, and increased run-off and
 Gender Based Violence/Sexual Exploitation and Abuse-Sexual Harassment (GBV/SEA-SH, release of odors due to
 inappropriate handling of fecal sludge, solid waste and sewerage; eruption of infectious diseases (e.g. infectious diseases
 including cholera, typhoid, hepatitis, ascariasis, and schistosomiasis), within the communities and among the project
 workers emanating from fecal sludge collection conducted not in accordance with safe standards or in case of an accident
 or a weather event; contamination of water during maintenance of water pipes; traffic safety management during
 transportation of waste; degradation of the local environment due to accidental leakage from landfill; composting/fecal
 sludge management plant releasing fecal material into water courses and open ground; accidents or breaking of the
 infrastructure, heavy winds and flooding hence taking away all sludge to the rest of flooded area and stream, risk of waste
 contact by any unauthorized entry in case of compromised site management, management of a scenario when there is
 shortage in recommended PPE, safety of compost, financial preparedness for any emergency such as breakage etc.

 Both Blantyre Water Board and Blantyre City Council have institutional capacity on environmental management but not
 social and gender. BWB has three environmental management personnel while BCC has four in different departments.
 Both institutions have experience with World Bank safeguards policy. PIU will be established and will have environmental
 and Health and Safety specialist and Social and Gender Specialist who will be supported by institution personnel. The
 project will take the framework approach since some of the sites are not yet known and other activity details are not yet
 available. Environmental and Social management Framework with therefore be prepared to manage the above risks
 associated with ESS1, ESS2, ESS3, ESS4, ESS6, ESS8 and ESS10 while Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared
 to manage all risks associated with ESS5. Other instruments that will be prepared include Labor Management Procedures
 (LMP), including a worker Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM); the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) will include
 project Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM); and an Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) that will be
 agreed on with the borrower and will set out the substantive measures and actions required for the project to meet
 environmental and social requirements over a specified period of time prior to project appraisal. The project’s GBV and
 SEA/SH risks have been rated moderate and SEA/SH Prevention and Response Action Plan, and an Accountability and
 Response Framework will be included in the ESMF.




Aug 13, 2022                                                                                                       Page 10 of 11
          The World Bank
          Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P178954)


 .
     CONTACT POINT


     World Bank
     Odete Duarte Muximpua
     Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist


     Borrower/Client/Recipient
     Ministry of Finance and Economic Affairs
     Nations Msowoya
     Director Debt and Aid
     nmsowoya@naosupportmw.org

     Implementing Agencies

     Blantyre Water Board
     Robert Hanjahanja
     Chief Executive Officer
     rhanjahanja@bwb.mw


     FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
     The World Bank
     1818 H Street, NW
     Washington, D.C. 20433
     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects



     APPROVAL

     Task Team Leader(s):                       Odete Duarte Muximpua

     Approved By
     APPROVALTBL
     Country Director:                          Hugh Riddell            12-Sep-2022




Aug 13, 2022                                                                          Page 11 of 11
