Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        DRC Water Supply and Sanitation Access Program (P178389)

                                f




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                    Project Information Document (PID)


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                   Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 16-Mar-2023 | Report No: PIDA35284




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Mar 16, 2023                                                                                      Page 1 of 30
          The World Bank
          DRC Water Supply and Sanitation Access Program (P178389)



   BASIC INFORMATION

 OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA
  A. Basic Project Data

   Country                                       Project ID            Project Name                 Parent Project ID (if any)
   Congo, Democratic Republic of                 P178389               DRC Water Supply and
                                                                       Sanitation Access
                                                                       Program
   Region                      Estimated Appraisal Date                Estimated Board Date         Practice Area (Lead)
   EASTERN AND SOUTHERN AFRICA 28-Mar-2023                             12-Jun-2023                  Water

   Financing Instrument                          Borrower(s)           Implementing Agency
   Investment Project Financing                  Ministry of Finance   Province of Kasai Central,
                                                                       Province of Kasai,
                                                                       Province of Kwilu,
                                                                       Ministry of Hydraulic
                                                                       Resources and Energy,
                                                                       Province of Kasai Oriental

   Proposed Development Objective(s)

   To increase access to basic drinking water supply and sanitation services in selected provinces of DRC and to
   strengthen the capacities of the public and private sector for water and sanitation service delivery

   Components
   Component 1: Increasing access to and capacities for drinking water supply delivery
   Component 2: Increasing access to and capacities for sanitation and hygiene service delivery
   Component 3: Program Management and Learning
   Component 4: Contingency Emergency Response Component, CERC



   PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

  SUMMARY                    -NewFin1




   Total Project Cost                                                                                                   400.00
   Total Financing                                                                                                     400.00
                             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                         400.00
   Financing Gap                                                                                                           0.00


  DETAILS      -NewFinEnh1




Mar 16, 2023                                                                                                          Page 2 of 30
          The World Bank
          DRC Water Supply and Sanitation Access Program (P178389)


   World Bank Group Financing

      International Development Association (IDA)                                                                          400.00
         IDA Credit                                                                                                        400.00

   Environmental and Social Risk Classification
   Substantial

   Decision
   The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate




   Other Decision (as needed)


   B. Introduction and Context

   Country Context

          1.        The Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), the largest and third most populous country in Sub-
          Saharan Africa, is rich in natural resources. With a total land area of 234 million ha, DRC’s size is
          equivalent to that of Western Europe. It has a low population density of 16.1 person per km2 and an
          estimated 89.61 million inhabitants2, of which 54.4 percent live in rural areas.3 The country has vast natural
          resources, including the world’s third largest hydropower potential, the world’s second largest tropical
          forest area, mineral endowments that are the richest and most diverse in the world, and more than half
          of all freshwater resources in Sub-Saharan Africa.4 Since the 2006 elections, the country follows a semi-
          presidential system, whereby the President is the head of state and the Prime Minister is the head of
          government, of a pluriform multi-party system. There are 26 provinces and provincial executive power is
          exercised by elected governors and their provincial ministers.

          2.     DRC is one of the world’s poorest countries, with a per capita gross domestic product (GDP) of
          US$545,5 roughly one-third of the Sub-Saharan Africa average (US$1,499). Based on the international
          standard of living on less than US$1.90 a day, 73 percent of households live in poverty (2020). Moreover,
          the number of poor is growing, with 20 million more poor in 2020 than in 2003. Poverty reduction is
          hampered by high population growth—on an average three percent annually from 1961 to 2020—
          combined with weak economic growth, with a real GDP growth rate of 1.6 percent over the same period.

          1
            World Bank (2020): www.data.worldbank.org (the latest census took place in 1984).
          2
            Estimates as per the National Deployment and Vaccination Plan (Ministry of Health, 2021) go as high as 116
          million.
          3
            World Bank (2020): www.data.worldbank.org.
          4
            Natural Resources Governance Institute. 2015. Country Strategy Note: Democratic Republic of Congo.
          5
            World Bank (2020): www.data.worldbank.org.

Mar 16, 2023                                                                                                             Page 3 of 30
          The World Bank
          DRC Water Supply and Sanitation Access Program (P178389)


          This has resulted in a 60 percent decline in GDP per capita in 2020 compared to its 1960 level. The impact
          of global supply chain disruptions, inflation, and higher global food and energy prices, compounded by
          the aftermath of the pandemic, present socioeconomic challenges. In 2020, the non-mineral GDP
          contracted by 1.3 percent although GDP growth rebounded to 6.2 percent in 2021 and is estimated to
          reach 6.6 percent in 2022. Additionally, the humanitarian situation is precarious: half of all children have
          not received routine immunizations, over 5.2 million people are forcibly displaced, 27 million people are
          food insecure, and there have been four Ebola outbreaks in the past three years.6 In 2020, DRC’s Human
          Development Index ranked 175 out of 189 countries and territories, while the 2020 Human Capital Index
          score was 0.37, which is below the average in Sub-Saharan Africa.

          3.       Conflict and violence continue, particularly in DRC’s part of the Great Lakes Region of Africa 7
          and lead to persistent fragility. Over the past decade, continuing violence has affected nearly 40 million
          Congolese.8 Women and girls are especially affected as widespread conflict-related sexual violence
          compounds other forms of gender-based violence (GBV). Enduring political instability and cycles of
          conflict have led to weak governance and institutions, hampering reform implementation, service
          delivery, and private sector growth. The three main themes driving fragility and conflict identified in the
          World Bank’s 2021 Risk and Resilience Assessment are (a) elite capture and resource extraction
          perpetuating a nonresponsive system of governance and a poorly redistributive economy; (b) an
          increasingly younger population lacking prospects for social mobility due to trauma and exclusion; and (c)
          the interaction between local, regional, and international conflict systems based on the competition for
          access to land, minerals, and other natural resources.

          4.       Decentralization is enshrined in the 2006 Constitution, however, many key government
          functions and financial resources have yet to be transferred to provinces. Provincial and local
          government capacities are severely constrained by lack of resources, poor intergovernmental
          coordination, and insufficient human resources. Uncertainties and delays surrounding transfer of
          resources to provinces hamper budget planning and execution at provincial level. A sound public financial
          management system is lacking, and provinces still lack proper collection of resources, procedures, systems
          and staff for budget management and execution. The budget execution rate for domestic expenditure on
          water has been around 14-34 percent in the period 2017-2021, and the execution for water-related
          investments to be transferred to provinces has been negligible (0-4 percent)9. The slow progress on
          decentralization severely hampers the ability to deliver services and develop infrastructure for DRC’s
          citizen.

          5.      Major infrastructure gaps, combined with poor governance, have led to geographic isolation,
          socioeconomic inequalities, and disparities in poverty rates across provinces, as well as between urban
          and rural areas. The poor state of access to basic infrastructure services represents a major constraint to
          sustainable and inclusive growth. Decades of conflict, underinvestment, and lack of connectivity across
          DRC’s vast territory have resulted in particularly large gaps in access to water supply and sanitation (WSS)
          services and electricity supply. Lack of access to these services represents a major barrier to doing


          6
            World Bank Group (2022). Country Partnership Framework for the Democratic Republic of Congo for the period
          FY22-FY26. Washington DC.
          7
            Countries include Burundi, DRC, Rwanda, and Uganda.
          8
            Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs data (2021).
          9
            Authors analysis of BOOST database based on National Budget data; period 2017-2021

Mar 16, 2023                                                                                                             Page 4 of 30
          The World Bank
          DRC Water Supply and Sanitation Access Program (P178389)


          business, hampers market development, and adds significant costs to projects. The government has begun
          the reform of key state-owned enterprises responsible for service delivery, including the national water
          utility. However, these reforms principally impact urban services, leaving significant governance gaps in
          rural areas where alternative service provision models are be strengthened.

          6.       Significant gender gaps as well as high prevalence rates of gender-based violence (GBV) are a
          significant barrier to women’s full engagement in social and economic life in the DRC and remain
          correlated with violence and insecurity. DRC ranks 149 (out of 153 countries) as measured by the Global
          Gender Gap Index from the World Economic Forum. Gender gaps exists across all pillars of the World Bank
          Group (WBG) Gender Strategy10 and national-level indicators of the World Bank’s Africa Human Capital
          Plan11 show that girls and women in the DRC are highly disadvantaged in terms of empowerment and
          agency over life choices and access to basic services (water sanitation, education). Women still face
          discrimination regarding labor force participation as well as land and property ownership. Furthermore,
          61.5 percent of female-headed households live under the poverty line.12 Women are less involved in the
          labor market and are also less likely to have skilled jobs,13 only accounting for 24 percent of professional
          and technical workers. One quarter of STEM14 graduates are female and only 9 percent of graduates from
          construction and engineering programs are female15. Addressing women’s economic empowerment
          requires improving security and household agency, increasing educational attainment and skills,
          increasing access to capital, and supporting women’s productivity.16

          7.       Women and girls in the DRC experience high levels of violence. In the DRC, according to
          Demographic and Health Survey (DHS), more than half of all women in DRC have experienced physical
          violence since the age of 15 (52 percent), and 27 percent of women reported they had been victims of
          physical violence over the past 12 months,17 most often by a family member but also by teachers, police,
          soldiers, or armed groups. Levels of acceptability of intimate partner violence in the DRC are very
          elevated, reflecting the significant socialization and internalization of violence against women as an
          acceptable norm. This level of violence, higher than Sub-Saharan Africa regional and global averages,
          represents a critical barrier to women’s and girls’ full participation in the social and economic space.1819

          8.      Climate change poses a serious threat to the country’s weak infrastructure and livelihoods. Due
          to the vast resources of the Congo basin and a high average annual rainfall of over 1500 mm per year, DRC
          is generally water rich. The total volume of freshwater withdrawn by major economic sectors is 0.2

          10
             World Bank Group Gender Strategy 2016–2023. World Bank, Washington DC.
          11
             Human Capital Plan for Africa. 2019. World Bank, Washington DC.
          12
             https://databank.worldbank.org/source/world-development-indicators.
          13
             World Economic Forum (WEF). 2020. Global Gender Gap Index.
          14
             STEM = science, technology, engineering, mathematics subjects; The Little data Book on Gender. 2019. World
          Bank, Washington DC.
          15
             https://genderdata.worldbank.org (2016)
          16
             World Bank. 2021. Women’s Economic Empowerment in the Democratic Republic of Congo. Obstacles and
          Opportunities. World Bank Washington DC.
          17
             Government of the Democratic Republic of Congo DHS (2014).
          18
             Demographic and Health Survey, 2013–2014.
          19
            World Health Organization, Global and regional estimates of violence against women: prevalence and health
          effects of intimate partner violence and non-partner sexual violence, 2013.


Mar 16, 2023                                                                                                              Page 5 of 30
          The World Bank
          DRC Water Supply and Sanitation Access Program (P178389)


          percent of the total resource endowment. Long-term forecasts show more intense and frequent rainfall
          and an increase in daily mean temperature of 1.5–2.5°C warming by 2050. This would lead to more
          frequent flooding, increased erosion, and prolonged dry spells. Climate change impacts and vulnerabilities
          already pose significant challenges and risks in key sectors such as agriculture, urban development, water
          supply and sanitation, electricity, and human health and compound existing risks from conflict and
          violence. Progressing climate change will impact DRC’s water security in terms of access to services and
          water-related risks, hence the need for climate-resilient infrastructure and water resources management.
          The DRC’s Climate Change and Development Report (in preparation) will assess progressing water security
          risks and make recommendations for climate-resilient infrastructure development.


   Sectoral and Institutional Context

          9.       Despite DRC’s rich water resources, the country faces water security challenges, given the low
          access rates for water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) services20. As of 2020, 48 million (53 percent)
          people lack basic water access, 76 million lack basic sanitation (84 percent), and 73 million lack basic
          hygiene services (81 percent)21. DRC is, after Nigeria and Ethiopia, the third largest country in terms of
          unserved population in Sub Sharan Africa. The scale of the challenge is enormous: 8 million people per
          year need to gain access to water supply, and 10 million people per year to sanitation to achieve universal
          access by 2030, one of the Sustainable Development Goals. The most recent household survey found that
          access in rural areas is much lower than in urban areas across all WSS services.22 Most notably, only 19
          percent of rural households have access to basic water supply and only 9 percent have access to basic
          sanitation, whereas 18 percent of rural household still practice open defecation as their primary sanitation
          solution and just 15 percent of rural households have access to basic hygiene services23.. Not only is access
          higher in urban areas, but wealthy households are also much more likely to have access to water supply
          (66 percent versus 14 percent) and basic sanitation (30 percent versus 6 percent) than those in the bottom
          quintile of the total population.




          20
             World Bank (2017). WASH Poor in a Water-Rich Country: A Diagnostic of Water, Sanitation, Hygiene, and Poverty
          in the Democratic Republic of Congo. World Bank, Washington, DC.
          21
             JMP data www.washdata.org/
          22
             UNICEF (2018) DRC Multiple Cluster Indicator Survey (MICS) Household survey.
          23
             Definitions are defined through the Joint Monitoring Program (JMP) of UNICEF/WHO (www.washdata.org). JMP
          uses national data such as Demographic Health Survey (DHS) and the Multiple Cluster Indicator Survey (MICS).
          “Basic” water supply is defined as access to an improved water source within a 30-minute-roundtrip time. An
          improved water source includes piped water (tap stand or yard connection), borehole, handpump, protected
          spring or dug well. JMP defines “safely managed” water supply as a much higher level of service with access on
          premises, a reliable supply, and free of contamination. Basic sanitation is defined as access to an improved
          sanitation facilities not shared with other households. An improved facility includes a pit latrine with slab, a
          ventilated improved pit latrine, a flush toilet, a pour-flush toilet, or a composting toilet. Basic hygiene means an
          on-plot handwashing facility with water or soap. Safely managed sanitation means that the household has access
          to a basic service and where excreta are safely disposed of in situ or treated off site.

Mar 16, 2023                                                                                                                Page 6 of 30
          The World Bank
          DRC Water Supply and Sanitation Access Program (P178389)


          Figure 1: Access to improved water supply (blue), improved sanitation (green), and prevalence of open defecation
          (orange) (MICS, 2018)




          10.      Water supply and sanitation access and the prevalence of open defecation is uneven
          geographically with hotspots in the central provinces, and large number of people without services in
          the eastern provinces. Figure 1 shows the relative access share for water and sanitation, while 1 provides
          an overview of people without access at the province level. Not considering Kinshasa24, the biggest
          contributors to the access gap on water are Kwilu, Kongo Central, Kasai, Kasai Central, Kasai Oriental, Nord
          Kivu and Sud Kivu. The Multi-Phase Programmatic Approach (MPA) focusses on nine provinces25 identified
          in the World Bank Group (WBG) FY22-26 as focus areas for operational engagements. The provinces under
          the MPA were selected based on poverty and stunting levels, synergies with other IDA-financed projects
          such as in electrification, private sector development, health, education, and governance, and the number
          of people without water and sanitation services. These nine provinces represent 45 percent of the total
          population, hosting 50 percent of the people without basic water supply, 47 percent of the people without
          basic sanitation, and 45 percent of people practicing open defecation (2022).
          11.      The human capital costs of poor WASH services in DRC are high. WASH is closely linked to
          malnutrition, stunting, and related health problems, such as diarrhea, ranking among the top five risk
          factors associated with death and disability in DRC26. More than 40 percent, or about 5.6 million children
          under the age of five, are stunted27. Women and girls are especially affected by the lack of access to
          improved WASH infrastructure, as they bear the brunt of collecting water from distant sources. Water
          collection and open defecation, especially at night, increase their exposure to risk of gender-based
          violence (GBV). As 58 percent of primary schools lack access to water services and 35 percent have no
          sanitation facilities28, girls’ learning environment and school attendance is affected. A large majority of

          24
             Figure 1 refers to access to an improved water source, which explains the high access rate in Kinshasa where
          there are many informal water points being used in absence of a piped service by REGIDESO
          25
             Provinces for phase 2 are preliminary identified as Ituri, Kongo Central, Kasai, Kasai Central, Kasai Oriental, Kwilu,
          Lomami, Nord Kivu, Sud Kivu. They will be confirmed once phase preparation will start.
          26
             Skoufias,Emmanuel; Vinha,Katja Pauliina; Sato,Ryoko. 2019. All Hands on Deck: Reducing Stunting through
          Multisectoral Efforts in Sub-Saharan Africa (English). Washington, D.C: World Bank Group.
          27
             Demographic Health Survey (2014)
          28
             JMP (2022) www.washdata.org ; no data available on presence of hygiene facilities (water and soap).

Mar 16, 2023                                                                                                                     Page 7 of 30
          The World Bank
          DRC Water Supply and Sanitation Access Program (P178389)


          girls report that they do not change absorbents at schools due to lack of suitable space and/or dirty
          toilets29. Without WASH access at home, school, or work, menstrual hygiene management (MHM)
          remains a challenge for many women and girls and around 15 percent of women, aged 15-49 state they
          are not participating in work, school, or social activities due to their periods30. Moreover, lack of WASH
          access in health clinics impacts the quality of care and limits infection prevention and control. In DRC, 46
          and 47 precent of health centers have no basic water, respectively sanitation service, while the situation
          is better for hospitals (15 percent and 25 respectively)31.
          12.      In a context of state fragility and poor governance, three major institutional weaknesses have
          plagued the sector: institutional fragmentation, weak capacity, and a bias towards investing in urban
          water services32. The water sector institutional framework is highly fragmented and poorly coordinated.
          The Ministry of Water Resources and Electricity (Ministère des Ressources Hydrauliques et Electricité,
          MRHE) is the key government institution for the water supply sector including developing water sector
          policies, planning access scale up, and overseeing program implementation, and as such is the main
          custodian of the implementation of the 2015 Water Law. Although foreseen in the law, a national policy
          on water supply has not yet been approved33. Under the tutelage of the Ministry of Rural Development
          (Ministère de Développement Rural, MDR) the National Office for Rural Hydraulics (Office National
          d'Hydraulique Rural, ONHR) assumes tasks for the development of rural water schemes and support to
          rural water committees, although this entity has no mentioning in the Water Law. The 2015 Water Law
          also introduced the establishment of new sector institutions, namely the Water Regulatory Agency
          (ARSPE, Autorité de Régulation du Service Public de l’Eau) responsible for economic and service level
          regulation and the development of water PPPs, and the Congolese Water Authority (OCE, Office Congolais
          des Eaux) responsible for water resources management (WRM) functions, although both entities have not
          yet been established operationally. While OCE is foreseen to have operational task to help set-up basin
          committees, develop basin plans, manage water allocations, and collect water resources taxes, the
          Department for Water Resources (DRE, Direction Ressources en Eau) under MRHE remains responsible for
          policy and regulatory framework, hosting the hydromet data systems, and issuance of water abstraction
          permits.
          13.      Despite significant donor investments in the urban water sector through the national water
          utility REGIDESO (Régie de Distribution d’Eaux) shows weak performance, operational inefficiencies,
          and poor financial health. This is due to high levels of technical losses, tariffs that do not support cost
          recovery, low levels of bill collection and limited use of digital technologies for network management and
          payments. Weak governance manifests through lack of transparency in reporting, non-implementation of
          performance standards and human resource issues. The national government has significant arrears to
          REGIDESO, impacting its ability to make investments to maintain assets, much less to invest in new
          infrastructure. In response, a REGIDESO restructuring strategy was approved by the Government in
          September 2021. Since December 2022, a competitively recruited General Director is leading the



          29
             UNICEF/Catholic Relief Services (2018). Study on the Management of Menstrual Hygiene in DRC.
          30
             UNICEF (2018). Multiple Cluster Indicator Survey
          31
             JMP (2022) www.washdata.org ; no data available on presence of hygiene facilities (water and soap/alcohol
          rub).
          32
             World Bank. 2017. WASH Poor in a Water-Rich Country: A Diagnostic of Water, Sanitation, Hygiene, and Poverty
          in the Democratic Republic of Congo. World Bank, Washington, DC.
          33
             A draft national water policy and implementation plan has validated in draft, but not approved.

Mar 16, 2023                                                                                                            Page 8 of 30
          The World Bank
          DRC Water Supply and Sanitation Access Program (P178389)


          transformation process34, that ultimately aims to set-up autonomous subsidiaries (filiales) at the
          provincial level, with a transfer of water supply assets to provinces.
          14.      Under the emerging decentralized governance structure, provinces are mandated to take on
          the water supply and sanitation investments and service delivery but have not yet been equipped to do
          so. While decentralization was enshrined in the 2006 Constitution, through its 26 provinces and its over
          1000 decentralized territorial entities (ETDs, Entitées Teritoriales Décentralizées) little progress has been
          made thus far. Fiscal transfers to the provinces are only slowly materializing and a dedicated fund to
          support the provinces and ETDs has not been set-up. The Water Law (2015) mandates provinces to
          organize WSS service delivery in coordination with the ETDs, although only a few by-laws (mésure
          d’application) have been issued . This includes the establishment of provincial public water supply units35,
          or Regies Provinciales (RP) de Service Public d’Eau (RP). The RPs are responsible to develop and oversee
          water supply/infrastructure services through service delegation contracts with operators. These
          operators could be i) public, such as REGIDESO (Régie de Distribution d’Eaux) or its future subsidiaries, ii)
          private through various Public Private Partnership (PPP) contracts, or iii) drinking water associations or
          ASUREPs (Association d'Usagers de Réseau d'Eau Potable36), that are not-for-profit organizations. There
          is no register of all ASUREPs at provincial or national level, and often rural water committees operate in
          full informality without technical support or oversight. With support of other partners, RPs have already
          been established in Kwilu, Kasai Oriental, and Nord-Kivu.
          15.      While sanitation37 services, such as collection, treatment and disposal, are absent in urban areas
          due to the lack of governance framework, no investments and weak institutions, the government is
          addressing basic on-site sanitation access through its National Roadmap for Eradicating Open
          Defecation38.The Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development (Ministère de l’Environnement
          et Développement Durable, MEDD) oversees the sanitation subsector. The MEDD’s Sanitation Department
          (Département d'Assainissement, DAS) is responsible for sanitation planning and programming and,
          building on previous programs39, collaborates with the Ministry of Public Health (MSP, Ministère de Santé
          Public), notably its department for Hygiene and Public Health (Direction Hygiène et Salubrité Publique,
          DHSP) at provincial level. In 2022, the Government has embarked upon the development of a framework
          law for sanitation, that would require future implementation decrees to assign clear institutional
          mandates long the sanitation service chain (liquid sanitation/sludge)40.
          16.     The Government of DRC (GoDRC) is in the process of reforming both the water supply and
          sanitation sector and prepared a national program to improve access and sustainability of services. The
          National Program for Water, Sanitation and Hygiene 2020-2030 (Programme National d’Eau, Hygiène et


          34
             Three phases are foreseen: (a) the regionalization of REGIDESO’s activities into Regional/provincial Directorates
          with increased autonomy, (b) the creation of a REGIDESO holding company and gradually establishing REGIDESO
          subsidiaries (filiales), and (c) the opening up of service provision in provincial capitals for various types of PPPs.
          35
             In some provinces they are called Regie Provinciales d’Infrastructure, combining multiple sectors (e.g. including
          energy)
          36
             Under a legal not-for-profit organizational form Association Sans But Lucrative (ASBL)
          37
             This refers to the safe containment, collection, treatment, disposal/re-use of fecal matter (septage, fecal sludge,
          wastewater);
          38
             MEDD (2019). Feuille de Route de l’éradication de la défécation a l’air libre en RDC 2020-2030.
          39
             Notably the National Healthy School and Village Program that ran until 2019.
          40
             in DRC sanitation has a much broader definition, including solid water management, drainage, and other
          environmental health aspects; sanitation is often referred to as liquid sanitation/sludge management.

Mar 16, 2023                                                                                                                   Page 9 of 30
          The World Bank
          DRC Water Supply and Sanitation Access Program (P178389)


          Assainissement, PNEHA), lays out the policy priorities and desired investments, setting ambitious access
          targets of 80 percent for urban water, 60 percent for rural water, 70 percent for sanitation and universal
          access in schools and health centers by 2030. The PNEHA, budgeted at US$ 8 billion of which the majority
          is for water supply, has several subprograms and involves all relevant ministries. Annual review of results
          and spending are not systematically tracked. The National Action Committee for Water Supply, Sanitation,
          and Hygiene (CNAEHA, Committée Nationale d’Action, d’Eau, Hygiène et Assaisinissement), plays a
          coordinating role involving MRHE, MDR, MEDD, MSP, and Ministry of Education (Ministère d‘Education
          Primaire, Secondaire et Tertiaire, MEPST).
          17.      GoDRC expenditure on WASH is extremely low and budget execution rates are compromised
          due to the incomplete decentralization process, leaving the sector dependent on donor financing. An
          analysis of expenditure data over the period 2017-2021 reveals that domestic public expenditure on
          WASH was only 0.23 percent of overall government expenditure (excluding external funds), a mere 0.02
          percent of GDP and in absolute terms only US$ 9 million on average annually (capital and recurrent
          expenditure). When including donor-financed expenditure (US$ 70 million on average annually), the share
          goes up to 0.13 percent of GDP41. Domestic budget execution rates in the same period are extremely low
          at just 20 percent, mostly due to dysfunctional transfer and execution process of transfers to provinces
          and ETDs.
          18.     The water sector is critical to implement the Government’s response to climate change. As
          indicated in the Nationally Determined Contributions document42, the Government has committed to
          reducing its greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 21 percent43 from 2021 to 2030—a reduction of around
          650 million tCO2e compared to business-as-usual emissions. Targeted sectors for GHG emissions reduction
          include agriculture, forestry, land use, and energy. In the energy sector, the main priority is the
          development of renewable energy sources, mainly hydropower and solar. The operation of water
          production and distribution is often among the largest energy consumers in small towns and rural areas
          and accelerating the use of solar-powered solutions for water system operations is part of the mitigation
          response. The Government’s National Adaptation Plan to Climate Change 2022-202644 identifies the
          following adaptation priorities (a) conservation of forest ecosystems and biodiversity; and (b) integrated
          agriculture, fishing, livestock, and rural development, and (c) water and sanitation, including reducing
          flood risk, drought and erosion impacts. Climate change is driving the increased spread of many
          communicable diseases, including diarrheal diseases, cholera, and flooding results in increased spread of
          pathogens. Low-income communities, often impacted most by floods and droughts, are the most
          vulnerable to the climate-induced impacts of disrupted water and sanitation systems45.


          41
             Based on analysis of BOOST data set from Ministry of Budget and data from Government Platform on Aid
          Investments
          42
             Deputy Prime Minister’s Office, Ministry of the Environment and Sustainable Development. Nationally
          Determined Contribution -updated version. for Democratic Republic of Congo
          https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/NDC/2022-06/CDN%20Revis%C3%A9e%20de%20la%20RDC.pdf with 19
          percent to be achieved with external support while 2 percent based on national efforts
          43
             Of which 19 percent to be achieved with external support while 2 percent based on national efforts.
          44
             Deputy Prime Minister’s Office, Ministry of the Environment and Sustainable Development. National Adaptation
          Plan to Climate Change 2022- 2026 for Democratic Republic of Congo;
          https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/DRC-NAP_EN.pdf
          45
             Un Water Conference 2023; Conference paper A/CONF.240/2023/4
          https://documents-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N23/028/75/PDF/N2302875.pdf?OpenElement

Mar 16, 2023                                                                                                           Page 10 of 30
          The World Bank
          DRC Water Supply and Sanitation Access Program (P178389)


          19.      The proposed DRC Water Supply and Sanitation Access Program (Programme d’Accès aux
          Services d’Eau et d’Aissainissement, PASEA) complements past and ongoing water projects financed by
          the International Development Association (IDA). In 2009, the Cellule d’Exécution des Projets-Eau (CEP-
          O) was established under REGIDESO, tasked with the implementation of the IDA financed Urban Water
          Supply project (PEMU) from 2009-202146. In February 2022, CEP-O was transferred to MRHE to strengthen
          the implementation capacity of its General Secretariat. The ongoing Kinshasa Multi-sector Development
          and Urban Resilience Project (Kin Elenda)47 as well as the ongoing Access, Governance, and Reform for
          Electricity and Water sectors project (AGREE)48 are both implemented through CEP-O. Kin Elenda and
          AGREE project supports REGIDESO’s transformation, investments and support to Regie Provinciales in two
          provinces49 and intends to build capacity of nascent institutions such as ARSPE and OCE and supports
          MEDD in the development of the framework sanitation law (see Box 1). Kin Elenda supports the
          development of the performance contract between the state and REGIDESO, its transformation plan, and
          the first fecal sludge treatment plant (FSTP) in Kinshasa.
          20.      PASEA has synergies with other IDA-funded projects concerning renewable-based
          electrification, increasing private sector engagement, strengthening governance, and improving
          education and girls’ empowerment. PASEA, through its focus on building decentralized implementation
          capacity, is fully aligned with the ENCORE50 project supporting decentralization and execution of fiscal
          transfers to provinces in four overlapping provinces as well as the development policy financing (DPF) for
          economic governance reform51, that aims to improve sound public financial management and accelerate
          SOE-reforms, including of REGIDESO (see Box 1).
          21.      PASEA complements the AGREE project, benefiting from market development for mini-grids or
          off-grid solar systems in the Kasais that will support sustainable solar pumping systems in rural areas.
          Specifically, PASEA will leverage the collaboration with the National Rural Electrification Agency (Agence
          Nationale d’Electrification et des Services Énergétiques en milieux Rural et Péri-Urbain, ANSER) in building
          the capacity of solar companies, specifically in deepening skills on solar pumping systems and developing
          maintenances services for ASUREPs. PASEA will help reinforce the goals of the Girls Empowerment
          Project52, through investing in WASH infrastructure in primary and secondary schools and changing stigma
          and social norms around menstrual hygiene. PASEA builds on the TRANSFORME53 project as it aims (in
          phase 2) to facilitate water operators’ access to commercial finance from participating financial
          institutions under a dedicated water-window of its existing Partial Portfolio Credit Guarantee (PPCG)
          scheme. Moreover, PASEA aims to support micro, small and medium enterprises (MSME) in sanitation
          and hygiene with catalytic grants.




          46
             Projet Eau en Milieu Urbain (PEMU) (P091092)
          47
             Kinshasa Multi-sector Development and Urban Resilience Project (Kin Elenda) (P1711141)
          48
             Access, Governance, Reform for Electricity and Water (Eau) Sectors (AGREE) (P173506)
          49
             Nord Kivu and Kasai Central
          50
             Enhancing Collection of Revenues and Expenditure Management Project (ENCORE) (P171762)
          51
             DRC Foundational Economic Governance Reform program (Development Policy Financing, DPF) (P179141)
          52
             DRC Girls Empowerment Project (P178684); coordination on the targeting of secondary schools will be ensured
          through the provincial education departments
          53
             Empowering Women Entrepreneurs and upgrading MSMEs for Economic Transformation and Jobs in DRC project
          (P178176)

Mar 16, 2023                                                                                                         Page 11 of 30
          The World Bank
          DRC Water Supply and Sanitation Access Program (P178389)


          Box 1. Overview of broader economic and governance reforms relevant for water and sanitation and outcomes

               Water and Sanitation reforms under AGREE and Kin Elenda projects (2022-2028)

               Focus of reform and interventions:

                 REGIDESO transformation process with state performance contract and improvement plan(digitalization)
                 REGIDESO retructuring process:
                  (i) increasing autonomy and viability of provincial directorates
                  (ii) estabslishment of holding with subsidairies (filiales); pilots in Nord Kivu and Kasai Central/Kasai
                 Automatic payments to REGIDESO for water bil of Instances Officielles (public institutions) and ban of free
                  water
                 Operationalize basic functions of ARSPE and OCE (staff, operational procedures, regulatory instruments)
                 Techncial assistance to develop sanitation framework law at national level


               ENCORE and Economic Governance Reform DPF (2022-2026)

                  Competetive recruitment of REGIDESO General Manager and Chairman of REGIDESO Board
                  Enhancement in financial reporting and auditing for REGIDESO
                  Overall system and human resources improvements for Public Financial Management (PFM)
                  Capacity building for PFM at provincial level and incentives to realize fiscal transfers to ENCORE pilot
                   provinces (include the three Kasais provinces)


               Envisioned governance and service delivery outcomes:

             Leadership and changed organizational culture in support of REGIDESO transformation
             Increased transparency and improved financial position of REGIDESO (reduced government debt)
             More accountable, decentralized management of REGIDESO provincial directorates and successfull pilot of
               subsidiarization (filiales) under oversigth of Regies Provinciales; readiness for replication in other
          22. provinces
                  Development partners support the Government’s efforts in the water and sanitation sector in
             Updated and
          a coordinated       cost-reflective
                            manner.            water tariffs;
                                        Development           basic functioning
                                                         partners’                of economic
                                                                       interventions            regulation through the Donors
                                                                                         are oordinated
             IncreasedGroup,
          Coordination    transparency,
                                 co-chairedeffectiveness
                                                by UNICEFandandcredibility in budgeting
                                                                   the World     Bank. Inand
                                                                                           thePFM
                                                                                                water sector, key donors are the
              Increased  fiduciairy comptencies    for budget   execution   at
          German Agency for International Cooperation (Deutsche Gesellschaft fürnational and provincial  level
                                                                                                 Internationale Zusammenarbeit,
          GIZ), German Development Bank (Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau, KFW), African Development Bank
          (AFDB), USAID (United States Agency for International Development), International Committee of the Red
          Cross (ICRC), and others have investment in infrastructure development, master planning, and technical
          assistance (TA) to support the reform, strengthen MRHE, REGIDESO, private operators, and the set-up of
          several Regies Provinciales. For rural areas, PASEA design draws on lessons from PRISE54, a project financed
          by AfDB and lessons from ASUREP management of peri-urban systems, implemented through ENABEL,
          the Belgian technical cooperation agency. PASEA has incorporated lessons from the UNICEF supported
          National Healthy Schools and Village Program (PNEVA, Programme Nationale Ecoles et Villages
          Assainisses) and the implementation of MEDD’s Roadmap to End Open Defecation. PASEA complements
          investments in urban water supply by KFW and AFD in the Kasai region, utilizing production capacity
          managed by REGIDESO for extensions to peri-urban areas.

          54
                PRISE = Project for the Reinforcement of Socioeconomic Infrastructure in the Central Region

Mar 16, 2023                                                                                                                    Page 12 of 30
          The World Bank
          DRC Water Supply and Sanitation Access Program (P178389)


          23.      The MPA responds to pressing institutional challenges, opportunities for the private sector, and
          to access gaps in water supply and sanitation services in rural and peri-urban areas, requiring a long-
          term approach. Expanding basic service provision for households, businesses and community institutions
          is aimed at human capital development and trust building between the state and its citizens. The project
          will enhance rural water security through provincial WSS investments and WRM measures, technical
          support and better coordination mechanisms among all involved stakeholders. To increase climate
          resilience, the MPA will develop MEDD and OCE’s capacities for sub-basin planning and groundwater
          management. The MPA will design climate resilient infrastructure and support low-carbon solar-based
          water pumping. The MPA with its learning agenda, allows adaptive implementation, especially for
          innovative elements and on how to support government-led implementation at scale. The MPA will also
          engage in longer-term reforms, such as on rural water, private sector development, and urban sanitation,
          where big gaps exist.



   C. Proposed Development Objective(s)



  Development Objective(s) (From PAD)
  To increase access to basic drinking water supply and sanitation services in selected provinces of DRC and to strengthen
  the capacities of the public and private sector for water and sanitation service delivery


   Key Results

          24.     The proposed PDO-level indicators for phase 1 are:
                  (a)   People provided with access to at least basic drinking water services (number),
                        disaggregated by basic drinking water service, safely managed drinking water service,
                        people in rural areas, people in (peri-) urban areas, female.
                  (b)   People provided with access to basic sanitation services (number), disaggregated by
                        people ending open defecation, people in rural areas, people in (peri-) urban areas,
                        female.
                  (c)   Provincial Units for Water Supply (Regies Provinciales) are established and fully
                        operational (number)
                  (d)   Provinces with governance framework assigning institutional mandates for sanitation
                        (number)
                  (e)   Water operators performing satisfactorily as per delegation agreements/contracts
                        (Percentage)
                  (f)   Sanitation and hygiene enterprises entering and active in the market (number)

          25.     The proposed Program Development Objective (PrDO) is to scale-up access to basic drinking
          water supply and basic sanitation services in selected provinces of DRC and to strengthen institutions
          for water and sanitation service delivery. The Project Development Objective (PDO) for phases 1 and 2
          are proposed to be the same: to increase access to basic drinking water supply and sanitation services in
          selected provinces of DRC and to strengthen the capacities of the public and private sector for water and


Mar 16, 2023                                                                                                    Page 13 of 30
          The World Bank
          DRC Water Supply and Sanitation Access Program (P178389)


          sanitation service delivery. Phase 1 focusses on the provinces of Kasai, Kasai Central, Kasai Oriental, and
          Kwilu, as these provinces have both high absolute numbers of unserved people, including high levels of
          open defecation, and were identied as priority by the Government. They also offer immediate synergies
          with the World Bank’s support to provincial decentralization under ENCORE project and AGREE project.
          Additional five provinces have preliminairy been selected for phase 2, including Ituri, Kongo Central,
          Lomami, Nord Kivu, and Sud Kivu, underserved provinces in central as well as eastern DRC, the latter
          affected by conflict and violence. Phase 3 scales-up implementation in the four “phase 1 provinces”, and
          phase 4 across the five “phase 2 provinces”.

          26.     The proposd PDO for phases 3 and 4 is to increase access to basic drinking water supply and
          sanitation services in selected provinces of DRC and to strengthen institutions for sustainable service
          delivery. Table 1 includes the PrDO level results indicators measuring the scale-up in terms of additional
          number of people provided with access to basic water and basic sanitation services, broken down per
          phase. These estimates assume the leveraging of US$ 250 million of donor co-financing and US$ 150
          million of government co-financing under phases 3 and 4. This translates in a projected relative access
          change across all nine provinces from 32 to 58 percent access to basic water, and from 10 to 32 percent
          access to basic sanitation55. Although the challenge of universal access is enormous, especially given the
          high population growth of DRC of around 3 percent, the MPA is expected to build a solid implementation
          foundation that will - beyond the MPA - allow further acceleration through a nation-wide scale-up
          program.

                  Table 1. Overview of Program Development Objective Indicators
                                          Additional people with access to        Estimated % change in provinces
                                          basic drinking          basic         basic drinking           basic
                                              water            sanitation           water             sanitation
                  Phase 1: 4
                  provinces                 3,000,000          2,000,000      From 14% to 30%      From 4% to 15%
                  6/2023 - 6/2029
                  Phase 2: 5
                  provinces                 3,750,000          2,500,000      From 43% to 49%     From 12% to 20%
                  7/2026 - 7/2031
                  Phase 3: 4
                  provinces                 2,000,000          1,500,000      From 22% to 36%     From 10% to 20%
                  1/2027 - 6/2032
                  Phase 4: 5
                  provinces                 2,500,000          2,000,000      From 47% to 53%     From 16% to 24%
                  1/2029 - 6/2034
                  Total: 9 provinces
                                           12,250,000          8,000,000      From 32% to 58%     From 10% to 28%
                  6/2023 - 6/2034




          55
            Estimates are based on Multiple Cluster Indicator Survey, 2018 data and National Institute of Statistics; Coverage
          estimates are indicative.

Mar 16, 2023                                                                                                               Page 14 of 30
          The World Bank
          DRC Water Supply and Sanitation Access Program (P178389)


   D. Project Description

          27.      The overall program framework includes a proposed MPA financing envelope of US$ 1.25 billion
          over an eleven-year implementation framework. The four phases are simultaneous each with a duration
          of 5.5 to 6 years. Phase 2 is used for geographic expansion across more provinces, while deploying phases
          3 and 4 are used to scale-up within the already participating provinces. During phase 1, under the
          coordination of the Project Coordination Unit (PCU), the second phase 2 will be prepared in the additional
          five provinces, ensuring for readiness. Also the foundations for a coherent national WASH platform will
          be prepared, with a financing plan, and sector review mechanism. Phase 2 will be used to prepare for
          phases 3 and 4, including all assessments reuired to shift to a PforR instrument, aligned with the
          reinvigorated national program. Each phase preparation will include a province-led validation process to
          prioritize ETDs, based on criteria such as people without services, level accessibility, the presence of larger
          villages and growth centers, and some clustering to increase efficiency of implementation. Within each
          ETD, an area-wide approach will be used to create significant impact. Phase 3 and 4 will be used to select
          additional ETDs, including those villages that may have more challenging accessibility.

          28.      Phase 1 includes performance based conditions (PBCs) to incentivize improvements in the
          governance framework, encourage a result-based culture, and emphasize sustainability. PBCs may be
          continued under phase 2. The first two phases will develop a better enabling environment for private
          sector growth in rural and peri-urban WSS service provision, and increase the comptencies of PPIUs and
          provincial actors, and reducing risks that come with scaling-up investments, potentially through a PforR
          (with IPF component) in phases 3 and 4. Phase 1 will focus on the most underserved provinces of DRC,
          that represent around 18 percent of the population, host 31 percent of those without water, 23 percent
          of those without sanitation, and 33 percent of people that practice open defecation. Phase 2, expanding
          to five other provinces will follow in 2026, with similar activities, ensuring adaptation to the fragility and
          complex governance context in eastern DRC.

          29.      Informed by evidence-based learning, phase 1 and 2 will develop scalable water supply and
          sanitation service delivery models, while strengthening national and provincial sector governance and
          financing (see Table 3). Specifically for the rural water sector, mandates are ambiguous and not aligned
          with the Water Law. ONHR56 - including its deconcentrated provincial offices - is weakly resourced and
          other than salary payments of staff, the agency has a poor track record of investment execution57. This
          results in the de-facto absence of rural water maintenance and institutional support to water operators.
          Hence, phase 1 and subsequent phases aim to reorganize rural water development and support functions,
          in line with the Water Law and decentralization. This would mean the integration of rural water
          investment implementation functions within the Regies Provinciales – as maitre d’ouvrage - and the
          development of support functions for rural water operators though restructuring of ONHR58. To strenghen
          financing for rural and peri-urban water supply, phases 1 and 2 aim to establish a water fund to finance
          capital maintenance, rehabilitation and development of new infrastructure, that could receive different

          56
             An agency not mentioned in the Water Law, bears responsible for rural water supply development and
          maintenance support as per its Prime Minister’s establishment decree.
          57
             BOOST database 2016-2021 indicates that budget execution for non-salaries has been only CDF 3.8 billion (total
          for 2018 and 2019), or US$ 2.4 million (in 2018/2019 prices).
          58
             Phase 1 will develop a costed implementation plan for strengthening rural water functions/ ONHR evolvement,
          however, future Development Policy Financing (DPF) operations may be required to support full implementation.

Mar 16, 2023                                                                                                             Page 15 of 30
          The World Bank
          DRC Water Supply and Sanitation Access Program (P178389)


          sources of finance, namely lease payments of operators (redevence), provincial budget allocations and
          national budget transfers. Subsequent phases would consolidate the mechanisms and crowd in financing
          for execution, including domestic resources.

          30.      Phases 1 and 2 of the MPA will follow the same component structure, although interventions
          adopted to the specific context in the provinces selected, as folows:
               Component 1: Increasing access to and capacities for drinking water supply service delivery
              1.1 Increasing access to basic water supply in rural and peri-urban areas
              1.2 Improving performance of private and not-for profit water operators
              1.3 Strenghening public institutions and capacity for scaled-up water services
               Component 2 Increasing access to and capacities for sanitation service delivery
              2.1 Increasing access to basic sanitation in rural and peri-urban areas
              2.2 Improving water, sanitation and hygiene in institutions
              2.3 Developing the private sector for sanitation and hygiene
              2.4 Strengthening public institutions and capacity for scaled-up sanitation services
               Component 3 Program management and learning
               Component 4 Contigency Emergency Response Component (CERC)

          31.     As per the Program framework the components are similar across all program phases. The
          components are structured along the different services and institutional mandates, with component 1
          pertaining to water supply and component 2 to sanitation and hygiene, including the improvement of
          WASH facilities within schools and health centers. In phase 1, a total of 39 ETDs have been selected,
          validated by the provinces in March 2023. Across these 39 ETDs, there are 12 ETDs where REGIDESO is
          already operating water systems and where extensions/rehabilitation in the urban centers (or rural
          growth centers) will be supported. Phase 3 intends to scale-up both within these ETDs to more difficult to
          reach areas, as well as to additional ETDs.

          32.     Phase 1 introduces five Performance Based Conditions (PBCs) to incentivize important reforms
          and encourage result orientation for implementation, equating US$ 58 million or 14.5 percent of project
          funds. Three PBCs are introduced to emphasize and incentive important institutional and governance
          milestones in water and sanitation that are critical for the PDO achievement and will be a foundation for
          to scale-up investments under subsequent phases (PBC1, PBC2, PBC5). Two other PBCs are introduced to
          increase result orientation for sanitation access, critical for the PDO, as well as sustainability aspects
          important for efficient investments, and – under phases 3 and 4 – the result orientation through potential
          PforR instruments will be further incentivized. Table 2 and the component description below further
          explains the rationale and eligible expenditure under the PBCs.




Mar 16, 2023                                                                                                     Page 16 of 30
          The World Bank
          DRC Water Supply and Sanitation Access Program (P178389)


          Table 2. Overview of Performance Based Conditions and allocation (in US$)
                     PBC Indicators                                              Scalability formula                 PBC expenditure
                                                                                                                        allocated


                                      PBC 1.1 Adoption of a national water supply              Not scalable            1,000,000
                             policy                                                             Not scalable            1,000,000
                     PBC 1            PBC 1.2 Adoption of an implementation plan for
                             strengthening of rural water mandates
                                      PBC 2.1 Two Regies Provinciales operational         500,000 per province         1,000,000
                             (Kasai and Kasai Central)
                                      PBC 2.2 Four provinces adopt governance             500,000 per province         2,000,000
                             framework for water supply operators
               1.3                    PBC 2.3 Four provinces established                  500,000 per province         2,000,000
                             infrastructure maintenance and development fund for
                     PBC 2
                             water supply                                                  250,000 per province         1,000,000
                                      PBC 2.4 Four RPs have an operational MIS for
                             montiroing of operators                                       250,000 per province         1,000,000
                                      PBC 2.5 Four RPs have service delegation
                             contracts with at least 75% of water operators (year 5)       250,000 per province         1,000,000
                                      PBC 2.6 Four RPs publish their first annual
                             monitoring report
                                      PBC 3 : Number of households that live in             100 per household         24,000,000
                             villages or neighborhoods (quartier) that are certified as    living in ODF certified
                     PBC 3
               2.1           ODF                                                               village/quartier
                             Cumulative target of households within ODF villages is
                             240,000 over the duration of the project
                                      PBC 4.1 Share of WASH facilities in schools and       100,000 per % of           8,000,000
                             health centers that is functional, accessible, well               achievement
                             maintained
                                      PBC 4.2 Share of WASH facilities in schools and       100,000 per % of           8,000,000
               2.2   PBC 4   health centers that is functional, accessible, well               achievement
                             maintained
                             1st monitoring round includes at least 200 and 2nd
                             monitoring round at least 500 facilities
                                      PBC 5.1 Four provinces adopt governance             1,000,000 per province       4,000,000
                             framework assigning institutional mandates for
                     PBC 5
               2.3           sanitation                                                     1000,000 per CWIS           4,000,000
                                      PBC 5.2 Four city-wide inclusive sanitation plans          plan
                             are endorsed through provincial validation workshops
                             Total                                                                                     58,000,000

          Component 1: Increasing access to and capacities for drinking water supply service delivery (IDA: US$
          262 million)

          33.     Component 1 supports the government to implement water sector reforms at national level,
          improve governance and public sector capacities at provincial level. This component supports the
          government to implement water sector reforms at national level and improve governance and public
          sector capacities at provincial level. It will develop climate-resilient infrastructure for water supply

Mar 16, 2023                                                                                                                        Page 17 of 30
          The World Bank
          DRC Water Supply and Sanitation Access Program (P178389)


          services and strengthens the capacity and performance of domestic private, not-for- profit operators, and
          of REGIDESO provincial directorates and will deliver qualified water solar pumping technicians for the
          market. Sustainable yield assessments It consists of three subcomponents.

           34.      Subcomponent 1.1: Increasing access to basic water supply in rural and peri-urban areas (IDA
           US$ 215.1 million) will finance climate-resilient and low-carbon solar-powered water supply
           infrastructure development and related preparation, construction, and supervision costs to increase
           access water services. This subcomponent includes:
            i. construction of new water supply systems and the expansion and rehabilitation of existing water
               supply systems including water source intake (boreholes), solar energy systems with back-up
               generators, water production facilities, storage/reservoirs, conveyance, distribution networks, water
               kiosks, household connections, bulk and pre-paid meters
           ii. financing of Design-Build-Operate contracts (DBO) to design, construct and support operation of new
               water supply systems
          iii. feasibility and other preparatory technical, environmental, social and financial studies, development
               of design and bidding documents (including DBOs), construction supervision of water subprojects,
               implementation support for resettlement action plans (RAP) and indigenous population plans (IPP)
          iv. implementation costs, including motorbikes, of local ONHR staff to support baseline and preparation
               studies, construction supervision, and facilitate the establishment of ASUREPs for water scheme
               operation and technical follow-up support to scheme operators

           35.     Subcomponent 1.2: Improving performance of private and not-for profit water operators (IDA
           US$ 23.0 million) will include market enabling measures to increase private sector involvement, technical
           assistance, capacity building, equipment for private and not-for-profit water operators59 and result-based
           financing to extend service perimeters. This subcomponent includes:
            i. transaction advisory services to the Regies Provinciales for structuring PPP contracts
           ii. result-based grants to eligible private and not-for-profit operators to expand water services in
               unserved areas and/or increase water and energy efficiency; associated technical assistance for fund
               management and monitoring of results of the grants
          iii. technical assistance, equipment, and training for local private and not-for-profit operators on water
               system operations, business planning, and environmental and social compliance of result-based
               grants for extension subproject; water quality monitoring equipment and training
          iv. technical assistance to ANSER to prepare solar pumped water system maintenance contract, training,
               and business coaching for solar energy enterprises to deliver maintenance services

          36.      Subcomponent 1.3 Strengthening public institutions and capacity for scaled-up water services
          (IDA US$ 23.8 million) will support policy development and institutional strengthening of public entities
          at national and provincial levels, help operationalize and capacitate Regies Provinciales to fulfill their
          oversight and monitoring functions, prepare for scale-up of investments under subsequent phases. There
          are two performance conditions (PBCs) under this component, as summarized in table 2. PBC1 - with two
          sub-PBCs - relates to the issuance of a Prime Minister’s decree for a national policy on drinking water
          supply, including an implementation plan to strengthen rural water development functions. The policy
          will be developed through a multi-stakeholder approach, under leadership of the Prime Minister’s Office,

          59
            These are also referred to as community-based operators, drinking water associations, or ASUREPs. Annex 4
          provides a detailed assessment of the functioning and challenges of ASUREPs within the DRC context.

Mar 16, 2023                                                                                                            Page 18 of 30
          The World Bank
          DRC Water Supply and Sanitation Access Program (P178389)


            and stipulate, among others, the roles and responsibilities pertaining to rural water supply and a plan to
            support ONHR’s transformation in line with decentralization. PBC2 - with 6 sub-PBCs - relates to the
            establishment and strengthening of the Regies Provinciales, their functioning as maitre d’ouvrage, their
            ability to transparently monitor water operators under service delegation contracts, and the
            estabslishment of a water supply capital maintenance and development fund. The subcomponent will also
            develop human resources for water sector jobs and support job-placement in the water sector in high-
            demand technical areas such as solar-based water systems, with a special focus to attract women. This
            subcomponent finances the following activities, with expenditures linked to PBC 1 and PBC 2:
             i. technical assistance and studies to develop a national water policy, a policy implementation plan, with
                focus on rural water strengthening aligned with the Water Law and decentralization,
            ii. technical assistance to four Regies Provinciales to recruit and train staff, develop, and implement a
                provincial governance framework for managing service delegation contracts, operational manuals,
                establish a maintenance and development fund, develop and install a MIS system60
           iii. equipment (office equipment, ICT, heavy duty maintenance equipment for water systems), vehicles,
                training and workshops, and operational costs for four Regies Provinciales and the construction or
                rehabilitation of office buildings in Kwilu and Kasai province61
            as well as the following activities (non-PBC linked)
           iv. a medium-term financing plan for national WASH program, and annual monitoring and review for the
                national WASH program led by CNAEHA and in collaboration with all relevant ministries
            v. technical assistance to design and implement public communication and citizen engagement
                campaigns62 to incorporate feedback of citizens to improve local management of water systems
           vi. technical assistance to ARSPE for economic regulatory instruments and governance framework for
                overseeing water operator performance
          vii. technical assistance and equipment to REGIDESO (Kwilu, Kasai, Kasai Oriental)63 to prepare and
                implement a performance improvement plan, including NRW and energy efficiency improvements
         viii. office/ICT/technical equipment and training for ONHR deconcentrated offices in the four provinces
           ix. technical design studies for scale-up of phase 3 water supply subprojects in four provinces
            x. technical assistance and groundwater studies to the DRE and OCE for the delineation of sub-basins and
                the preparation of climate-informed sub-basin water management plans
           xi. installation of hydromet and groundwater monitoring points in the Kasai sub-basin
          xii. development and implementation of vocational training and higher education programs on solar-
                pumped water systems in collaboration with existing education institutes, including stipends and job-
                placements programs, specifically encouraging women participation.

          Component 2: Increasing access to and capacities for sanitation service delivery (IDA: US$ 105 million)

          37.      Component 2 supports national and provincial government to further develop the legislative,
          institutional and planning framework for sanitation, while focusing investments on increasing access to

          60
             The MIS system for provinces is expected to be linked to a national system; it may feed into the data needs of
          ARSPE, with ARSPE MIS system financed under AGREE project; with support of GiZ, the mWater platform is piloted
          at several RPs.
          61
             AGREE project supports Kasai Central; GiZ supports Kasai Oriental building for the RPs
          62
             AGREE project finances dissemination campaigns about the Water Law, targeting government institutions, and
          civil society.
          63
             REGIDESO Kasai Central is supported through the AGREE project

Mar 16, 2023                                                                                                            Page 19 of 30
          The World Bank
          DRC Water Supply and Sanitation Access Program (P178389)


          basic sanitation, and improving WASH in schools and health centers. Institutional development, business
          coaching and market development activities are critical to catalyze private sector growth and behavior
          change communication is needed to create demand for sanitation services, combined with incentives and
          investments. It includes the following four sub-components.

          38.       Sub-component 2.1: Increasing access to sanitation and hygiene in rural and peri-urban areas
          (IDA US$ 56.4 million) will finance the implementation of the GoDRC’s roadmap to end open defecation
          (Feuille de Route – finalization défécation à l'air libre (FDAL)) as well as investments in FSTPs in four cities
          in the four provinces. Informed by existing experiences of CLTS in DRC64, differentiated approaches will be
          used for rural and (peri-) urban areas to achieve open defecation free (ODF) villages and neighborhoods
          (quartiers)65. In rural areas, CLTS is combined with material support to communities to construct more
          durable latrine solutions (e.g. cement slabs, plastic pans, pit-lining) that are more resilient to climate
          change and mitigate the spread of pathogens. In peri-urban areas an adapted CLTS approach is combined
          with sanitation marketing activities and the use of e-vouchers to provide households with subsidies on
          toilet installation, stimulating the development of local enterprises with skills in toilet installation.
          Achieving ODF requires an effective community behavior change process facilitated by local facilitation
          teams, consisting of DAS and DHSP cadres at the health zone (ZdS, zone de santé) and health unit (AdS, aire
          de santé) level, the set-up of local sanitation committees66 (village/quartier level) with a team of
          community sanitation mobilizers tasked with door-to-door visits, planning and follow-up67. To increase
          result orientation, these implementation actors (local cadre and community volunteers) will receive a
          result-based compensation once villages/quartiers are certified68 as ODF. Under this sub-component, PBC
          3 is included to incentivize achievement of community wide ODF results, with a total allocation of US$ 24
          million, based on a scalable approach, with an amount of US$ 100 per household with access to basic
          sanitation that lives in an ODF certified community (village or quartier) and a target of 240,000 households.
          The ODF achievements are subject to verification by an independent verification agent (IVA). This
          subcomponent finances the following activities, with expenditures linked to PBC 3:
              i. technical assistance to support CLTS training, supervision of material delivery (rural), latrine
                 construction and monitoring, executing ODF-based compensation payment and ODF celebration
                 (upon verification by IVA)
             ii. technical assistance for managing the sanitation e-voucher scheme (urban)
            iii. technical assistance for identification and on-the-job coaching of toilet installation enterprises

          64
             The use of CLTS approaches in DRC is well documented; see World Bank. 2021 Progress Toward Healthy Villages:
          Preliminary Evidence from a Randomized Control Trial of a Community-Driven Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene
          Program in the Democratic Republic of Congo. Interim results indicate that through the provision of additional
          materials combined with CLTS, the quality of latrines has improved with statistical significance (e.g. squat holes
          covered with slab, footrests, elevated latrine).
          65
             The (peri-urban) approach will be implemented, as a priority, in the peri-urban areas of the four cities Kikwit,
          Mubji Mayi, Kananga and Tshikapa, where also pilots on fecal sludge management will take place. An existing
          sanitation planning tool will be used, with a typology characterization rural remote, rural on-road, rural mixed, and
          (peri-) urban. https://www.sanplan.app/maps/dem_rep_congo
          66
             These are established under existing Community Development Committees (CDC, Comité de Développement
          Communautaire) that are mostly present in all communities.
          67
             These sanitation mobilizers are recruited among existing community mobilization cadres, namely the Relais
          Commaunitaires (ReCos)or members of the Cellule d’Animation Commaunitaire (CAC)
          68
             An independent certification committee at the level of the urban commune or the territory (territoire) is set up,
          consisting of government cadre and civil society not involved in the implementation of the FDAL activities.

Mar 16, 2023                                                                                                                Page 20 of 30
          The World Bank
          DRC Water Supply and Sanitation Access Program (P178389)


                 participating in e-voucher scheme (urban)
             iv.     materials and goods for toilet construction of latrines provided to participating communities
                (rural)
                as well as the following activities:
              v.     implementation cost for ODF activities in villages and quartiers by local cadre of DAS and DHSP, as
                well as ODF certification committees (including motorbikes for local cadre)
             vi.     workshops and training for ODF activities, including for DAS, DHSP, masons, local sanitation
                committees and community mobilizers
            vii.     result-based compensation for facilitator teams and community mobilizers operating at village and
                quartier-level
           viii.     costs of e-vouchers (subsidies) for toilet installation for eligible households (urban)
             ix.     feasibility, design and preparation studies for fecal sludge treatment plants (FSTPs), supervision
                costs of construction and implementation support for resettlement action plan
              x.     civil works for FSTPs, including works required for producing reusable products.

        39.          Sub-component 2.2: Improving water, sanitation and hygiene in institutions (IDA US$ 35
        million) will improve access to WASH facilities in selected schools (400) and health centers (200) in the
        selected ETDs, while focusing on O&M arrangements for sustainability of WASH facilities and empowering
        girls in menstrual hygiene management (MHM). Schools and health centers will be prioritized in the same
        villages/quartiers that benefit from water supply interventions to guarantee water access69. Technical
        designs for the facilities will be inclusive and responsive to the needs of women and girls and people living
        with disabilities. This subcomponent includes a total allocated amount in PBC-linked expenditures of US$ 16
        million, equally divided over PBC 4.1 and PBC 4.2. PBC 4 aims for accessible, operational, and well-
        maintained water points, toilets and handwashing facilities that can continued to be used by patients,
        students and staff. It will increase accountability of school administration, and hospital management
        committees70 to ensure that costs of water, soap, toilet maintenance and cleaning are prioritized in budgets
        and attitudes towards the importance of WASH facilities change. PBC 4.1 and PBC 4.2 are scalable and
        measure the share of WASH facilities in schools and health centers that is functional, accessible, and well-
        maintained in two consecutive monitoring rounds, with US$ 100,000 per percent achievement (assuming
        80 percent as target). The subcomponent finances the following activities, with expenditures linked to PBCs
               i.    technical design and supervision costs for the construction and/or rehabilitation of water supply
                 connections (or water points) for health centers and schools, toilet facilities for students and teachers,
                 and handwashing facilities
              ii.    new construction and/or rehabilitation of the WASH facilities in schools
             iii.    technical assistance to develop policies for sustainable operation of WASH facilities in schools and
                 health centers, including monitoring and feedback systems
             iv.     training and workshops for O&M committees for WASH facilities in schools and health centers to
                 ensure sustainable operations
         as well as the following activities:
              v.     new construction and/or rehabilitation of the WASH facilities in health centers,
             vi.     implementation costs for the MESTP-Department of Infrastructure Services (DNAC, Direction
                 National de Construction) and the MESTP-Department of Life Skills Education (DEVC, Direction

          69
           Criteria will be defined in the project implementation manual (PIM) and based on baseline assessment results.
          70
           Health centers fall typically under the overall management and budget responsibilities of General Referral
          Hospitals

Mar 16, 2023                                                                                                               Page 21 of 30
          The World Bank
          DRC Water Supply and Sanitation Access Program (P178389)


                Education Vie Courante) to supervise construction, set-up O&M committees, and support MHM
                activities
           vii.      technical assistance to develop and deliver MHM extra-curricular activities for girls in schools and
               communities71 and supply of reusable hygienic pads for girls participating in activities.

          40.        Sub-component 2.3: Developing the private sector for sanitation and hygiene (IDA US$ 5.9
          million) includes market enabling and catalyzing measures to support capacity development of private
          sector involved in delivery of sanitation and hygiene products and services for peri-urban and rural growth
          centers. The subcomponent includes:
             i.      technical assistance for development of marketing and behavioral change communication
               strategy and tools, and the development of business models and supply chains
            ii.      training costs for local contractors/enterprises in peri-urban sanitation (sludge emptiers, toilet
               installation)
           iii.      catalytic grants for enterprises to develop sanitation and hygiene products and services (such as
               manufacturing/sales of plastic toilet pans, hygiene products, latrine installation and pit/sludge
               emptying)
           iv.       technical assistance for the design, management, and monitoring of the catalytic grant program
            v.       sludge emptying vehicles and equipment for emptiers to be leased by ETDs to private sector

          41.        Sub-component 2.4: Strengthening public institutions and capacity for scaled-up sanitation
          services (IDA US$ 13.3 million) will advance institutional reforms, build public sector capacity for
          sanitation service delivery at national and provincial level, prepare for scale-up of investments under
          phase 3, and develop a pipeline f PBC5, with an allocated amount of US$ 8 million, equally divided over
          two scalable sub-PBCs. PBC 5.1 incentivizes provincial governments to issue a decree that stipulates the
          institutional framework for urban sanitation, while assigning the roles and responsibilities of provinces
          and city administrations and clarifying the involvement of private sector along the sanitation service
          chain72. PBC 5.2 incentivizes the development, consultation, and provincial validation73 of city-wide
          inclusive sanitation (CWIS) for the four cities of Kikwit, Mbuji Mayi and Kananga that will guide
          investments under phase 3. The subcomponent will also develop human resources for sanitation and
          hygiene sector jobs and support job-placement for latrine construction, hygiene pad production, FSTP
          operations and other environmental engineering, with a special focus to attract women The
          subcomponent finances the following activities, with expenditures linked to PBCs
             i.      technical assistance for the development of implementation decrees (by-laws) for the foreseen
               Sanitation Law74
            ii.      technical assistance to develop provincial legislative and institutional framework for urban
               sanitation, regulations, and standard contracts (for FSTP operators, licensing regime and leases for
               sludge emptiers)


          71
             The MHM program is targeting additional 400 schools without infrastructure investments
          72
             It would clarify the arrangements for the management of FSTPs, management of networked sanitation with
          wastewater treatment plants, oversight and regulatory roles, requirements of the private sector in providing
          emptying services, and roles to support the safe containment at household level.
          73
             Given that urban city councils are not yet operational in all cities, a provincial validation workshop, co-led by the
          mayor’s office of the respective city will be used to adopt the CWIS plan for implementation.
          74
             AGREE project already support the development of the Sanitation Law; however, several implementation
          decrees will be required to clarify technical standards, institutional arrangements, etc.

Mar 16, 2023                                                                                                                    Page 22 of 30
          The World Bank
          DRC Water Supply and Sanitation Access Program (P178389)


            iii.      technical assistance to prepare CWIS plans for four cities and for implementation of
                accompanying measures (e.g. marketing campaigns, customer service centers, operational
                procedures)
            iv.       preparation studies to scale-up of (peri-urban) sanitation investments in phase 3, as identified
                in CWIS plans
             v.       workshops and materials to support dissemination of sanitation law; consultation and validation
                workshops for the CWIS plans
            vi.       equipment for four city sanitation departments to support the CWIS pilots
                as well as the following activities
           vii.       technical assistance to develop national rural sanitation MIS and support use in four provinces,
                including for annual planning and regular MIS-based learning and reviews
          viii.       technical training and workshops for provincial stakeholders on sanitation institutional
                framework and regulations and ODF roadmap progress reviews
            ix.       development and implementation of vocational and higher education programs on hygiene,
                sanitation and environmental engineering, in collaboration with existing education institutes, including
                equipment/civil works for training centers, stipends and job-placements programs

          Component 3: Program Management and Learning (IDA: US$ 33 million)

          43.        Component 3: Program Management and Learning (IDA US$33 million). This component will
          finance project management support for the implementation, coordination, monitoring and evaluation of
          project, learning agenda activities and knowledge exchanges, capacity development for project
          management and implementation through a Young Professional program, and the preparation costs for
          MPA-phase 2 project in additional provinces. It includes:
              i.     operation of the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) through the provision of technical assistance,
                training, goods, and financing of operating costs, including technical and financial audits, banking fees
                and charges, and preparation of ESF instruments and consultations for phase 1
             ii.     support to relevant national entities75 with a key-role in the coordination and supervision of the
                Project through training, goods, and financing of operating costs, including reasonable transport and
                communication allowances for assigned staff to the national coordination team
            iii.     establishment and operation of the Provincial Project Implementation (PPIUs) in Kasai, Kasai
                Central, Kasai Oriental and Kwilu, through the provision of technical assistance, training, goods, and
                financing of operating costs
            iv.      support to relevant provincial technical entities76 with a role in the provincial coordination of the
                project through the provision of training, goods and financing of operating costs including reasonable
                transport and communication allowances for assigned staff to the provincial technical coordination
                teams
             v.      project results monitoring platform, including Geographic Information System and remote
                monitoring applications
            vi.      costs to operationalize accessible grievance redress mechanism (GRM), to address GBV
                awareness and provide GBV survivor support services, for implementing Indigenous People Plans

          75
             This includes at national level: MRHE, MEDD-DAS, MSP-DHSP, MDR, ONHR, REGIDESO, MP-CNEAHA, MEPST-
          DNAC, MSTP-DEVC, and MoF-CSPP.
          76
             This includes at provincial level DAS, DHSP, ONHR, REGIDESO. This support is provided under component 1.3 to
          the Regies Provinciales, and under component 2.2 to the DNAC and DEVC offices.

Mar 16, 2023                                                                                                            Page 23 of 30
          The World Bank
          DRC Water Supply and Sanitation Access Program (P178389)


            vii.    peer-learning among provinces and relevant knowledge exchanges abroad
           viii.    design, implementation and monitoring of a Young Professional program for fiduciary,
                environmental, social and technical staff, including reasonable transport and communication
                allowances for Young Professionals placed within PPIUs
             ix.    cost for the Independent Verification Agent (IVA) of the PBCs
              x.    preparation costs for MPA-phase 2, including operating costs, vehicles, and coordinators in the
                PPIUs for phase 2 provinces; preparation studies (baseline, feasibility, technical, social and
                environmental) and costs to prepare all environmental and social framework instruments for phase 2

          44.      Component 4: Contingency Emergency Response Component ($0 allocated). A Contingent
          Emergency Response Component (CERC) with zero allocation may be used to contribute to an emergency
          response through the timely implementation of activities in response to an eligible national emergency.
          A CERC is included in the project in accordance with Investment Project Financing (IPF) Policy, paragraphs
          12 and 13, for Situations of Urgent Need of Assistance and Capacity Constraints. This will allow for rapid
          reallocation of credit/grant uncommitted funds in the event of an eligible emergency as defined in OP
          8.00. An Emergency Response Manual will be prepared as an to the Project Implementation Manual (CERC
          ). The environmental and social instruments required for the CERC are prepared, disclosed, and adopted
          in accordance with the CERC Manual and the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP). For the
          CERC to be activated, and financing to be provided, the Government will need (a) to submit a request
          letter for CERC activation, and the evidence required to determine the eligibility of the emergency, as
          defined in the CERC , an Emergency Action Plan, including the emergency expenditures to be financed;
          and (b) to meet the environmental and social requirements as agreed in the Emergency Action Plan and
          ESCP.




  .
  .
  Legal Operational Policies
                                                                       Triggered?

   Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                        Yes

   Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60                                 No


  Summary of Assessment of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
  .

  Environment and Social are rated Substantial. The risk is based on the project’s anticipated environmental and social
  risks and impacts which include, but not limited to, potential land acquisition leading to physical and economic
  displacement of Project Affected People (PAPs), exclusion of vulnerable communities and elite capture, community
  health and safety risks, potential labor influx, security issues in some provinces, increased pressure on water and
  natural resources, risks of pollution and degradation of aquatic habitats, occupational health and safety risks for
  workers during civil works, community health and safety risks for communities around works sites, and GBV/sexual


Mar 16, 2023                                                                                                     Page 24 of 30
          The World Bank
          DRC Water Supply and Sanitation Access Program (P178389)


  exploitation and abuse (SEA)/sexual harassment (SH) risks. The risk related to the Borrower’s capacity, provincial
  public institutions, and the private sector is also considered challenging due to varying ESF knowledge and experience
  among the different actors. Moreover, the project is being implemented over a large geographic area,
  dispersed/fragmented coverage and activities, in remote areas with some difficulty of access. Risks will be mitigated
  by developing provincial implementation teams, including E&S specialists.
  The assessment of the nature and magnitude of E&S risks and impacts describe that they are mostly temporary,
  predictable, and/or reversible, medium in magnitude and/or in spatial extend, medium to low probability of serious
  adverse effects, etc. All these adverse potential risks and impacts can be effectively prevented, mitigated, or
  minimized on-site in a predictable manner through good engineering design and appropriate E&S measures


   E. Implementation

   Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

          45.     The PASEA program will be anchored within MRHE at the national level and chaired by national
          program steering committee (NPSC). The program steering committee will be set up by MRHE to provide
          strategic guidance, approve annual work plans, and facilitate collaboration between the different
          ministries involved in the program implementation. Chaired by the MRHE general secretary and co-
          chaired by the general secretaries of MEDD and MDR, this steering committee will comprise
          representatives from the MoF (CSPP), the MP (CNAEHA), the Prime Ministry, MEPST, MSP, and
          representatives of the provincial governments. The composition, roles, and responsibilities of the PSC will
          be stated in a ministerial arrêté and detailed in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM). The PSC will
          meet twice per calendar year.

          46.      CEP-O, under MRHE, will be responsible for overall project coordination. CEP-O, referred to as
          the Project Coordination Unit (PCU), will be responsible for coordination and reporting; for financial
          management and procurement of activities assigned to the national level, and for ESF compliance. CEP-O
          will also undertake capacity building of Provincial Project Implementation units (PPIUs). Based on its
          expertise in the water sector, CEP-O will technically lead the project activities on peri-urban water and
          water PPPs, under component 1, in close coordination with ONHR. CEP-O has ample experience preparing
          and implementing IDA-financed projects, including the PEMU project (P091092), Kin Elenda (P171141),
          and AGREE (P173506). It will be strengthened, as deemed necessary, with relevant technical, fiduciary
          and/or E&S experts for the PASEA MPA, including an additional expert with focus on sanitation, who will
          be the link between CEP-O and the technical team at MEDD-DAS. To date, CEP-O’s performance has been
          satisfactory in terms of technical, fiduciary and E&S aspects. Once preparation of phase 2 under the MPA
          will start, the CEP-O team will be staffed up accordingly to ensure that phase 1 implementation does slow
          down.

          47.      A national technical coordination team led by MEDD-DAS for sanitation and by MDR-ONHR for
          rural water supply will assist CEP-O at the national level. For component 1, a technical coordination team
          will be dedicated to (rural) water supply activities under component 1, co-led by ONHR and CEP-O. The
          component 1 technical coordination team will consist of civil servants, one from MRHE, one from ONHR
          with part-time involvement of staff of MDR, REGIDESO and MP. A technical coordination team anchored
          in MEDD-DAS will lead the implementation of component 2 on sanitation, with support from MSP-DHSP
          and MEPST staff. The component 2 technical coordination team will be fully involved in procurement

Mar 16, 2023                                                                                                      Page 25 of 30
          The World Bank
          DRC Water Supply and Sanitation Access Program (P178389)


          process, preparation, and supervision of sanitation activities at national and provincial levels. The team,
          in close liaison with the sanitation specialist of CEP-O, will consist of civil servants, one from MEDD-DAS
          and one from MSP-HSP, with part-time involvement of MEPST staff. All members of the national technical
          coordination team will have a term of reference and be selected in a transparent and merit-based manner,
          as stipulated in the PIM (see figure 2).

          48.      Each province will establish a provincial steering committee, through a provincial arrêté and
          will estabslish Provincial Project Implementation Units (PPIUs), that will implement PASEA activities,
          and in the future could also serve other projects. Chaired by the Governor, the provincial steering
          committee will have similar composition as at the national level. Hence, it will comprise representatives
          of Régie Provincial du Service Public de l’Eau, and deconcentrated administration of provincial MRHE,
          MDR, REGIDESO provincial directorate, ONHR, MEDD-DAS, MSP-DSHP, MEPST, and MP. Under PASEA,
          provincial governments will estabslish Provincial Project implementation Units (PPIUs) in each province
          to develop project implementation capacity at the provincial level., with the vision that these PPIUs would
          also serve implementation of other (non-WASH) projects. The PPIUs will be created by a provincial arrêté
          and hosted under the Governor office by the Effective date. The PPIUs will be responsible for provincial
          coordination and reporting, for financial management, ESF and procurement of provincial level executed
          activities across all components77. The PPIUs will be staffed with a team of consultants selected by CEP-O
          by the Effective date, as per the agreed staffing plan78. In phases 1 and 2, the technical and fiduciary
          consultants integrated in the PPIUs will work in pairs with civils servants of the provincial administration,
          each in their respective fields to build the capacity of provincial administration. During the
          implementation of phase 1, regular assessments will be carried out to reevaluate whether increased
          fiduciary responsibility for the PPIUs is feasible. Supported through capacity building measures, including
          a Young Professional program, the objective is to gradually reduce the reliance on consultants under
          phases 3 and 4, as the competencies of provincial administration staff (of financial management and
          procurement units) and of staff of decentralized and deconcentrated technical offices increases. In the
          medium term, the PPIUs are also expected to recruit staff as social and environmental specialists.

          49.      Provincial technical implementation teams, consisting of civil servants of relevant provincial
          offices and entities will be assigned to work daily with the PPIU. For component 1, the technical
          implementation team comprises staff of Régie Provinciale, ONHR and REGIDESO, while for component 2
          the technical implementation team includes civil servants from provincial MEDD-DAS, MSP-DHSP, and
          MEPST (part-time) to support the PPIU in the overall planning, implementation, and monitoring. All
          members of the provincial technical implementation team will have a term of references and be selected
          in a transparent and merit-based manner, further stipulated in the PIM (see figure 3).

          50.    Provincial Subsidiary Agreements will be signed by the Effective Date between the Ministry of
          Finance and the Provincial Governments of Kwilu, Kasai Central, Kasai oriental and Kasai. These

          77
             The procurement assessment will identify a ceiling under which procurement can be carried out by the PPIUs
          until the MTR when a performance review will be done to evaluate whether the ceiling can be increased.
          78
             The staffing plan include a team of consultants selected by the PCU and integrated within the PPIUs. Per
          province these include: Provincial Project Coordinator/ Operations Engineer (water), Operations Engineer
          (sanitation), Procurement Specialist, Accountant, Cashier, M&E specialist, Environment specialist (shared with
          another province), Social/GBV specialist (shared with another province). Staffing needs will be reviewed during
          implementation.

Mar 16, 2023                                                                                                                Page 26 of 30
          The World Bank
          DRC Water Supply and Sanitation Access Program (P178389)


          agreements with the participating provinces will indicate the roles, responsibilities of the provinces in the
          implementation of provincially assigned activities under the various components of the project, including
          the fiduciary and ESF compliance roles of the PPIUs in the provinces, as PPIUs will manage sub-accounts
          of the project’s Designated Accounts.

          51.       Given the many different ministries and technical agencies involved in PASEA phase 1, a
          Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) will be signed with all entities by the Effective date. The MoU
          will identify the respective roles and responsibilities of all entities involved in project implementation. In
          addition to the four participating provincial administrations and the technical entities already mentioned
          in par 59 to 62 (MRHE, MDR-ONHR, REGIDESO, MP, MEDD-DAS, MSP-DHSP, MEPST-DNAC, MEPST-DEVC)
          it is foreseen that for specific national-level activities, such as related to the development of the national
          water supply policy the Prime minister’s office (Primature) will be involved as leading entity to convene
          multiple ministries (subcomponent 1.3, PBC 1). The Ministry of Finance (MoF), the Ministry of Budget
          (MoB), and the Ministry of Planning (MP_, specifically the CNAEHA will be co-leading the development of
          a financing strategy for the national WASH platform (including national MIS system) and specific activities
          related to water resources management will be led by the MRHE-DRE as well as the OCE (once
          operational). On economic regulation, ARSPE (once operational) will be technically leading activities under
          subcomponent 1.3, and on technical assistance to solar energy companies ANSER will technically lead.
          The MoU will, as part of the provincial roles and responsibilities, list roles and responsibilities of the four
          city administrations involved in the development of the CWIS plans and the urban sanitation pilots, as
          well as the ETDs benefitting from the water supply and sanitation activities (communes, secteur,
          chefferies).
          Figure 2: Institutional and Implementation arrangement at national level




Mar 16, 2023                                                                                                          Page 27 of 30
          The World Bank
          DRC Water Supply and Sanitation Access Program (P178389)




      Figure 3: Institutional and Implementation arrangement at provincial level




          52.      The capacity development programs under subcomponents 1.3 and 2.4 will be executed in
          collaboration with existing education institutes based on an assessment of comparative advantages and
          needs79. INPP and its four provincial branches (Institut National de Préparation Professionnelle) will be
          involved for the design and delivery of short vocational training courses. For specialized courses (credited)
          (3-4 months), the National Institute for Construction and Public Works (INBTP, Institut National de
          Batiment et Travaux Publics) and its three provincial branches80 (IBTP, Institut de Batiment et Travaux
          Publics) and the University of Kinshasa (Faculty of Polytechnics, Public Health, and the Water School (Ecole
          de l’Eau).

          53.        Several agreements will be developed as part of the PIM (or specific manuals) to organize

          79
               Capacity Development Program for WASH sector – Assessment is filled here (project files)
          80
               INBTP, Institut National de Bâtiment et Travaux Publics

Mar 16, 2023                                                                                                        Page 28 of 30
            The World Bank
            DRC Water Supply and Sanitation Access Program (P178389)


            implementation arrangements for specific activities. These include Result-based Grant Agreements for
            water operators, Catalytic Grant Agreements for WASH enterprises, Community Sanitation Support
            Agreements, Institutional WASH Facility agreements, and Sanitation Voucher Scheme.


  .

      CONTACT POINT

      World Bank

      Patrick Goy Ndolo
      Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

      Susanna Smets
      Senior Water Specialist

      Borrower/Client/Recipient
      Ministry of Finance
      Josee Miakukila
      Coordinator
      j_miakukila@yahoo.com
      Implementing Agencies
      Ministry of Hydraulic Resources and Energy
      Philippe Lumeka
      Coordinator
      philumeka@hotmail.com

      Province of Kasai
      Fidel Tshiamu
      Directeur de cabinet du Gouverneur
      fideltshiamu@gmail.com

      Province of Kasai Central
      Honoré MUTSHIPAYI
      Ministre Provincial en charge de l’Environnement et Développ
      Socrate.mutshipayi.sm@gmail.com

      Province of Kasai Oriental
      Gabriel K ANGUDIA
      Coordonnateur de la Régie Provinciale de Service Public de l
      gabrielkangudia5@gmail.com


Mar 16, 2023                                                                                                 Page 29 of 30
          The World Bank
          DRC Water Supply and Sanitation Access Program (P178389)


   Province of Kwilu
   Alpha LUMA
   Ministre Provincial de l’énergie
   mealphaluma@gmail.com



   FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT


   The World Bank
   1818 H Street, NW
   Washington, D.C. 20433
   Telephone: (202) 473-1000
   Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects



   APPROVAL


                                       Patrick Goy Ndolo
   Task Team Leader(s):
                                       Susanna Smets

   Approved By

   Practice Manager/Manager:

   Country Director:                   Issa Diaw                     31-Mar-2023




Mar 16, 2023                                                                       Page 30 of 30
