Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        DRC Rural Water and Sanitation Sector Development Project (P178389)




Public Disclosure Authorized

                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                            Concept Stage


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 06/03/2022 | Report No: ESRSC02819




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Jun 03, 2022                                                                         Page 1 of 18
                               The World Bank
                               DRC Rural Water and Sanitation Sector Development Project (P178389)



                     BASIC INFORMATION

                     A. Basic Project Data

                     Country                       Region                           Project ID                     Parent Project ID (if any)

                     Congo, Democratic             Eastern and Southern Africa      P178389
                     Republic of

                     Project Name                  DRC Rural Water and Sanitation Sector Development Project

                     Practice Area (Lead)          Financing Instrument             Estimated Appraisal Date       Estimated Board Date

                     Water                         Investment Project               3/31/2023                      7/27/2023
                                                   Financing

                     Borrower(s)                   Implementing Agency(ies)

                     Ministry of Finance           Ministry of Hydraulic
                                                   Resources and Energy,
                                                   Ministry of Environment and
                                                   Sustainable Development




Public Disclosure
                     Proposed Development Objective
                     To increase access to basic water supply and sanitation services in selected rural and peri-urban areas of DRC, and to
                     improve capacities of public and private sectors for service delivery and water resource management


                     Financing (in USD Million)                                                                                          Amount

                      Total Project Cost                                                                                                     400.00



                     B. Is the project being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project [including overview of Country, Sectoral & Institutional Contexts and
                     Relationship to CPF]
                     There are large urban-rural disparities in access to drinking water supply (rural basic access is 22 percent and urban 74
                     percent; safely managed access is 1 percent in rural and 40 percent in urban areas). Similar, for sanitation, the open
                     defecation rate in rural areas is 19 percent and just 4 percent in urban areas, and basic access is 11 percent in rural
                     versus 22 percent in urban areas). Although DRC is rich in water resources, water security is hampered by lack of
                     infrastructure, weak institutional capacities for sustainable service delivery and water resources management, and

                    Jun 03, 2022                                                                                                        Page 2 of 18
                              The World Bank
                              DRC Rural Water and Sanitation Sector Development Project (P178389)



                     under investments in lagging rural and peri-urban areas. DRC's water and sanitation sector is going through a critical
                     period of reform, including the creation of an independent regulator for the WSS sector and a national water office in
                     charge of water resources management. The reform entails the implementation of the Water Law (2015), which - in
                     line with the decentralization process - assigns the responsibility for WSS to provinces and opens up service provision
                     to public and private companies that operate under provincial delegation and oversight. This process is accompanied
                     by the restructuring of the national water utility (REGIDESO), that in the medium-term intends to form autonomous
                     subsidiaries at regional/provincial level to operate provincial-owned WSS assets. On the sanitation side, a new
                     legislative framework and roadmap for implementation needs to be developed to address fragmentation and lack of
                     clarity in mandates along the sanitation service chain.

                     The proposed project is expected to be the first in Series of Projects to, - on the one hand - dramatically increase
                     access to basic drinking water supply and sanitation in rural and peri-urban areas of the Democratic Republic of
                     Congo, and - on the other end - to support the implementation of reforms to ensure sustainable, resilient and
                     inclusive service delivery, in line with the water law (2015) while bolstering the role of the private sector in service
                     delivery. A Series of Projects will allow the implementation and consolidation of nascent institutional capacities at
                     national, provincial and local level for both water and sanitation, while gradually expanding the geographic scope
                     (adding lagging provinces of DRC) to develop/rehabilitate infrastructure, and strengthen sub-national governance.

                     The proposed project will focus on high-priority provinces that have been identified based on several criteria,
                     including: the rate of access to water and sanitation, the total number of people without access to basic water
                     services, poverty levels and stunting, priority provinces under the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) and synergies




Public Disclosure
                     with other Bank operations such as in electrification, health and nutrition, education, and governance. These
                     provinces include Kwilu, Kasai, Kasi Central, Kasai Oriental. The targeting of interventions in decentralized territorial
                     entities (ETDs), such as communes and secteurs, will be based on criteria such as needs, readiness of subproject,
                     accessibility and the presence of other development partner program. An area-wide approach will be followed that
                     aims to target the entire population with water supply improvements in the respective ETDs.

                     The proposed project is fully aligned with the CPF as it promotes public and private investments in critical
                     infrastructure to increase people’s access to basic infrastructure services (objective 2.2), strengthen transparency and
                     governance (objective 3.2), and strengthen the foundations for inclusive economic diversification and private sector
                     development (objective 3.3). As per the CPF focus on addressing fragility and conflict, the project will target provinces
                     affected by conflict and violence, where investments in basic water supply and sanitation infrastructure will increase
                     access, support human capital outcomes and unlock private sector growth in the delivery of WASH products and
                     services.

                     The project is proposed to have the following components:

                     Component 1: Developing Rural and Peri-Urban Water Supply for Water Security (US$250 million).

                     Sub-component 1.1: Increasing rural and peri-urban water supply access
                     This subcomponent, lead by the Project Coordination Unit (CEP-O) of the Ministry of Hydraulic Water resources and
                     Energy (MRHE) will finance infrastructure such as (i) expansion and rehabilitation of multi-village and/or peri-urban
                     water supply systems including water source intake, production, storage/reservoirs, conveyance and distribution
                     networks (ii) construction, expansion, and/or rehabilitation of rural water supply systems based on an approved menu
                    Jun 03, 2022                                                                                                         Page 3 of 18
                              The World Bank
                              DRC Rural Water and Sanitation Sector Development Project (P178389)



                     of technology options; (iii) the development of solar energy to power water systems where no electricity grids are
                     available (iv) equipment, tools and training for service providers; (v) technical preparation, design and supervision of
                     subprojects.
                     Different management models will be promoted, with an emphasis on involving the private sector in the development
                     and operation and maintenance phase. These will be explored during preparation but could include:
                     - medium-scale investments involving the private sector for in unserved perimeters that include peri-urban areas and
                     clustering of rural growth centers (>20,000 up to 200,000 people): PPP between the provincial government and the
                     private sector (e.g., lease with capital subsidies, Design-Build-Operate contract); the service level would be a
                     combination of household connections and to some extent water kiosks.
                     - small-scale community managed investments: these include new construction/rehabilitation of single or multi-
                     village systems (5,000 to 20,000), followed by a service delegation contract between the Province and a community
                     drinking water user association (ASUREP)
                     - micro-scale investments: repair/rehabilitation and/or new construction of handpumps or mechanical boreholes,
                     managed by community/village committees with technical and supply chain support models (< 5,000 people).

                     Subcomponent 1.2: Developing private sector capacity for innovation, resilience and sustainability of water services
                     This component includes technical assistance and market enabling measures to support private sector involvement in
                     water supply for rural and peri-urban areas. It will finance: i) transaction advisory services for larger PPPs perimeters;
                     ii) technical assistance to private sector in terms of business planning, loan proposal development, and E&S
                     compliance; iii) technical assistance to selected commercial banks interested in lending to rural water sector iv)
                     performance-based grants to existing private operators to expand connections/water kiosks in unserved peri-




Public Disclosure
                     urban/rural areas; v) innovation/catalytic grants to private sector to improve green energy profile, introduce digital
                     innovations, and/or develop guaranteed O&M models for community/village water points; and vi) partial portfolio
                     credit guarantee window for the water sector (initial endowment).

                     Subcomponent 1.3 Improving water governance, water resources management and investment planning
                     This subcomponent will finance institutional strengthening at the national, provincial, and local levels, development
                     of a long-term sectoral MIS and water resources management system. Specific activities include i) support to
                     provincial infrastructure units to oversee water services and PPP contracts, ii) support provincial investment plans and
                     studies for scale-up; iii) support MIS system for rural/peri-urban water systems; iv) support to ARSPE (regulator) on
                     regulatory guidelines for tariffs of ASUREPs, and application of tariff method under rural/peri-urban contractual PPPs;
                     v) support the water agency (OCE) with development of WRM plans in targeted basin(s), hydromet / groundwater
                     network development and improving the knowledge base of aquifers/groundwater to ensure resilience of rural water
                     systems.

                     Component 2: Improving Sanitation and Hygiene for Human Development (US$130 million):
                     This component will be implemented in all the targeted provinces, with a subset of selected ETD for sanitation
                     interventions. I

                     Sub-component 2.1: Increasing access to sanitation and hygiene in rural and peri-urban areas
                     The rate of access to basic sanitation in rural and peri-urban areas has decreased in the period 2000-2010 - even for
                     the wealthiest households, indicating issues of affordability and sustainability. Informed by lessons form past
                     programs this subcomponent will follow an area-wide approach (ETD) to achieve sustainable results, aligned with the
                     government's Roadmap to End Open Defecation. It will finance : i) implementation of CLTS and social marketing
                    Jun 03, 2022                                                                                                       Page 4 of 18
                              The World Bank
                              DRC Rural Water and Sanitation Sector Development Project (P178389)



                     campaigns and continuous engagement with communities for sustaining behavior change; ii) capacity development
                     and operational support for provincial, local and community facilitators and technicians (includes cadre of the
                     Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development (MEDD) and the Ministry of Public Health (MoPH) as well as
                     existing community-level structures; iii) technical assistance for product innovation, supply chain development and
                     training of local entrepreneurs for sanitation and hygiene products and services; iv) financing household incentives
                     (e.g. with a voucher system) for durable on-site sanitation latrines; and v) small-scale fecal sludge treatment plants
                     and emptying equipment for denser peri-urban areas and associated technical and E&S studies.

                     Sub-component 2.2: WASH infrastructure in public and social institutions (schools, health centers)
                     this subcomponent finances the electrification (when needed with off-grid-solar systems) and construction of water,
                     sanitation, and hygiene (handwashing) facilities in selected schools, health centers, markets, transport hubs, and
                     other public places in selected ETDs. Technical designs for the facilities will be inclusive and responsive to
                     women/girls' needs and people with disabilities, and the infrastructure will be accompanied by a menstrual health
                     and hygiene education program. Operational models for WASH facilities will encourage community or private sector
                     management, encouraging female entrepreneurship; the subcomponent will finance dynamic feedback systems to
                     ensure functionality of the WASH facilities in coordination with line ministries.

                     Sub-component 2.3: Development of private sector capacity for sustainable and resilient sanitation service delivery
                     This subcomponent will focus on market enabling measures to support private sector involvement in sanitation for
                     peri-urban and rural growth centers. It will finance: i) technical assistance to contractors to integrate sanitation
                     products/services in their business line (compliant with voucher scheme requirements); ii) training for sanitation and




Public Disclosure
                     hygiene entrepreneurs business planning and facilitating access to SME-credit (including for sanitation emptiers) iii)
                     innovation/catalytic grants for product innovation and market development (e.g. for menstrual hygiene pads, for
                     latrine slab innovation and marketing (e.g. sato-pan).

                     Sub-component 2.4: Improved sanitation sector governance and investment planning
                     This subcomponent will finance: i) national support to develop implementation decrees for the foreseen Sanitation
                     Law; ii) provincial support to develop regulatory and legislative framework and basic MIS systems; iii) assessments and
                     development of provincial sanitation plans; iv) detailed studies to prepare ETD/ or city-wide inclusive sanitation plan
                     for future investments.

                     Component 3 - Project Management (US$20 million). This component will finance all project management activities.

                     Component 4 - Contingency Emergency Response Component, CERC ($0 allocated). This component provides for a
                     zero dollar emergency response mechanism in the event of a natural disaster, crisis or emergency that meets
                     established criteria, which is defined as an event that has, or is likely to have in the very near future, significant
                     adverse economic and/or social effects on the Recipient as a result of natural or man-made crises or disasters.




                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1. Detailed project location(s) and salient physical characteristics relevant to the E&S assessment [geographic,
                     environmental, social]

                    Jun 03, 2022                                                                                                       Page 5 of 18
                              The World Bank
                              DRC Rural Water and Sanitation Sector Development Project (P178389)



                     The proposed project objectives are to increase access to basic drinking water supply and sanitation services in
                     selected rural and peri-urban areas and to improve private sector and public sector capacities for water and sanitation
                     service delivery and water resources management. The project will be implemented in a series of Project (SOP). As
                     part of SOP-1, the four (4) targeted provinces are Kwilu, Kasai, Kasai Central, and Kasai Oriental. These provinces have
                     been identified in dialogue with the Government of the DRC and are based on several criteria, including: the current
                     rate of access to water and sanitation, the total number of people without access to basic water services, poverty
                     levels and stunting, priority provinces under the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) and synergies with other Bank
                     operations. These 4 provinces represent a population of approximately 26 million inhabitants. The project area mainly
                     comprises two (2) protected areas: the Mangai hunting domain (Kwilu) and part of the Bushimaie hunting domain
                     (Kasai Central). The major environmental and social issues facing this area are mainly (i) erosion due mainly to
                     uncontrolled urbanization and lack of maintenance of sewers and gutters; (ii) poor waste management due to lack of
                     controlled landfill and the lack of technical and financial resources of the specialized public services ; (iii) the difficulty
                     of supplying drinking water and electricity while several rivers cross this area such as Kasai, Loange, Kwilu, Kwenge,
                     etc. A more detailed description of the particular conditions and the social and physical characteristics of the project
                     area will be provided at the appraisal stage and the project sites will be located in selected ETDs. At this stage, the
                     exact locations of the project activities are therefore not yet known.

                     Project activities relevant to the ESSs include mainly component 1, 2 and 4. Activities under component 1 will finance
                     infrastructure such as (i) expansion and rehabilitation of multi-village and/or peri-urban water supply systems
                     including water source intake, production, storage/reservoirs, conveyance and distribution networks (ii) construction,
                     expansion, and/or rehabilitation of rural water supply systems; and (iii) the development of solar energy to power




Public Disclosure
                     water systems where no electricity grids are available. Under component 2, the project (i) will finance the
                     construction of water, sanitation, and hygiene facilities in selected public institutions and other public places (i.e.
                     schools, health centers, markets, transport hubs), and (ii) may finance small-scale fecal sludge treatment plants and
                     emptying equipment and provide vouchers for households to install household latrines. These activities may likely
                     lead environmental risks and impacts. Component 4, CERC, covers activities to be financed by the project in the event
                     of an emergency.

                     The ESSs are also relevant to activities related to capacity development, technical assistance, training and grants
                     under Subcomponents 1.2, 2.1 and 2.3.
                     D. 2. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity
                     The project preparation will be fully handled by CEP-O, under the MRHE (Ministry of Water Resources and Electricity).
                     During implementation, CEP-O will be the lead coordination entity in addition to handling implementation of
                     component 1 and 3. The CEP-O has capacity for implementing World Bank-financed projects under the safeguards
                     policy and some experience implementing the ESF, and is co-implementing two (2) World Bank financed projects
                     where the ESF is applied: the Kinshasa Multisectoral Urban Development Project (Kin Elenda, P171141) and the
                     Access, Governance and Reform for Electricity and water (AGREE, P173506). Component 2 may be implemented by
                     DAS under MEDD (Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development). The option of a second implementation
                     unit under MEDD (DAS) for component 2 will be explored during preparation. MEDD does not have existing
                     experience under DAS (though the ministry is currently implementing a forestry project) nor does the Ministry of
                     Rural Development (MDR) have experience with World Bank financed projects. As needed, the implementing units
                     will be strengthened throughout implementation, and the project includes comprehensive technical assistance to
                     strengthen the capacities of key implementing entities and government institutions involved in sustainability of
                     service provision.
                    Jun 03, 2022                                                                                                           Page 6 of 18
                              The World Bank
                              DRC Rural Water and Sanitation Sector Development Project (P178389)




                     CEP-O includes an environmental specialist and a social development specialist based at national level. To ensure
                     close monitoring of the project implementation, four (4) additional E&S specialists shall be recruited at provincial level
                     and will be based in the provinces of Kwilu, Kasai, Kasai Central and Kasai Oriental (through provincial PIU teams).

                     The MEDD governs environmental policies and their compliance. MEDD's technical agency in charge of environmental
                     and social monitoring and management is the Congolese Environment Agency (ACE or Agence Congolaise de
                     l’Environnement). In accordance with Law No. 11/009 of July 9, 2011 on fundamental principles relating to the
                     protection of the environment and Decree No. 14/030 of November 18, 2014 establishing the statutes of the
                     Congolese Environment Agency, its purpose is the evaluation and approval of all environmental and social studies as
                     well as the monitoring of their implementation. ACE remains understaffed with limited financial capacity, and despite
                     several donor-funded capacity-building initiatives, it still largely relies on donor funds to carry out its field supervision
                     duties. Capacity building is thus required to enable this structure to play its role fully, particularly in the context of the
                     ESF. Despite its familiarity with the Bank's Safeguard policies, ACE has limited experience with the Bank's
                     Environmental and Social Framework (ESF). Its capacity with ESF will continue to be strengthened through the project.

                     At the provincial level, government agencies lack staff capacity and equipment to monitor E&S risks and impacts. Also,
                     as the project plans to involve private sector firms, their capacity to manage E&S risks and impacts should be assessed
                     and strengthened where required. To address any gaps in stakeholders’ capacity, a draft capacity building action plan
                     should be developed prior to appraisal and measures captured as part of the Environmental and Social Commitment
                     Plan (ESCP).




Public Disclosure
                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                            Substantial


                     Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                         Substantial
                     Environmental risk is rated as Substantial at concept stage. Potential environmental risks and impacts are expected
                     under Components 1 and 2. Under component 1, they are linked to the following activities (i) expansion and
                     rehabilitation of multi-village and/or peri-urban water supply systems including water source intake, production,
                     reservoirs, conveyance and distribution networks (ii) construction, expansion, and/or rehabilitation of rural water
                     supply systems; and (iii) the development of solar energy to power water systems where no electricity grids are
                     available. In addition, support provided under this component through a PPCG to develop SMEs in the Water sector
                     which involves the FIs may generate potential adverse direct and indirect environmental risks and impacts during
                     operations of SMEs. Under component 2, risks and impacts are mainly linked to small-scale fecal sludge treatment
                     plants, construction works of water, sanitation, and hygiene facilities in selected public institutions and limited risks
                     with household latrines. Key anticipated direct, indirect, and cumulative risks and impacts associated with project
                     activities will entail disruption of traffic in the project area due to trench excavation work to install drinking water
                     distribution pipes, OHS risks for workers, community health and safety risks for communities around works sites, fire
                     and explosions hazard, waste generation including fecal sludge, risks related to chemical management, risks of
                     pollution, disturbance of aquatic habitats at water intake sites, inadequate wastewater management that can
                     promote the proliferation of insects, risk of waterborne diseases if water distributed to communities is not well
                     treated and stored appropriately in reservoirs. Other risks and impacts are related to the large geographic area

                    Jun 03, 2022                                                                                                          Page 7 of 18
                              The World Bank
                              DRC Rural Water and Sanitation Sector Development Project (P178389)



                     (including remote areas with some difficulty of access) and dispersed/fragmented coverage and activities. Technical
                     assistance (TA) activities under components 1 and 2 that include transaction advisory services for larger PPPs
                     perimeters, TA to private sector in terms of business planning, loan proposal development, TA to local and/or private
                     operators on ESF, TA to selected commercial banks interested in lending to rural water sector, TA to contractors to
                     integrate sanitation products/services in their business line, are not expected to lead significant adverse risks and
                     impacts. The substantial risk rating takes into account the capacity of stakeholders involved in project, especially
                     MEDD, provincial governments, FIs and private sectors firms to manage potential risks based on the management
                     models that will be promoted. An assessment of the capacity of the FIs involved in component 1 against ESF
                     requirements (ESS9) will be carried out. These FIs will be required to develop and implement an ESMS to ensure that
                     the risks and impacts associated to the implementation of activities under the PPCG are properly managed. This risk
                     classification will be reassessed during project preparation as more information about the project implementation
                     modalities becomes known. In the current context of COVID-19, the project may increase its spread for workers,
                     beneficiaries and communities during project implementation if appropriate measures are not be taken. Regarding
                     aspects of Climate change (CC), DRC faces a serious threat due to the weakness of its infrastructure and livehoods.
                     More intense and frequent rainfall and an increase in the average daily temperature could lead to more frequent
                     flooding, increased erosion and prolonged dry spells. CC impacts and vulnerabilities already pose significant
                     challenges and risks in key sectors such as agriculture, water resources, water supply and sanitation, electricity, and
                     human health and compound existing risks from conflict and violence. Appropriate measures related to impacts on
                     climate change should be considered on the selection, siting, planning, design, and implementation of sub-projects.
                     Social Risk Rating                                                                                           Substantial
                     Social risk is rated as Substantial at concept stage. Overall the project will have positive impacts in that it aims to



Public Disclosure
                     increase access to basic drinking water supply and sanitation for rural and peri-urban communities. This will be
                     achieved through financing basic access infrastructure investments in water and sanitation within the targeted
                     communities, households, within social institutions and public places, and will support the expansion of private sector
                     actors role and investments in service delivery. The social risk for the SOP 1 is therefore based on a number of factors:
                     (i) land acquisition leading to physical or economic displacement of project affected persons (PAPs) related to the
                     infrastructure activities (component 1 and 2) where increasing water supply access will require construction, (ii)
                     expansion and rehabilitation of water supply systems, as well as the development of solar energy to power water
                     systems; (iii) elite capture and potential exclusion of the most vulnerable groups’ access to water and sanitation
                     services, most notably indigenous communities which are present in the project areas (Kasais) and often having
                     limited access in public services; (iv) increased pressure on water and natural resources; (v) Fragile context leading to
                     insecurity in some of the selected provinces such as Ituri (a red zone) and Kasai (orange zone) per Bank the security
                     assessments; (vi) limited E&S capacity of the private and/or local community operators (ASUREP) that will be financed
                     through performance based grants or private operators through Design Build Operate contracts as well as related
                     risks of the Financial Institutions downstream activities (the physical works will have the same risks as those works
                     financed through other mechanisms); and (vii) and disturbance of community health and safety through labor influx,
                     security risks, sexual exploitation and abuse.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESSs) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1. General Assessment

                     ESS1 Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts

                    Jun 03, 2022                                                                                                      Page 8 of 18
                              The World Bank
                              DRC Rural Water and Sanitation Sector Development Project (P178389)



                     Overview of the relevance of the Standard for the Project:
                     Rural areas, where some of poorest people reside, are disproportionately impacted by poor service delivery, unsafe
                     drinking water quality, increasing water costs, and lack of access to safe sanitation and hygiene services. Lack of
                     water WSS access negatively impacts public health, overburdens women and girls responsible for water collection
                     and hinders human capital development and economic growth. Therefore, the project will have positive social and
                     environmental impacts in increasing access, but also through strengthening the capacity of both public and private
                     services for water supply systems and improved sanitation.

                     This standard is relevant as the project will finance infrastructure activities under component 1 and 2 which will
                     involve civil works to construct, expand and/or rehabilitate water systems, WASH facilities in public institutions as
                     well as small-scale treatment facilities for fecal sludge.

                     To manage environmental risks mentioned above and considering that the specific subproject locations are not yet
                     known at this stage, the project will develop prior to project appraisal an Environmental and Social Management
                     Framework (ESMF). The ESMF will examine the project’s overall risks and impacts, setting out the principles, rules,
                     guidelines and procedures to assess, mitigate and monitor potential risks and impacts from project activities. It will
                     include E&S risk and impact screening criteria, and a template for preparing Environmental and Social Impact
                     Assessments (ESIAs) including, as appropriate, analysis of alternatives (project site, technology, design and
                     operation), and Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) or checklists (ie. such as for household latrines
                     or school facilities where a comprehensive ESMP may not be needed), as necessary for managing risks and impacts
                     related to site-specific subprojects. The ESMF will outline the framework of the borrower’s capacity, at national and



Public Disclosure
                     provincial level, and implementation arrangements to be put in place for E&S management. Additionally, the ESMF
                     will also include measures to manage environmental, health and safety impacts, including specific guidance for the
                     preparation of subproject instruments. Hence, the project will apply the requirements of the Environmental Health
                     and Safety Guidelines (EHSGs) to be adopted and utilized by contractors and other project implementers such as
                     private water operators. A CERC-ESMF will be prepared and disclosed if and when the CERC component is activated
                     and before the commencement of CERC activities.

                     Regarding TA activities proposed under components 1 and 2, the Borrower shall, during project implementation,
                     draft Terms of Reference (ToRs) and output acceptable to the Bank and will include environmental and social
                     considerations that are consistent with ESSs 1-10.

                     The project will finance reforms, master plans and feasibility studies that may lead to regulation of natural resources
                     (such as delineation/demarcation of water sources for protection). The project will conduct a Social, Legal and
                     Institutional assessment under the ESMF, in order to identify potential economic and social risks and impacts of the
                     planning or regulation around water sources, and propose appropriate measures to minimize and mitigate them, in
                     particular those that affect poor and vulnerable groups.

                     To manage the social risks, the project will prepare a Social Assessment either as a standalone or part of the ESMF
                     (this will be determined during preparation) to assess and address risks and impacts of the project related to water
                     access, including GBV/SEA/SH risks related to the sector and activities proposed in the project activities. The social
                     assessment should, amongst others, propose ways in which the project the project addresses inclusion and
                     vulnerability in water and sanitation access, especially for vulnerable, excluded and marginalized groups. An SEA/SH


                    Jun 03, 2022                                                                                                      Page 9 of 18
                              The World Bank
                              DRC Rural Water and Sanitation Sector Development Project (P178389)



                     Prevention and Response action plan (SEA/SH Action Plan) will be prepared prior to appraisal and included in the
                     ESMF with provisions for additional assessment and mitigation measures at the subproject level. The action plan will
                     include the basic Code of Conduct (CoC) outlining prohibited SEA/SH behaviors and applicable sanctions, an
                     accountability and response framework within the project’s Grievance Mechanism (GM) with specific procedures to
                     manage SEA/SH complaints safely and confidentially, including referral protocols for survivors, a holistic package of
                     GBV support services, regular trainings for workers, awareness measures for communities on GBV/SEA/SH risks,
                     prohibited behaviors in the CoC and reporting procedures for SEA/SH incidents, regular consultations with women
                     and girls in separate groups led by a woman in a safe place and procedures for further assessment of risks at the
                     subproject level. Given the rural nature of the project, the unknown size of the infrastructure and the possible use of
                     worker camps the SEA/SH action plan and PIU staff should be in place as early as possible, and definitely before the
                     start of any project activities.

                     Labor Management Procedures (LMP) will be prepared to guide the management of project workers, contractors,
                     community workers and other groups involved in providing labor services.

                     Due to the existing security risks in some of the selected provinces, notably the Kasai Province, the project will also
                     prepare a security risk assessment and security management plan to ensure the safety of communities, project staff,
                     and contractors.

                     As for now, associated facilities have not yet been identified as part of this project as the specifics of the project sites
                     are not yet known. However, if any associated facility is identified during project preparation, an assessment of its




Public Disclosure
                     potential E&S risks and impacts will be carried out in the relevant E&S instruments to be prepared by the project.

                     The project will not support activities, subprojects or sub-Borrowers that would involve significant conversion or
                     degradation of critical habitat or restrict communtiy access to water resouces, as these will be specifically excluded as
                     part of the screening criteria in the ESMF. It will include a Negative list to exclude any possibility of risks and impacts
                     of sub-projects in protected areas, sensitive areas, biodiversity offsets, management of living resources and others
                     for the implementation of any sub-projects.

                     Lastly, the borrower will prepare an Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) with the support of the Bank.
                     The ESCP will include a commitment to the preparation of potential subsequent ESIAs and relevant instruments, and
                     related timeline.
                     Areas where “Use of Borrower Framework” is being considered:
                     The project will be implemented in accordance with requirements of the ESF Environmental and Social Standards
                     (ESSs) and in accordance with national and National level regulatory and legal requirements where applicable.


                     ESS10 Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure
                     Key stakeholders are the rural and peri-urban communities expected to benefit from the project activities,
                     government institutions and private sector which will receive technical assistance and/or financing to implement the
                     project. A stakeholder mapping and outreach will be included in the design of the Stakeholder Engagement Plan
                     (SEP). The SEP (as well as the Project Operations Manual) will cover consultations to inform the choice for the
                     proposed management model for subproject(s), such as for example the ASUREP model (community-management)

                    Jun 03, 2022                                                                                                        Page 10 of 18
                              The World Bank
                              DRC Rural Water and Sanitation Sector Development Project (P178389)



                     or the delegation of the system O&M through private sector arrangements. Given the framework nature of the
                     project, management models will not have been identified for all subprojects before appraisal, however, a decision-
                     making framework will be applied, taking into account aspects such as size of the project, density of the subproject
                     area, access to market players, as well as the outcome of the consultation province with provincial government, ETDs
                     and local communities. In addition to identifying the stakeholders, the SEP will propose strategies for the continuous
                     engagement and consultation of the various stakeholders at national, provincial and local levels; the inclusion of a
                     citizen engagement approach into the design of the project; the establishment of a GM to address and resolve
                     complaints ; a plan for the engagement and inclusion of the most disadvantaged and vulnerable populations in the
                     project areas. The GM will be sensitive to SEA/SH complaints with multiple channels to report complaints confirmed
                     as safe and accessible during consultations with women; with referral to at the minimum medical, psychosocial and
                     legal aid GBV service providers that will be mapped out and evaluated for the quality of their services before referral
                     protocols can be developed; and with complaint verification and management procedures that are confidential and
                     survivor centered.
                     Vulnerable groups that will be considered are women & girls, extreme poor as well as people with disabilities. Design
                     of infrastructure facilities will be tailored to the specific needs of women & girls and will be accessible for people with
                     disabilities. Community consultation and mobilization will be carried out in gender-sensitive manner, ensuring
                     separate spaces for women to voice priorities and needs and ensuring that women will have adequate representation
                     in ASUREPs management structures or oversight boards (at least 40 percent) and that the location of public
                     standpipes has been consulted with women and vulnerable households).

                     The SEP will be prepared prior to appraisal.




Public Disclosure
                     B.2. Specific Risks and Impacts

                     A brief description of the potential environmental and social risks and impacts relevant to the Project.
                     ESS2 Labor and Working Conditions
                     This standard is relevant to the project. Labor and working conditions will apply to direct, contracted, primary supply
                     and community workers. The borrower will prepare Labor Management Procedures (LMP) that will detail how
                     workers are going to be managed throughout the project cycle. Based on the nature of project activities and their
                     scope, the project will include the following categories of workers under components 1 and 2: direct workers (PIU
                     and regional PIU staff overseeing the implementation of project activities); contracted workers (private sector water
                     operators engaged in civil works and PPPs for O&M); primary supply workers (provision of goods and materials to
                     contractors) and community workers (in the ASUREPs and Community led sanitation activities where some
                     community civil works for installation of sanitation facilities will be undertaken under the Community-Led Total
                     Sanitation (CLTS) program, as well as in the innovative O&M models combining community and PPP management).
                     The LMP will also include guidelines for a worker’s GM for all type of workers. The project will need to ensure that
                     Labor Management Procedures (LMP) are in place and are consistent with the provisions of the World Bank’s ESS2
                     and National laws, which identify that all contractors and sub-contractors must ensure that there is no forced or child
                     labor employed during construction. The LMP will be as a standalone document, and include provisions to ensure fair
                     wages in line with local legislation and provide contractual hiring of workers (both male and female), adequate
                     payment for overwork, clearly define the terms and conditions on which community labor will be engaged (including



                    Jun 03, 2022                                                                                                       Page 11 of 18
                              The World Bank
                              DRC Rural Water and Sanitation Sector Development Project (P178389)



                     amount and method of payment), and other measures. The LMP will also include guidelines for a worker’s GM for all
                     type of workers, as well as codes of conduct, and other measures to prevent and respond to SEA/SH.

                     Occupational Health and Safety (OHS): To ensure the health and safety of workers during the construction and
                     operational phases, a Health, Safety and Environmental (HSE) plan will be developed as part of the ESMF and
                     contractors will develop and implement a site specific Health, Safety and Environmental (HSE) plans in line with
                     World Bank Group Environment, Health and Safety (EHS) Guidelines (for construction activities), and International
                     Good Practices, including emergency preparedness and response measures in line WHO guidelines on COVID19. The
                     plan will include procedures on incident investigation and reporting, recording and reporting of non-compliance,
                     emergency preparedness and response procedures and continuous training and awareness to workers.

                     Workers Accommodation: although it is expected that most works will be completed using local labor and nearby
                     workers, should on-site workers accommodation is confirmed, a Labor Camp Management Plan will be required as
                     part of the C-ESMP.


                     ESS3 Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management
                     This standard is relevant to the project. The ESMF will identify and assess all risks and impacts for projects activities
                     under component 1 and 2 associated to relevant requirements of ESS3 (including energy, water use, raw materials,
                     air emissions, vegetation and soil loss, waste management (such as fecal sludge), etc) and will propose standardized
                     measures to address these risks.




Public Disclosure
                     Energy, water and raw materials uses should be relevant to the construction and operation of project supported
                     works.
                     Energy: The rate of access to electricity is very low in rural areas compared to urban areas. The project is not
                     expected to be a potentially significant user of energy. Even tough the project design plans the development of solar
                     energy to power water system where no electricity grids are available,. however this aspect will be assessed during
                     the project preparation through the environmental and social assessment.

                     Water use: the project plans to construct, rehabilitate and extend water and sanitation systems in some rural and
                     peri-urban areas. This project could impact adversely the water quantity and quality of the associated surface and
                     groundwater system while generating risks to the environment and communities. Since the project will support
                     investments to increase water accessibility / supply to communities, a water balance study might be required. It will
                     be assessed, as part of the environmental and social assessment, and appropriate measures will be put in place.
                     Sanitation systems are limited to on-site facilities for public institutions and for households as well as small-scale fecal
                     sludge treatment plants
                     Raw materials: The project will make use of natural resources as materials for construction/rehabilitation/expansion
                     activities. These materials will potentially include stones, sand, concrete blocks, and timber. The project will ensure
                     that all these materials are obtain from legally established quarries and certified suppliers, without any risk of
                     conflict.

                     Air emissions: During construction phase, air emissions will include exhaust gases from vehicles and machinery, as
                     well as dust generated by construction activities. Those most likely to be affected are workers and people living near


                    Jun 03, 2022                                                                                                       Page 12 of 18
                              The World Bank
                              DRC Rural Water and Sanitation Sector Development Project (P178389)



                     construction sites. Implementation of mitigation measures will be applied to minimize the impact of air emissions
                     during construction, transportation of materials, and residual impacts is expected to be limited in scope and duration.

                     Noise: During the construction phase, noise could be generated by the construction/rehabilitation works, using
                     construction machinery and the movement of vehicles. This noise pollution relating to the construction work would
                     be limited to the duration of the work. However, appropriate measures must be taken during the operation phase of
                     certain infrastructures such as water treatment plants to minimize noise pollution for nearby residents. The ESMP
                     and other subsequent instruments to be prepared will include mitigation measures to minimize and manage noise
                     levels, for example by applying standard restrictions on working hours on site.

                     Waste management: Construction activities will generate solid waste which will primarily include excavated soil and
                     hazardous waste such as hydrocarbon oils from construction machinery and vehicles. Appropriate mitigation
                     measures to manage hazardous and non-hazardous wastes will be included in the ESMPs and other subsequent
                     instruments to be prepared.

                     Climate risks: Climate projections indicate increased flooding, erosion, and dry spells. Hence, the proposed WRM-
                     considerations in rural water planning will help ensure long-term sustainability of infrastructure and provide greater
                     resilience to climate shocks moving forward, while developing long-term capacities of OCE to better manage basin-
                     level water resources, including groundwater aquifers, reduce climate risks through better data and set-up
                     sustainable financing mechanism. The project will finance solar pumping schemes where access to the grid is not
                     feasible and will aim to connect water supply systems to renewables-based mini-grids, reducing GHG emissions and




Public Disclosure
                     carbon footprint. GHG emissions may also be reduced by improved sanitation facilities linked with fecal sludge
                     treatment. Investments in resilient sanitation facilities will also reduce the spread of fecal matter due to flooding.
                     Further climate resilient options for infrastructure and its O&M will be explored during preparation based on DRC-
                     specific climate considerations and the realities on the ground in the targeted provinces.


                     ESS4 Community Health and Safety
                     This standard is relevant as the project activities will be ongoing in communities, and the project will be required to
                     conduct an assessment (in the ESMF) of the potential impacts of the project activities on the health and safety of the
                     beneficiary communities. These include risks and impacts of the design of the infrastructure both during and after
                     construction, community exposure to labor influx, exposure to transmissible diseases (including COVID-19, HIV/AIDS),
                     noise, pollution and other public health issues.

                     The project will operate in areas with security concerns, specifically Kasai Central and Kasai where there are high
                     levels of crime, civil unrest, and where armed groups occasionally continue to operate. A security risk assessment
                     (SRA) combined with a Security Management Plan (SMP) will be carried out prior to implementation of project
                     activities in the areas where there exists security risks. The security risks will need to be monitored as the project
                     moves into implementation and when choosing subproject sites. A security management Plan (SMP) will be
                     developed prior to operations commencing on the ground and address mitigation measures as they apply to site
                     specific sub-projects/activities, including appropriate measures to protect workers, contractors, communities and
                     beneficiaries. It has not yet been determined whether the project will utilize security personnel to secure staff or



                    Jun 03, 2022                                                                                                      Page 13 of 18
                              The World Bank
                              DRC Rural Water and Sanitation Sector Development Project (P178389)



                     project equipment. The security assessment and subsequent management plan will determine whether security
                     forces are required, if so, ESS4 and SEA/SH risk management guidelines and requirements will be adhered to.

                     For the project activities that have the potential to generate emergency events (to be identified), the borrower shall
                     prepare an Emergency Response Plan (ERP) in coordination with the relevant local authorities and the affected
                     communities.

                     The ESMF including the SEA/SH Action Plan will be prepared prior to project appraisal, while the SRA/SMP will be
                     prepared prior to project implementation.


                     ESS5 Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement
                     This standard is relevant as activities under component 1 and 2, which include but are not limited to construction,
                     expansion, and/or rehabilitation of rural water supply systems in rural and peri-urban areas, the construction of
                     public WASH facilities and small scale fecal sludge treatment plants and will require land acquisition resulting in
                     physical or economic displacement of Project Affected People (PAP). Potential social impacts and risks are expected
                     including economic impacts on PAP and temporary or permanent land acquisition, increased pressure on water
                     resources in densely populated areas, or water scarcity in drought-prone areas affecting livelihoods. Some works may
                     require permanent land acquisition, these include the installation of standpipes, distribution networks, water
                     storage/reservoirs, solar panels where power grids are not available; while some other works may require temporary
                     relocation during works, such as the installation/rehabilitation of handwashing facilities in schools, health centers,




Public Disclosure
                     markets, transport hubs, etc. As some facilities (water points) will be community based and managed, the project
                     may envisage voluntary land donations (VLD) on community managed land where viable. Seeing as the specific
                     activities will be limited in scope and size (mainly small civil works), the land needs are not estimated to be
                     significant, therefore the number of PAPs is expected to be also small. Moreover, the areas to be covered by the
                     project are rural and peri-urban areas with low population density where land scarcity is not a challenge.

                     The project may also finance water master plans and feasibility studies (as part of subsequent SOPs) that may alter
                     the land usage in areas around water resources, and may lead to demarcation to protect water sources. The impacts
                     of the land management in and around these areas will be assessed through a Social, Legal and Institutional
                     Assessment to be undertaken under the ESMF (see under ESS1).

                     The Borrower will develop a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) that will include the procedures and approaches
                     for land acquisition. The RPF will provide guidance for preparation of site-specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) as
                     required before civil works can commence on specific sub-projects. The RAPs will be prepared, consulted upon,
                     cleared by the Bank and implemented prior to commencement of any construction, rehabilitation and/or land
                     acquisition. The project will (in line with provisions in ESS6 application in the project) not finance any activities in
                     natural habitats, protected areas, forests, or any areas where access to natural resources will be restricted.

                     The RPF will be prepared prior to project appraisal.


                     ESS6 Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources


                    Jun 03, 2022                                                                                                     Page 14 of 18
                              The World Bank
                              DRC Rural Water and Sanitation Sector Development Project (P178389)



                     ESS6 is relevant to the project. Activities under components 1 and 2 could impact biodiversity conservation and
                     sustainable management of living natural resources as the project activities will be located in rural areas. At this
                     stage, the locations of subprojects and, the nature of biodiversity and its sensitivity within each project areas are not
                     yet known. An early screening will be done to improve projects site selection to avoid selecting areas with high
                     biodiversity values. The project will not support activities, subprojects or sub-Borrowers that would involve significant
                     conversion or degradation of critical habitat, as these will be specifically excluded as part of the screening criteria in
                     the ESMF. It will include a Negative list to exclude any possibility of risks and impacts of sub-projects in protected
                     areas, sensitive areas, biodiversity offsets, management of living resources and others for the implementation of any
                     sub-projects.

                     Through the ESMF, the Borrower will identify relevant risks/impacts associated to ESS6 for subprojects under
                     component 1 and 2 and will include appropriate mitigation measures. All proposed alternatives for sub-projects will
                     be assessed trough potential subsequent ESIAs and relevant instruments to avoid sensitive environmental, social and
                     cultural receptors.

                     As the project footprint will be in rural areas, it may be necessary to engage a specialist biodiversity consultant to
                     carry out a comprehensive biodiversity baseline study. This aspect will be reassessed at appraisal stage when further
                     details of the project are known.


                     ESS7 Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional Local Communities




Public Disclosure
                     The Pygmy Indigenous Population in the DRC possess the characteristics of Historically Underserved Traditional Local
                     Communities under ESS7 and are present in the project implementation areas, more specifically in the Kasai, Kasai
                     Oriental, and Kasai Central Provinces. The Social Assessment will also specifically assess the risks and impacts of the
                     project on Pygmy and an Traditional Local Communities Planning Framework/Indigenous Peoples Policy Planning
                     Framework (TLCPF/IPPF) will be prepared, consulted upon and disclosed by Appraisal to ensure that Indigenous
                     Peoples are fully included in any project activities or benefits occurring where they live, and that any potential
                     impacts on land used by them for traditional activities are addressed. Once the project has identified subproject sites,
                     the TLCPF/IPPF will serve as guidance to prepare the site specific Traditional Local Communities Plan/Indigenous
                     Peoples Plans (TLCP/IPP). The project activities are not expected to result in adverse impacts on land or natural
                     resources subject to traditional Pygmy/IP ownership or under customary use or occupation, to cause their relocation
                     from these lands, or to have significant impacts on their cultural heritage. Activities addressing SEA/SH risks for
                     Pygmy women will be integrated in the SEA/SH Action Plan.


                     ESS8 Cultural Heritage
                     ESS8 is relevant for this project. The project will support civil works activities that will include land excavations works
                     that may have adverse impacts on tangible cultural heritage. Through the environmental and social assessment, the
                     project will confirm the existence of intangible cultural heritage in the rural areas of the project. To manage and
                     mitigate the risks related to ESS8, further screening and assessment will be conducted to the identified risks and,
                     screening criteria will be included in the ESMF as well as chance find procedures which also included in the relevant
                     ESMPs and contractor contracts.



                    Jun 03, 2022                                                                                                        Page 15 of 18
                              The World Bank
                              DRC Rural Water and Sanitation Sector Development Project (P178389)



                     ESS9 Financial Intermediaries
                     ESS9 applies to project activities under sub-component 1.2, whereby the project may finance the capitalization of a
                     dedicated water window under the Partial Portfolio Credit Guarantee introduced through the Bank’s t Empowering
                     Women Entrepreneurs and Upgrading MSMEs for Economic Transformation and Jobs in DRC Project (P178176) . The
                     application of ESS9 would be assessed based on the following considerations:
                     The E&S risks identified during World Bank due diligence process will be addressed through preparation and
                     implementation of an Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) by the PFIs. The ESMS should include
                     the following to meet the requirements of ESS9: (i) environmental and social policy; (ii) clearly defined procedures for
                     the identification, assessment and management of the environmental and social risks and impacts of subprojects; (iii)
                     organizational capacity and competency; (iv) monitoring and review of environmental and social risks of subprojects
                     and the portfolio; and (v) external communications mechanisms; (vi) categorization of investment projects including
                     requirements to fulfill national legislation requirements related to E&S management.
                     In addition, it should also include procedures for environmental and social screening of project applications
                     investments against the exclusion list, to be developed during preparation, that is consistent with international good
                     practice of development finance institutions, considers the E&S capacity of the FIs, and is overall satisfactory to the
                     World Bank, as well as risk categorization of investment projects including requirements to fulfill national legislation
                     requirements related to E&S management. The client will be required to mandate PFIs to apply this exclusion list to
                     activities it supports via PFIs. However, with regard to the activities to be supported by the project, the following
                     project-specific exclusions would be asked from the agency (to be incorporated in the screening activities for
                     supported transactions and subprojects under the project:
                     -        Activities involving adverse impacts on critical habitats (in line with definitions provided in ESS6)



Public Disclosure
                     -        Activities that would have adverse impacts on IPs;
                     -        Activities in legally protected cultural heritage areas (in line with definitions provided in ESS8)

                     At this stage, FIs involved in this project are not yet known. Their capacity to manage E&S risks and impacts will be
                     assessed as soon as these FIs are known. The identification will be done during the implementation phase and an
                     E&S integration Plan containing specific provisions for incorporating E&S due diligence, monitoring, and reporting
                     under each project activities under subcomponent 1.2 will be prepared and will form part of the ESMS..


                     B.3 Other Relevant Project Risks
                     The project will operate in areas with security concerns, specifically Kasai Central and Kasai where there are high
                     levels of crime, civil unrest, and where armed groups occasionally continue to operate. A security risk assessment
                     (SRA) combined with a Security Management Plan (SMP) will be carried out prior to implementation of project
                     activities in the areas where there exists security risks. The security risks will need to be monitored as the project
                     moves into implementation and when choosing subproject sites. A security management Plan (SMP) will be
                     developed prior to operations commencing on the ground and address mitigation measures as they apply to site
                     specific sub-projects/activities, including appropriate measures to protect workers, contractors, communities and
                     beneficiaries.

                     C. Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                     OP 7.50 Projects on International Waterways                                                                              Yes


                    Jun 03, 2022                                                                                                      Page 16 of 18
                              The World Bank
                              DRC Rural Water and Sanitation Sector Development Project (P178389)




                     OP 7.60 Projects in Disputed Areas                                                                                    No



                     III. WORLD BANK ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL DUE DILIGENCE

                     A. Is a common approach being considered?                                                                             No
                     Financing Partners
                     No other financial partner is currently involved in this project


                     B. Proposed Measures, Actions and Timing (Borrower’s commitments)
                     Actions to be completed prior to Bank Board Approval:
                     Preparation, consultations, and disclosure of the following ESF instruments are expected prior to Project Appraisal
                     • An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF);
                     • Labor Management Procedures (as standalone);
                     • Social, Legal and Institutional Assessment (as part of the ESMF);
                     • Social Assessment (as standalone during preparation);
                     • A SEA/SH Action Plan (as part of the ESMF);
                     • A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF);



Public Disclosure
                     • An Indigenous People Planning Framework (IPPF);
                     • A Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP).
                     Possible issues to be addressed in the Borrower Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP):
                     The Borrower will:
                     - Ensure the preparation of subsequent ESIAs, ESMPs and relevant E&S instruments when required, and related
                     timeline.
                     - Ensure adequate staffing are in place prior to project effectiveness
                     - Prepare an ESMS for the FI that will include an E&S integration Plan as described below to become part of the ESMS
                     - Disclose the full ESMS, as well as it’s summary, as required by ESS9
                     - Prepare an E&S integration Plan containing specific provisions for incorporating E&S due diligence, monitoring, and
                     reporting under each project activities under subcomponent 1.2
                     - Prepare specific tools to be required for implementation by PFIs to screen and mitigate E&S risks in transactions
                     supported by the World Bank
                     - Prepare an E&S capacity building Plan to include, at a minimum (i) assessment of capacity and resources for E&S
                     management by PFIs (once identified); (ii) awareness training on E&S requirements and tools under the project for
                     PFIs); (iii) one-on-one support to PFIs, as needed, on implementation of the required tools. The E&S Capacity Building
                     Plan will be consulted on and publicly disclosed.
                     - Incorporate appropriate environment and social clauses in all legal agreements with participating FIs to ensure SMEs
                     compliance with E & S procedures and national E & S laws and regulations
                     - Conduct quarterly monitoring and reporting on compliance of PFIs with environmental and social requirements



                    Jun 03, 2022                                                                                                   Page 17 of 18
                              The World Bank
                              DRC Rural Water and Sanitation Sector Development Project (P178389)



                     C. Timing
                     Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage ESRS                                           09-Jan-2023

                     IV. CONTACT POINTS

                     World Bank
                     Contact:            Rebecca Jean Gilsdorf               Title:             Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

                     Telephone No:       5377+3036                           Email:             rgilsdorf@worldbank.org

                     Contact:            Patrick Goy Ndolo                   Title:             Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

                     Telephone No:       5377+3006                           Email:             pndolo@worldbank.org

                     Contact:            Susanna Smets                       Title:             Senior Water Specialist

                     Telephone No:       +1-202-473-9329                     Email:             ssmets@worldbank.org

                     Borrower/Client/Recipient
                     Borrower:              Ministry of Finance

                     Implementing Agency(ies)



Public Disclosure
                     Implementing Agency: Ministry of Hydraulic Resources and Energy

                     Implementing Agency: Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development



                     V. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     VI. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):              Patrick Goy Ndolo, Susanna Smets, Rebecca Jean Gilsdorf

                     Practice Manager (ENR/Social)     Africa Eshogba Olojoba Recommended on 31-May-2022 at 05:37:22 GMT-04:00

                     Safeguards Advisor ESSA           Ning Yang (SAESSA) Cleared on 03-Jun-2022 at 15:21:38 GMT-04:00




                    Jun 03, 2022                                                                                                Page 18 of 18
