Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       DRC Rural Water and Sanitation Sector Development Project (P178389)




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                        Project Information Document (PID)



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                       Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 25-May-2022 | Report No: PIDC33484




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               May 25, 2022                                                                                        Page 1 of 14
        The World Bank
        DRC Rural Water and Sanitation Sector Development Project (P178389)


  BASIC INFORMATION


  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE

  Country                                        Project ID                 Parent Project ID (if any)    Project Name
  Congo, Democratic Republic                     P178389                                                  DRC Rural Water and
  of                                                                                                      Sanitation Sector
                                                                                                          Development Project
                                                                                                          (P178389)
  Region                                         Estimated Appraisal Date   Estimated Board Date          Practice Area (Lead)
  Eastern and Southern Africa                    Mar 31, 2023               Jul 27, 2023                  Water

  Financing Instrument                           Borrower(s)                Implementing Agency
  Investment Project Financing                   Ministry of Finance        Ministry of Hydraulic
                                                                            Resources and Energy,
                                                                            Ministry of Environment and
                                                                            Sustainable Development

   Proposed Development Objective(s)

    To increase access to basic water supply and sanitation services in selected rural and peri-urban areas of DRC, and to
    improve capacities of public and private sectors for service delivery and water resource management

    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

   SUMMARY-NewFin1

   Total Project Cost                                                                                                    400.00
   Total Financing                                                                                                       400.00

                             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                           400.00

   Financing Gap                                                                                                            0.00

   DETAILS     -NewFinEnh1




   World Bank Group Financing

      International Development Association (IDA)                                                                        400.00
          IDA Credit                                                                                                     200.00
          IDA Grant                                                                                                      200.00




May 25, 2022                                                                                                           Page 2 of 14
         The World Bank
         DRC Rural Water and Sanitation Sector Development Project (P178389)




  Environmental and Social Risk Classification                                   Concept Review Decision
  Substantial                                                                    Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to
                                                                                 continue



  Other Decision (as needed)



  B. Introduction and Context

   Country Context
 1.       The Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), the largest and third most populous country in Sub-Saharan Africa, is
 rich in natural resources. With a total land area of 234 million ha, DRC’s size is equivalent to that of Western Europe. It
 has a low population density of 16.1 person per km2 and an estimated 89.61 million inhabitants2, of which 54.4 percent
 live in rural areas.3 The country has vast natural resources, including the world’s third largest hydropower potential, the
 world’s second largest tropical forest area, mineral endowments that are the richest and most diverse in the world, and
 more than half of all freshwater resources in Sub-Saharan Africa.4 Since the 2006 elections, the country follows a semi-
 presidential system, whereby the President is the head of state and the Prime Minister is the head of government, of a
 pluriform multi-party system. There are 26 provinces and provincial executive power is exercised by elected governors
 and their provincial ministers.

 2.      DRC is one of the world’s poorest countries, with a per capita gross domestic product (GDP) of US$545,5 roughly
 one-third of the Sub-Saharan Africa average (US$1,499). Based on the international standard of living on less than
 US$1.90 a day, 73 percent of household live in poverty (2020). Moreover, the number of poor is growing, with 20 million
 more poor in 2020 than in 2003. Poverty reduction is hampered by high population growth—on an average three percent
 annually from 1961 to 2020—combined with weak economic growth, with a real GDP growth rate of 1.6 percent over the
 same period. This has resulted in a 60 percent decline in GDP per capita in 2020 compared to its 1960 level. Additionally,
 the humanitarian situation is precarious: half of all children have not received routine immunizations, over 5.2 million
 people are forcibly displaced, 27 million people are food insecure, and there have been four Ebola outbreaks in the past
 three years.6 More than 40 percent, or about 5.6 million children under the age of five, are stunted and 23 percent of
 children are underweight.7 In 2020, DRC’s Human Development Index ranked 175 out of 189 countries and territories,
 while the 2020 Human Capital Index score was 0.37, which is below the average in Sub-Saharan Africa.




 1 World Bank (2020): www.data.worldbank.org (the latest census took place in 1984).
 2 Estimates as per the National Deployment and Vaccination Plan (Ministry of Health, 2021) go as high as 116 million.
 3 World Bank (2020): www.data.worldbank.org.
 4 Natural Resources Governance Institute. 2015. Country Strategy Note: Democratic Republic of Congo.
 5 World Bank (2020): www.data.worldbank.org.
 6 World Bank Group (2022). Country Partnership Framework for the Democratic Republic of Congo for the period FY22-FY26. Washington DC.
 7 Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) 2014.



May 25, 2022                                                                                                                      Page 3 of 14
         The World Bank
         DRC Rural Water and Sanitation Sector Development Project (P178389)


 3.       Conflict and violence continue, particularly in DRC’s part of the Great Lakes Region of Africa8 and lead to
 persistent fragility. Over the past decade, continuing violence has affected nearly 40 million Congolese.9 Women and girls
 are especially affected as widespread conflict-related sexual violence compounds other forms of gender-based violence
 (GBV). Enduring political instability and cycles of conflict have led to weak governance and institutions, hampering reform
 implementation, service delivery, and private sector growth. The three main themes driving fragility and conflict identified
 in the World Bank’s 2021 Risk and Resilience Assessment are (a) elite capture and resource extraction perpetuating a
 nonresponsive system of governance and a poorly redistributive economy; (b) an increasingly younger population lacking
 prospects for social mobility due to trauma and exclusion; and (c) the interaction between local, regional, and international
 conflict systems based on the competition for access to land, minerals, and other natural resources.

 4.       Addressing gender inequalities is paramount to realize poverty reduction, human capital outcomes, and
 growth. In 2020, DRC was ranked 175 out of 189 countries on the Gender Inequality Index. Gender gaps exists across all
 pillars of the World Bank Group (WBG) Gender Strategy:10 (a) human endowments – access to basic services, health, water
 and sanitation, (b) economic opportunities and jobs, (c) asset control and ownership and (d) voice and agency in decision
 making bodies. Women have less access to the education system, graduating four times less frequently than men.
 Furthermore, 61.5 percent of female-headed households live under the poverty line.11 As a result, women are less involved
 in the labor market and are also less likely to have skilled jobs,12 only accounting for 24 percent of professional and
 technical workers. In addition, women suffer from high rates of GBV. More than half of all women in DRC have experienced
 physical violence since the age of 15 (52 percent), and 27 percent of women reported they had been victims of physical
 violence over the past 12 months,13 most often by a family member but also by teachers, police, soldiers, or armed groups.
 Addressing women’s economic empowerment requires the advancement of strategic priorities such as improving security
 and household agency, increasing educational attainment and skills, increasing access to capital, and supporting women’s
 agricultural productivity.14

 5.       Major infrastructure gaps, combined with poor governance, have led to geographic isolation, socioeconomic
 inequalities, and disparities in poverty rates across provinces, as well as between urban and rural areas. The poor state
 of access to basic infrastructure services represents a major constraint to sustainable and inclusive growth. Decades of
 conflict, underinvestment, and lack of connectivity across DRC’s vast territory have resulted in particularly large gaps in
 access to water supply and sanitation (WSS) services and electricity supply. Lack of access to these services represents a
 major barrier to doing business, hampers market development, and adds significant costs to infrastructure projects. The
 government has begun a campaign of reforming key state-owned enterprises responsible for service delivery, including
 REGIDESO, the national water utility. However, these reforms principally impact urban services, leaving significant
 governance gaps in rural areas where alternative service provision models are to be developed and strengthened.

 6.      Climate change poses a serious threat to the country’s weak infrastructure and livelihoods. Due to the vast
 resources of the Congo basin and a high average annual rainfall of over 1500 mm per year, DRC is generally water rich.
 The total volume of freshwater withdrawn by major economic sectors is 0.2 percent of the total resource endowment.
 Long-term forecasts show more intense and frequent rainfall and an increase in daily mean temperature of 1.5–2.5°C
 warming by 2050. This would lead to more frequent flooding, increased erosion, and prolonged dry spells. Climate change

 8 Countries include Burundi, DRC, Rwanda, and Uganda.
 9 Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs data (2021).
 10 World Bank Group Gender Strategy 2016–2023. World Bank, Washington DC.
 11 https://databank.worldbank.org/source/world-development-indicators.
 12 World Economic Forum (WEF). 2020. Global Gender Gap Index.
 13 Government of the Democratic Republic of Congo DHS (2014).
 14 World Bank. 2021. Women’s Economic Empowerment in the Democratic Republic of Congo. Obstacles and Opportunities. World Bank

 Washington DC.

May 25, 2022                                                                                                                  Page 4 of 14
         The World Bank
         DRC Rural Water and Sanitation Sector Development Project (P178389)


 impacts and vulnerabilities already pose significant challenges and risks in key sectors such as agriculture, water resources,
 water supply and sanitation, electricity, and human health and compound existing risks from conflict and violence.
 Progressing climate change will impact DRC’s water security in terms of access to services and water-related risks, hence
 the need for climate-resilient infrastructure and water resources management.

 7.       The COVID-19 pandemic presents significant socioeconomic challenge and threatens to undo recent progress in
 curbing poverty and enhancing state institutional capacity. The economic impact of the pandemic added significant stress
 to an already strained service delivery system and its institutions. As a result, 2020 saw a contraction of the non-mineral
 GDP by 1.3 percent and a slight increase in the poverty rate from 2019. DRC could face weaker growth, higher prices, and
 the diversion of public resources away from ongoing development efforts.


  Sectoral and Institutional Context
 8.       Despite DRC’s rich water resources, the country faces water security challenges, given the low and
 geographically uneven access rates for WASH services15. The most recent nationally representative household survey
 found that access in rural areas is much lower than in urban areas across all WSS services.16 Most notably, only 19 percent
 of rural households have access to basic water supply and only 9 percent have access to basic sanitation, whereas 18
 percent of rural household still practice open defecation as their primary sanitation solution and just 15 percent of rural
 households have access to basic hygiene services17. Figure 1 shows that water supply and sanitation access is lowest in
 the central provinces of the country. These are also the provinces with some of the highest rates of open defecation. Not




 Figure 1: Access to basic water supply (blue) and basic sanitation (green) by province (2019) (based on JMP data)

 15 World Bank (2017). WASH Poor in a Water-Rich Country: A Diagnostic of Water, Sanitation, Hygiene, and Poverty in the Democratic Republic of

 Congo. World Bank, Washington, DC.
 16 UNICEF (2018) DRC Multiple Cluster Indicator Survey (MICS) Household survey.
 17 Definitions are defined through the Joint Monitoring Program (JMP) of UNICEF/WHO (www.washdata.org). JMP uses national data such as

 Demographic Health Survey (DHS) and the MICS. “Basic” water supply is defined as access to an improved water source within a 30-minute-
 roundtrip time. An improved water source includes piped water (tap stand or yard connection), borehole, handpump, protected spring or dug well.
 JMP defines “safely managed” water supply as a much higher level of service with access on premises, a reliable supply, and free of contamination.
 Basic sanitation is defined as access to an improved sanitation facilities not shared with other households. An improved facility includes a pit latrine
 with slab, a ventilated improved pit latrine, a flush toilet, a pour-flush toilet, or a composting toilet. Basic hygiene means an on-plot handwashing
 facility with water or soap.

May 25, 2022                                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 14
         The World Bank
         DRC Rural Water and Sanitation Sector Development Project (P178389)


 only is access higher in urban areas, but wealthy households are also much more likely to have access to water supply (66
 percent versus 14 percent) and basic sanitation (30 percent versus 6 percent) than those in the bottom quintile. Annex 1
 provides detailed access rates for each province.

 9.      The government is in the process of reforming both the water supply and sanitation sectors and has developed
 a national program to improve access and sustainability of service provision. At a national level, the National Program
 for Water, Sanitation and Hygiene 2020-2030 (PNEHA), lays out the priorities for sectoral reform and investments over
 the coming years. The PNEHA sets ambitious targets of 80 percent for urban and 60 percent rural water access and
 universal water access in schools and health centers by 2030. The PNEHA, budgeted at almost US$ 8 billion of which the
 majority for water supply, has several subprograms and involves all ministries involved in the water, sanitation and hygiene
 (WASH) sector.
 10.     The Ministry of Water Resources and Electricity (Ministère des Ressources Hydrauliques et Electricité, MRHE) is
 the key government institution for the water supply sectors, whereas the Ministry of Environment and Sustainable
 Development (Ministère de l’Environnement et Développement Durable, MEDD) oversees the sanitation sector. The
 MRHE is responsible for developing water sector policies, planning access scale up, and overseeing program
 implementation and as such is the main custodian of the implementation of the 2015 Water Law. The MEDD’s Sanitation
 Department (Département d'Assainissement, DAS) is responsible for sanitation planning, while the Ministry of Health
 (Ministère de la Santé Public, MSP) is responsible for hygiene and sanitation promotion in rural areas. MEDD and MSP
 have jointly developed a Roadmap to Eradicate Open Defecation 2030 (Defecation a l’Aire Libre, DAL) with concrete
 program of policy and investments measures to eradicate open defecation by 2030 and reduce fecal contamination to the
 environment by 50 percent by 2030. The National Action Committee for Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene (CNAEHA,
 Committée Nationale d’Action, d’Eau, Hygiène et Assaisinissement), plays at a national coordinating role involving MRHE,
 MEDD, MSP, Ministry of Education (Ministère d‘Education Primaire, Secondaire et Tertiaire, MEPST), and the Ministry of
 Rural Development (Ministère de Développement Rural, MDR).18
 11.      The 2015 Water Law supports the decentralization of the sector, empowering provincial governments to take
 on their mandate for overseeing service provision and opening the sector for private sector engagement. While
 decentralization was enshrined in the 2006 Constitution, through its 26 provinces (tier 2) and its over 1000 self-governing
 entities19 (ETDs, Entitées Teritoriales Décentralizées) little progress has been made thus far. National to provincial fiscal
 transfers are not yet fully effective and a dedicated fund to support the provinces and the ETDs has not been set-up. The
 Water Law (2015) mandate provinces to organize WSS service delivery in coordination with the ETDs20. This includes the
 water supply asset transfer to provincial governments, the establishment of provincial infrastructure units (or Regies
 Provinciales d’lnfrastructure) that develop and oversee water supply/infrastructure services through services delegation
 contracts with operators. These operators could be i) public, such as the national state-owned water utility REGIDESO or
 future REGIDESO subsidiaries (filiales)21, ii) private through various Public Private Partnership (PPP) contracts, and iii) not-
 for-profit drinking water associations (ASUREP, Association d'Usagers de Réseau d'Eau Potable). The Water Law also

 18 The MDR has been implementing, through a dedicated project implementation unit, a long-standing rural water supply and sanitation project,

 financed by the African Development Bank (AfDB)
 19 There are 25 provinces and one the city-province of Kinshasa (tier 2). The third tier is the level of ETD that includes in the urban areas 98 cities

 (villes) with population above 100,000, 620 communes (rural and peri-urban) and 478 rural sectors (secteurs) and 263 chiefdoms (chefferie) with
 traditional leadership. ETDs can be divided into quartier (urban), or into (groups of) villages (groupement or village), with over 88,000 villages in
 rural DRC. Rural ETDs are administratively grouped into 145 territoires that have no self-government function as such.
 20 In line with the 2008 Law on Self Governance of Provinces and ETDs.
 21 A Restructuring Strategy was prepared by COPIREP (Comité de Pilotage de la Réforme des Entreprises Publiques) under the Ministry of Portfolio

 that was approved by the Government in September 2021. The REGIDESO strategy entails three phases: (i) a regionalization of REGIDESO’s
 activities into Regional Directorates with increased autonomy; (ii) creation of a REDIGESO holding company and the set-up of REGIDESO
 subsidiaries (filiales); (iii) the opening up of service provision in provincial capitals for various types of PPPs. Ultimately the filiales could be
 corporatized in autonomous utilities with mixed share capital.

May 25, 2022                                                                                                                                  Page 6 of 14
         The World Bank
         DRC Rural Water and Sanitation Sector Development Project (P178389)


 introduced the establishment of new sector institutions, namely the Water Regulatory Agency (ARSPE, Autorité de
 Régulation du Service Public de l’Eau) responsible for economic and service level regulation and the development of water
 PPPs, and the Congolese Water Authority (OCE, Office Congolais des Eaux ) responsible for water resources management
 (WRM) functions such as river basin planning, managing water permits and allocation regimes, setting up a water fund,
 and financing water supply infrastructure in rural areas.
 12.      The proposed project supports to GoDRC water sector reform and complements past and ongoing water
 projects financed by the International Development Association (IDA), considering past implementation lessons. To
 strengthen implementation capacity of the MRHE’s General Secretariat, the Cellule d’Exécution des Projets (CEP-O), was
 created in 2009 under REGIDESO, and tasked with the implementation of the IDA financed Urban Water Supply project
 (PEMU) from 2009-202122. CEP-O was transferred on February 15, 2022 from REGIDESO to the MRHE. The ongoing multi-
 sectoral Kin Elenda23 project as well as the ongoing combined energy and water AGREE project24, are both implemented
 through CEP-O. The AGREE project is supporting GoDRC’s reform program and Water Law implementation, with a focus
 of developing the Regie Provinciales in two target provinces25, the regulatory framework for economic regulation and
 WRM through capacity building of nascent institutions such as ARSPE and OCE, as well as the introduction of PPP contracts
 in peri-urban areas outside of REGIDESO service areas.
 13.      The proposed project concept features synergies with several IDA-funded projects concerning renewable-based
 electrification, increasing private sector engagement, strengthening governance, and improving education and girls’
 empowerment. Annex 2 provides an overview of the synergies and complementarities with existing projects in terms of
 scope and co-location to raise human development, economic and governance outcomes that go beyond infrastructure
 access. The proposed project targets provinces under the ENCORE26 project that aims to strengthen provincial governance
 in the context of decentralization. Secondly, the proposed project is aligned with the TRANSFORME27 project as it aims to
 facilitate private water operators’ access to commercial finance from participating financial institutions under a dedicated
 water-window Partial Portfolio Credit Guarantee (PPCG) scheme established under TRANSFORME. Moreover, it intends
 to use entrepreneurship and performance-based grants to develop and support micro, small and medium enterprises in
 the WASH sector, e.g., for the expansion of water services to unserved areas, to scale-up sanitation marketing for ending
 open defecation and to promote the production and use of locally produced menstrual hygiene pads. Critical synergies
 exist with the AGREE project, where electricity mini-grids and off-grid solar system development opens opportunities to
 expand drinking water services, including through for solar pumping. The proposed project will collaborate closely with
 the Girls Empowerment Project28 not only through investing in WASH infrastructure in schools, but also by changing social
 norms and stigma around menstrual hygiene and health (MHH), positively impacting the learning environment.



   Relationship to CPF
 14.      The project contributes to the objectives laid out in the WBG’s DRC Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for
 fiscal year 2022–2026 discussed by the Board on February 23, 2022 (Report No. 168084-ZR). It will promote public and
 private investments in critical infrastructure to increase people’s access to basic infrastructure services (objective 2.2),
 strengthen transparency and governance (objective 3.2), and strengthen the foundations for inclusive economic
 diversification and private sector development (objective 3.3). As per the CPF focus on addressing fragility and conflict,


 22 Projet Eau en Milieu Urbain (PEMU) (P091092)
 23 Kinshasa Multi-sector Development and Urban Resilience Project (Kin Elenda) (P1711141)
 24 Access, Governance, Reform for Electricity and Water (Eau) Sectors (AGREE) (P173506)
 25 These are Nord Kivu and Kasai Central under the AGREE project
 26 Enhancing Collection of Revenues and Expenditure Management Project (ENCORE) (P171762)
 27 Empowering Women Entrepreneurs and upgrading MSMEs for Economic Transformation and Jobs in DRC project (P178176)
 28 DRC Girls Empowerment Project (P178684)



May 25, 2022                                                                                                           Page 7 of 14
          The World Bank
          DRC Rural Water and Sanitation Sector Development Project (P178389)


 the project will target provinces affected by conflict and violence, where investments in basic water supply and sanitation
 infrastructure will increase access, support human capital outcomes, strengthen the social contract, and unlock private
 sector engagement in the delivery of WASH products and services.

 15.      The project addresses drivers of fragility identified in DRC’s Risk and Resilience Assessment and is aligned with
 the WBG 2020 Fragility, Conflict, and Violence (FCV) Strategy29. First, it will enhance governance and trust in the state
 (driver 1) through: (a) strengthening governance at provincial and local levels; (b) developing accountable and transparent
 management of services (e.g., community-based, utility-based, or private sector-based); and (c) increased citizen
 engagement in design and operation of water systems, and WRM. Second, the project contributes to addressing a non-
 diversified economy (driver 2) by creating jobs in the private sector, specifically for women, including through vocational
 and entrepreneurship training for MSME development in the WASH sector.

 16.     The project is aligned with the WBG COVID-19 response approach.30 The project will enable access to water and
 sanitation for the rural poor, including in schools and health care facilities (Pillar 2). The project supports provincial
 governments, central ministries (MRHE, MEPST, MSP, MDR), and key sector agencies (OCE, ARSPE) enhancing their
 capacity for resilient investments and sustainable operations (Pillar 4).

 17.      The proposed project contributes to the WBG Action Plan on Climate Change Adaptation and Resilience. On
 mitigation, the project will (a) promote the use of solar pumping in areas where grid access is not available and (b) increase
 energy and water use efficiency in the rehabilitation/expansion of water systems in peri-urban and rural areas. On
 adaptation, the project will address vulnerabilities through (a) developing climate-resilient sanitation and water
 infrastructure by enhancing design and protecting water and sanitation infrastructure from flooding and erosion and (b)
 supporting data-driven basin-level WRM planning through expanding hydromet and groundwater monitoring, carrying
 out aquifer assessments, so as to increase the resilience of rural water supply systems that often rely on groundwater.

 18.      The project supports the implementation of the WBG Gender Strategy (2016–2023). Project activities contribute
 to narrowing gender gaps on (a) human endowments by increasing access to water and sanitation and better learning
 environments for girls due to WASH access in schools; (b) access to economic opportunities through vocational and
 entrepreneurship programs and encouraging female employment in the public sector; and (c) increasing voice and agency
 through empowering women in the water system management and oversight. The project addresses security and GBV
 risks through at-home access to water and sanitation and/or WASH facilities at closer distance.


  C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

 19.     The project development objectives are to increase access to basic drinking water supply and sanitation (WSS)
 services in selected rural and peri-urban areas of DRC, and to improve capacities of public and private sectors for service
 delivery and water resource management.

  Key Results (From PCN)
 Proposed PDO-level indicators are:

                   Number of people gaining access to at least basic drinking water services (number)

 29 World Bank. 2020. World Bank Group Strategy for Fragility, Conflict, and Violence 2020–2025.
 30 World Bank. 2020. COVID-19 Crisis Response Approach Paper: Saving Lives, Scaling-up Impact and Getting Back on Track. The Approach has four

 pillars: (i) Saving lives; (ii) Protecting poor and vulnerable people; (iii) Ensuring sustainable business growth and job creation; (iv) Strengthening
 policies, institutions and investments.

May 25, 2022                                                                                                                                    Page 8 of 14
        The World Bank
        DRC Rural Water and Sanitation Sector Development Project (P178389)


               Number of people gaining access to at least basic sanitation services (number)
               Number of social institutions and public facilities with functional WASH facilities and an O&M arrangement
                in place (number)
               Number of PPP contracts for O&M of peri-urban/rural water systems executed and monitored annually by
                regulator and provinces (number)
               Number of Provincial Infrastructure Units strengthened with trained staff, equipment, and MIS tools to
                monitor and support rural water service delivery (text)
               Number of basins with water resources management plans prepared (number)


  D. Concept Description

 20.     Within the context of the humanitarian, development and peace building nexus, the GoDRC expressed demand
 for long-term programmatic support to reform the WSS sector, deliver tangible service improvements in lagging areas
 and help restore the social contract with its citizens. The PNEHA 2020-2030 is the overarching planning framework that
 has consolidated several sub-sectoral plans, bringing financing needs together in a complementary and systematic
 manner. A Series of Projects (SOP) instrument is proposed, with the program objective to increase access to resilient,
 sustainable, and inclusive water supply and sanitation services in lagging regions of DRC. It allows for the preperation of
 subsequent IPFs, without the need to approve the total program enveloppe by the Board as is the case for a Multi-Phase
 Approach and hence allowing for flexibility in the scope of subsequent projects. At this point in time, a Program for Results
 instrument was not deemed appropriate due to (i) weak country fiduciary and ESF systems, ii) almost exclusive reliance
 on development partner fianncing for rural WSS and the lack of a robust domestic expenditure program that a PfoR would
 aim to leverage.

 21.     SOP-1 will focus on priority investments in the most underserved rural and peri-urban areas of DRC, where
 REGIDESO is absent, while developing scalable and viable service delivery models. The program will strengthen national
 and provincial sector governance and develop an enabling environment for private sector growth in rural and peri-urban
 WSS service provision. SOP-1 will build capacity at national and provincial levels and readiness for scaling-up investments
 through subsequent projects. While SOP-1 foresees a central project implementation unit (PIU) under MRHE with field
 presence in target provinces, SOP-2 and SOP-3 could explore a province-led implementation model in line with the
 decentralization in DRC, e.g. by hosting PIUs within Regie Provinciales. The overall enveloppe for the SOP is tentatively
 scoped for US$ 1.3 billion through a series of three projects, as indicated below.


                   Budget         Scope                                                                            Timeline
                   (million)
   Total SOP       US$ 1,300      WSS sector transformation to achieve sustainable, resilient and inclusive        May 2023-May 2033
                                  water supply and sanitation services, with at-scale private sector involvement
   SOP-1           US$ 400           4 provinces (Kwilu, Kasai, Kasai Central, Kasai Oriental)                    May 2023-May 2028
                                     Most infrastructure for rural and peri-urban water supply, sanitation;
                                      limited IWRM/resilience, mostly focused on TA
                                     Support WSS reform, decentralization; provincial governments
                                      strengthened
                                     Develop viable management and PPP models, with potential limited
                                      leveraging of commercial financing
                                     Address sanitation legal framework and sustainable programmatic
                                      approach policy actions
   SOP-2           US$ 400           Additional provinces aligned with the CPF 2022-2026 to scale-up              Jan 2025-Jan 2030


May 25, 2022                                                                                                                      Page 9 of 14
          The World Bank
          DRC Rural Water and Sanitation Sector Development Project (P178389)


                                                investment
                                               Move to provincial-led implementation of investment program; update
                                                national WSS investment framework
                                               Increased role of private sector and more leveraging of commercial
                                                finance
                                               Increased sanitation investments following ETD or city-wide inclusive
                                                sanitation approach
                                               Investments in WRM and resilience (watershed and storage
                                                management, groundwater development)
   SOP-3                US$         500        Nation-wide transfer of capital and performance grants to provinces to          May 2027-May 2033
                        million                 improve service efficiency, sustainability, and inclusiveness.
                                               Consolidate and sustain gains in eradication of open defecation
                                               Deepen reform implementation, develop mix private/public provincial
                                                utilities
                                               Move towards larger or province-wide PPP contracts for rural/peri-urban
                                                water service perimeters; scale-up FSM



 Proposed Project Components

 22.      The proposed project concept responds to pressing institutional challenges, opportunities for the private sector,
 and to access gaps in water supply and sanitation services in rural and peri-urban areas. Expanding basic service
 provision for households, businesses and community institutions is aimed at human capital development and trust
 building between the state and its citizens. The project will enhance rural water security through provincial WSS
 investments and water resources management measures, technical support and better coordination mechanisms among
 MRHE as lead ministry and other ministries and entities, such as MEDD, MDR, MEPST and MSP. To increase climate
 resilience, the project will develop OCE’s capacities for data driven WRM planning and better groundwater management,
 as most rural populations rely on groundwater for drinking water. The project will design climate resilient infrastructure
 and support decarbonization through solar water pumping.

 23.      The project will follow a framework approach31 with implementation targeting a limited number of provinces,
 followed by sub-provincial targeting of the most in-need ETDs. Currently, the targeted provinces under SOP-1 are Kwilu,
 Kasai, Kasai Central, and Kasai Oriental. These provinces were identified in dialogue with the GoDRC and are based on
 several criteria, including: the current rate of access to basic water and sanitation, the total number of people without
 access to basic water services, poverty levels and stunting, priority provinces under the Country Partnership Framework
 (CPF) and synergies with other IDA-financed projects such as in electrification, private sector development, health,
 education, and governance (see also Annex 2). ETDs will be selected based on needs, readiness of subproject, accessibility,
 and the presence of other development partners, and will be developed during preparation. An area-wide approach in
 the ETDs will target the entire population with water supply and sanitation improvements – at the household level as well
 as in institutions. Selection criteria for rural and peri-urban ETDs will be stipulated in the Project Implementation Manual
 (PIM), excluding cities (villes) with over 100,000 inhabitants.32 The project consists of four components.

 24.     Component 1: Developing Rural and Peri-Urban Water Supply for Water Security (US$280 million) consist of
 three subcomponents.

 25.    Subcomponent 1.1: Increasing rural and peri-urban water supply access will finance infrastructure, such as (i)
 expansion and rehabilitation of multi-village and/or peri-urban water supply systems including water source intake,

 31 Not all investment subprojects will be identified; site-specific design studies will be carried out within the first two years.
 32 Peri-urban areas are defined as those areas surrounding urban settlements (villes), classified as urban communes.



May 25, 2022                                                                                                                                Page 10 of 14
         The World Bank
         DRC Rural Water and Sanitation Sector Development Project (P178389)


 production, storage/reservoirs, conveyance and distribution networks; (ii) construction, expansion, and/or rehabilitation
 of rural water supply systems based on an approved menu of technology options; (iii) the development of solar energy to
 power water systems where no electricity grids are available; (iv) equipment, tools and training for service providers; and
 (v) technical preparation, design and supervision of subprojects. Different management models will be promoted, with an
 emphasis on involving the private sector in the development and operation and maintenance phase. These will be
 explored during preparation but could include a mix of PPPs between the provincial government and private sector firms,
 service delegation from the province to a drinking water user association (ASUREP33) and/or repair/rehabilitation and/or
 new construction of handpumps or mechanical boreholes, managed by village committees with technical support models,
 possibly involving private sector.

 26.       Subcomponent 1.2: Developing private sector for innovation, resilience, and sustainability of water services
 that will finance technical assistance and market enabling measures to increase private sector involvement in rural water.
 It will finance: i) transaction advisory services for PPPs with larger perimeters; ii) technical assistance to private sector
 firms, including for business planning, loan proposal development, and E&S compliance; iii) technical assistance to selected
 commercial banks interested in lending to rural water sector; iv) performance-based grants to existing private operators
 to expand connections/water kiosks in unserved peri-urban/rural areas; and v) innovation/catalytic grants to private
 sector to improve green energy profile, introduce digital innovations, and/or develop guaranteed O&M service models for
 village water points, and vi) the endowment of a “water window” under the PPCG established under the TRANSFORME
 project (P178176) (to be confirmed based on market assessment)

 27.     Subcomponent 1.3 Improving water governance, water resources management and investment planning will
 finance institutional strengthening at national and provincial levels and development of a rural water MIS and WRM
 system. Specific activities include i) support to provincial infrastructure units (régies provincials) to oversee water services
 and PPP contracts, ii) support provincial investment plans and studies for scale-up under SOP-2 and SOP-3; iii) support MIS
 system for rural/peri-urban water systems;34 iv) support to ARSPE (regulator) on regulatory guidelines for tariffs of
 ASUREPs, and application of tariff method under rural/peri-urban contractual PPPs and v) support OCE with development
 of WRM plans in targeted basin(s), hydromet and groundwater monitoring network development to improve the
 knowledge base for ensuring resilience of rural water systems.

 28.      Component 2: Improving Sanitation and Hygiene for Human Development (US$100 million): This component
 will be implemented in a subset of ETDs under component 1.35

 29.      Sub-component 2.1: Increasing access to sanitation and hygiene in rural and peri-urban areas. Access to basic
 sanitation in rural and peri-urban areas has decreased in the period 2000-2010 - even for the wealthiest households,
 indicating issues of affordability and sustainability. It will finance: i) implementation of Community-Led Total Sanitation+
 (CLTS+)36 and social marketing campaigns and continuous engagement with communities for sustaining behavior change;
 ii) capacity development and operational support for provincial, ETD and community facilitators and technicians, includes
 local cadres of the MEDD and MSP, as well as existing community-level structures37; iii) technical assistance for product

 33 ASUREPs are registered as ASBL (Association Sans But Lucrative)
 34 The rural water supply MIS may be linked or integrated as part of the MIS systems for larger urban water service providers (developed with support

 of AGREE project); users would include ARSPE, MRHE, OCE, provincial and local ETDs. OCE will develop an MIS to manage water resources quantity
 and quality, e.g. for abstraction and discharge permits and other WRM data.
 35 In order to increase the success rate of a market-based approach, ETDs will be selected with higher population density and with closer proximity

 to markets / urban centers.
 36 CLTS = Community-Led Total Sanitation, a behavior change approach that triggers communities’ self-awareness and empowers them to stop

 open defecation, build and use latrines; also referred to ATPC (ATPC = Assainissement Total Piloté par la Communauté)
 37 These include structures such as village volunteers (Relais Communautaires = Rescos) and the community mobilization units (Cellule d’ Animation



May 25, 2022                                                                                                                             Page 11 of 14
         The World Bank
         DRC Rural Water and Sanitation Sector Development Project (P178389)


 innovation, supply chain development and training of local entrepreneurs for sanitation and hygiene products and
 services; iv) financing household incentives (e.g., with a voucher system) for durable on-site sanitation latrines; and v) for
 dense peri-urban areas small-scale fecal sludge treatment plants and emptying equipment, and associated technical and
 E&S studies.
 30.      Sub-component 2.2: WASH infrastructure in public and social institutions will finances the electrification
 (including with off-grid-solar systems) and construction of water, sanitation, and hygiene (handwashing) facilities in
 selected schools, health centers, markets, transport hubs, and other public places in targeted ETDs. Technical designs for
 the facilities will be inclusive and responsive to women/girls' needs and people with disabilities, and the infrastructure will
 be accompanied by a menstrual health and hygiene education program.38 Operational models for WASH facilities will
 encourage community or private sector management, encouraging female entrepreneurship; the subcomponent will
 finance feedback systems to ensure functionality of the WASH facilities in coordination with line ministries.

 31.      Sub-component 2.3: Development of private sector for sustainable and resilient sanitation service delivery will
 focus on market enabling measures to support private sector involvement in sanitation for peri-urban and rural growth
 centers. It will finance: i) technical assistance to contractors to integrate sanitation products/services in their business line
 (compliant with voucher scheme requirements); ii) training for sanitation and hygiene entrepreneurs’ business planning
 and facilitating access to SME-credit (including for sanitation emptiers); and iii) innovation/catalytic grants for product
 innovation and market development such as for menstrual hygiene pads, for latrine slab innovation, marketing and
 piloting of business models (e.g., container-based sanitation in dense peri-urban areas).

 32.     Sub-component 2.4: Improved sanitation sector governance and investment planning will finance: i) national
 support to develop implementation decrees for the foreseen Sanitation Law;39 ii) provincial support to develop regulatory
 and legislative framework and basic MIS systems; iii) assessments and development of provincial sanitation plans; and iv)
 detailed studies to prepare ETD/or city-wide inclusive sanitation plans for investments under SOP-2 and SOP-3.

 33.      Component 3: Project Management (US$20 million). This component will finance all project management
 activities, including incremental project management costs, financial and technical audits, monitoring and evaluation of
 project activities (including gender disaggregated data), oversight of environmental and social framework (ESF)
 compliance, communication, technical assistance and consultant services, training and knowledge exchange.

 34.       Component 4: Contingency Emergency Response Component, CERC ($0 allocated). This component provides for
 a zero-dollar emergency response mechanism in the event of a natural disaster, crisis or emergency that meets established
 criteria, which is defined as an event that has, or is likely to have in the very near future, significant adverse economic
 and/or social effects on the Recipient as a result of natural or man-made crises or disasters.

 35.     Performance Based Conditions will be explored during the preparation and will likely include (i) conditions
 linked to reform actions and (ii) conditions linked to tangible results on the ground. In the first case, the project could
 use PBCs to assist (i) the DAS, under the supervision of the MEDD, to finalize and approve (at the technical level)
 implementing decrees related to the Sanitation Law; (ii) ARSPE to approve guidelines for cost-reflective tariffs for ASUREPs
 and/or cost recovering tariffs for the rural water PPPs under the project; (iii) establishment of Regies Provinciales in the


 Communauté = CAC) that take on social mobilization and household support roles in community-based nutrition interventions.
 38 Facility design will rely on existing Ministry of Education designs that were developed through support from UNICEF. Additionally, school

 infrastructure investments and hygiene messaging are being closely coordinated with the Girls’ Empowerment and Learning for All Project
 (P168699).
 39 AGREE project already support the development of the Sanitation Law; however, several implementation decrees will be required to clarify

 technical standards, institutional arrangements, etc.

May 25, 2022                                                                                                                          Page 12 of 14
           The World Bank
           DRC Rural Water and Sanitation Sector Development Project (P178389)


 target provinces to oversee water and sanitation services; and/or (iv) government actions to clarify the roles of the
 institutions involved in the rural water sector.40 In the second case, PBCs would be used as results-based financing in a
 context where the end result is difficult to achieve, for example, the sustainability of waterpoints, the achievement of
 community-wide sanitation targets, the sustainability of WASH facilities at schools and health centers. Implementation
 of component 1 will be led by MRHE, implemented through CEP-O, and supported by OCE with regard to the WRM
 activities, while component 2 will be led by MEDD, specifically the DAS, in close coordination with the MEPST and MSP,
 specifically the DHP.




     Legal Operational Policies                                                                             Triggered?
     Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                                            Yes
     Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60                                                                     No

     Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
     .


 .
     CONTACT POINT


     World Bank
     Rebecca Jean Gilsdorf, Patrick Goy Ndolo, Susanna Smets
     Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist


     Borrower/Client/Recipient
     Ministry of Finance
     Honore Tshioyoyo
     Coordinator
     honoretshiyoyo@yahoo.fr

     Implementing Agencies




 40 Specifically, the role of National Office of Rural Hydraulics (ONHR , Office National d'Hydraulique Rural), whose establishment is not foreseen in

 the Water Law.

May 25, 2022                                                                                                                               Page 13 of 14
        The World Bank
        DRC Rural Water and Sanitation Sector Development Project (P178389)


  Ministry of Hydraulic Resources and Energy
  Philippe Lumeka
  Coordinator
  philumeka@hotmail.com

  Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development
  Pascaline Mbangu
  Director
  passymbangu@yahoo.fr


  FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
  The World Bank
  1818 H Street, NW
  Washington, D.C. 20433
  Telephone: (202) 473-1000
  Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects



  APPROVAL

  Task Team Leader(s):                     Rebecca Jean Gilsdorf, Patrick Goy Ndolo, Susanna Smets

  Approved By
  APPROVALTBL
  Practice Manager/Manager:

  Country Director:                       Jean-Christophe Carret                 25-May-2022




May 25, 2022                                                                                         Page 14 of 14
