Public Disclosure Authorized

                                                                       FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
                                                                                                                  Report No: PAD5613




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                           INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION


                                                                   PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

                                                                                  ON A

                                                                          PROPOSED CREDIT



                                                                IN THE AMOUNT OF US$500 MILLION




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                                TO THE
                                                                 FEDERAL GOVERNMENT OF NIGERIA
                                                                                 FOR A
                                                   SUSTAINABLE POWER AND IRRIGATION FOR NIGERIA PROJECT


                                                                           September 5, 2024




Public Disclosure Authorized
                               Water Global Practice
                               Western and Central Africa Region




                                 This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of
                                 their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.
                   CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
             (Exchange Rate Effective July 31, 2024)


              Currency Unit = Nigerian Naira (NGN)
                       US$1 = NGN 1,661

                          FISCAL YEAR
                    January 1 - December 31




Regional Vice President: Ousmane Diagana

      Country Director: Ndiame Diop

     Regional Director: Chakib Jenane

     Practice Manager: Anna Cestari

    Task Team Leaders: Jun Matsumoto, Emmanuel Chinedu Umolu, Pravin Karki
                        ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AAD      Annual Average Damages
AM       Accountability Mechanism
AWD      Alternate Watering and Drying
BCM      Billion Cubic Meters
BIS      Bakolori Irrigation Scheme
BPE      Bureau of Public Enterprises
CIC      Commitment, Integrity, and Capacity
CPF      Country Partnership Framework
DARES    Distributed Access through Renewable Energy Scale-up Project
DDRO     Department of Dams and Reservoir Operations
DID      Department of Irrigation and Drainage
DKIS     Dadin Kowa Irrigation Scheme
DRO      Dams and Reservoir Operations
DSRP     Dam Safety Review Panel
EAP      Emergency Action Plan
EFA      Economic and Financial Analysis
ERR      Economic Rate of Return
ESCP     Environmental and Social Commitment Plan
ESDD     Environmental and Social Due Diligence
ESF      Environmental and Social Framework
ESIA     Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
ESMF     Environmental and Social Management Framework
ESMP     Environmental and Social Management Plan
ESS      Environmental and Social Standards
EWS      Early Warning Systems
EX-ACT   Ex-Ante Carbon Balance Tool
FFWSDO   Flood Forecasting and Warning System for Dam Operations
FGN      Federal Government of Nigeria
FLID     Farmer-Led Irrigation Development
FLL      Field-Level Leadership
FM       Financial Management
FMAFS    Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security
FMEnv    Federal Ministry of Environment
FMF      Federal Ministry of Finance
FMP      Federal Ministry of Power
FMWRS    Federal Ministry of Water Resources and Sanitation
FPFMD    Federal Project Financial Management Department
FPMU     Federal Project Management Unit
FRR      Financial Rate of Return
FTC      Federal Technical Committee
FX       Foreign Exchange
GBV      Gender-Based Violence
GDP      Gross Domestic Project
GHG      Greenhouse Gas
GIS      Geographic Information System
GRM      Grievance Redress Mechanism
GRS      Grievance Redress Service
HMP      Hydropower Master Plan
HPP      Hydropower Plant
HVIS     Hadejia Valley Irrigation Scheme
ICRC     Infrastructure Concession Regulatory Commission
ICT      Information and Communication Technology
IFC      International Finance Corporation
IFR      Interim Financial Report
IPF      Investment Project Financing
ISF      Irrigation Service Fee
IWRM     Integrated Water Resources Management
KRIS     Kano River Irrigation Scheme
LCBC     Lake Chad Basin Commission
LMP      Labor Management Procedures
M&E      Monitoring and Evaluation
MIGA     Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
MOM      Management, Operations, and Maintenance
MRVIS    Middle Rima Valley Irrigation Scheme
NBA      Niger Basin Authority
NDC      Nationally Determined Contribution
NESREA   National Environmental Standards and Regulations Enforcement Agency
NIDP     National Irrigation Development Program
NPV      Net Present Value
NWRI     National Water Resources Institute
O&M      Operation and Maintenance
OHS      Occupational Health and Safety
PAD      Project Appraisal Document
PBC      Performance-Based Condition
PDO      Project Development Objective
PFMU     Project Financial Management Unit
PIU      Project Implementation Unit
PMP      Pest Management Plan
PMU      Project Management Unit
POM      Project Operational Manual
PPP      Public-Private Partnership
PPSD     Project Procurement Strategy for Development
PSC      Project Steering Committee
RAP      Resettlement Action Plan
RBDA     River Basin Development Authority
RPF      Resettlement Policy Framework
SCF      Standard Conversion Factor
SEA      Sexual Exploitation and Abuse
SEP      Stakeholder Engagement Plan
SESA     Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment
SH        Sexual Harassment
SMWA      State Ministry of Women Affairs
SOP       Standard Operating Procedure
SPC       Shadow Price of Carbon
SPIN      Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria
SPIU      State Project Implementation Unit
SRI       System of Rice Intensification
STEP      Systematic Tracking and Exchanges in Procurement
TRIMING   Transforming Irrigation Management in Nigeria
TU        Technical Unit
VIDA      Village Data Analytics
WRM       Water Resources Management
WUA       Water User Association
WUG       Water User Group
The World Bank
Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)




                                                                TABLE OF CONTENTS
  DATASHEET ........................................................................................................................... 1
  I.    STRATEGIC CONTEXT ...................................................................................................... 7
        A. Country Context................................................................................................................................ 7
        B. Sectoral and Institutional Context .................................................................................................... 8
  II.   PROJECT DESCRIPTION.................................................................................................. 13
        A. Project Development Objective ..................................................................................................... 13
        B. Project Components ....................................................................................................................... 13
        C. Project Beneficiaries ....................................................................................................................... 19
        D. Results Chain .................................................................................................................................. 20
        E. Rationale for World Bank Involvement and Role of Partners......................................................... 20
        F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design .................................................................... 21
  III. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS ............................................................................ 22
        A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements .......................................................................... 22
        B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements......................................................................... 24
        C. Sustainability................................................................................................................................... 24
  IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY ................................................................................... 24
        A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis (if applicable) ............................................................ 24
        B. Fiduciary.......................................................................................................................................... 27
        C. Legal Operational Policies ............................................................................................................... 29
        D. Environmental and Social ............................................................................................................... 29
  V. GRIEVANCE REDRESS SERVICES ..................................................................................... 33
  VI. KEY RISKS ..................................................................................................................... 33
  VII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING ................................................................... 35
  ANNEX 1: Implementation Arrangements and Support Plan ................................................. 50
  ANNEX 2: Irrigation Investment - State Selection and Investment Staging ............................ 60
  ANNEX 3: Technical Note on Dam Safety .............................................................................. 68
  ANNEX 4: Technical Description of the Hydropower Component .......................................... 72
  ANNEX 5: Economic and Financial Analysis .......................................................................... 75
     The World Bank
     Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)




@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padbasicinformation#doctemplate
DATASHEET


BASIC INFORMATION


Project
                         Operation Name
Beneficiary(ies)
Nigeria                  Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project
                                                      Environmental and Social Risk
Operation ID             Financing Instrument
                                                      Classification
                         Investment Project
P179684                                               High
                         Financing (IPF)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padprocessing#doctemplate
Financing & Implementation Modalities
[ ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA)                      [ ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)
[ ] Series of Projects (SOP)                                    [✓] Fragile State(s)
[✓] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs)                         [ ] Small State(s)
[ ] Financial Intermediaries (FI)                               [ ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country
[ ] Project-Based Guarantee                                     [ ] Conflict
[ ] Deferred Drawdown                                           [ ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster
[ ] Alternative Procurement Arrangements (APA)                  [ ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS)


Expected Approval Date                 Expected Closing Date
26-Sep-2024                            31-Dec-2029
Bank/IFC Collaboration
No


Proposed Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective is to strengthen dam safety and improve management of water resources for
hydropower and irrigation in selected areas of Nigeria.


                                                                                                           Page 1 of 86
      The World Bank
      Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)




Components
 Component Name                                                                       Cost (US$)
 Institutional strengthening and capacity building for Water Resources
                                                                                          30.00
 Management
 Irrigation Modernization                                                                350.00
 Improvements in dam operations and enhancing dam safety                                 100.00
 Project Management                                                                       20.00


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padborrower#doctemplate
Organizations
Borrower:                        FEDERAL GOVERNMENT OF NIGERIA
Implementing Agency:             Federal Ministry of Water Resources and Sanitation


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padfinancingsummary#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   Yes

Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             Yes

SUMMARY

  Total Operation Cost                                                                   500.00

  Total Financing                                                                        500.00
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                           500.00

  Financing Gap                                                                            0.00


DETAILS

 World Bank Group Financing
   International Development Association (IDA)                                           500.00

      IDA Credit                                                                         500.00




                                                                                       Page 2 of 86
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



IDA Resources (US$, Millions)

                                                                                           Guarantee
                           Credit Amount         Grant Amount        SML Amount                              Total Amount
                                                                                             Amount

National
Performance-Based                  500.00                0.00                 0.00               0.00              500.00
Allocations (PBA)

Total                              500.00                0.00                 0.00               0.00              500.00



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@paddisbursementprojection#doctemplate
Expected Disbursements (US$, Millions)
WB Fiscal
Year                   2025              2026              2027              2028              2029              2030

Annual                 15.00             40.00            90.00             135.00            155.00            65.00
Cumulative             15.00             55.00            145.00            280.00            435.00            500.00


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padclimatechange#doctemplate
PRACTICE AREA(S)


Practice Area (Lead)                                            Contributing Practice Areas
Water                                                           Agriculture and Food; Energy & Extractives

CLIMATE


Climate Change and Disaster Screening
Yes, it has been screened and the results are discussed in the Operation Document


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padrisk#doctemplate
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK- RATING TOOL (SORT)


Risk Category                                                                  Rating
1. Political and Governance                                                    ⚫ High
2. Macroeconomic                                                               ⚫ High

                                                                                                                Page 3 of 86
      The World Bank
      Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



3. Sector Strategies and Policies                                           ⚫ Substantial
4. Technical Design of Project or Program                                   ⚫ Moderate
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability             ⚫ Moderate
6. Fiduciary                                                                ⚫ Substantial
7. Environment and Social                                                   ⚫ High
8. Stakeholders                                                             ⚫ Moderate
9. Overall                                                                  ⚫ Substantial




@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padcompliance#doctemplate
POLICY COMPLIANCE


Policy
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects?
[ ] Yes      [✓] No

Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?
[ ] Yes [✓] No



ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL


Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal
E & S Standards                                                                     Relevance
ESS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and
                                                                                    Relevant
Impacts
ESS 10: Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                           Relevant
ESS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                                                 Relevant
ESS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                  Relevant
ESS 4: Community Health and Safety                                                  Relevant
ESS 5: Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement      Relevant
ESS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural
                                                                                    Relevant
Resources




                                                                                                Page 4 of 86
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



ESS 7: Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved
                                                                                    Not Currently Relevant
Traditional Local Communities
ESS 8: Cultural Heritage                                                            Relevant
ESS 9: Financial Intermediaries                                                     Not Currently Relevant
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review
Summary (ESRS).


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalcovenants#doctemplate
LEGAL
Legal Covenants
Sections and Description
The Recipient shall, not later than three (3) months after the Effective Date, establish and thereafter maintain
throughout the implementation of the Project, a Federal Technical Committee, with functions, composition, and
resources satisfactory to the Association.
The Recipient shall, not later than three months (3) months after the Effective Date, establish and thereafter maintain
throughout the implementation of the Project, three (3) Technical Units (“TUs”) specializing in (i) irrigation; (ii) dam
safety; and (iii) hydropower, each with functions, composition and resources satisfactory to the Association.
The Recipient shall (a) not later than thirty (30) days after the Effective Date, establish and thereafter maintain an
independent dam safety review panel (“Dam Safety Review Panel”) comprised of experts having the qualifications,
experience and terms of reference acceptable to the Association.
The Recipient, through FMF-FMWRS, shall, not later than thirty (30) days after the Effective Date, prepare, in
accordance with terms of reference acceptable to the Association, a Project implementation manual.
The Recipient shall, not later than six (6) months after the Effective Date, engage an independent verification agency,
with qualifications and under terms of reference acceptable to the Association, (“Verification Agent”).


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padconditions#doctemplate
Conditions
Type                              Citation                    Description                    Financing Source
                                                              The Recipient has
                                                              established the Project
                                                              Steering Committee in
                                                              accordance with the
                                  Financing Agreement,        provisions of Section I.A.2
Effectiveness                                                                                IBRD/IDA
                                  Article 4.01                of Schedule 2 to the
                                                              Financing Agreement, and
                                                              the Project Steering
                                                              Committee has held its
                                                              inaugural meeting.



                                                                                                                Page 5 of 86
     The World Bank
     Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



                                                            No withdrawal shall be
                                                            made for payments to a
                                                            Participating State under
                                                            Category (2) until and
                             Financing Agreement,           unless the Recipient and
Disbursement                 Schedule 2, Section III. B.1   such Participating State has   IBRD/IDA
                             (b)                            executed the Subsidiary
                                                            Agreement in accordance
                                                            with the provisions of
                                                            Section I.B of Schedule 2 to
                                                            the Financing Agreement.
                                                            No withdrawal shall be
                                                            made for payments under
                                                            Category (3) to a
                                                            Participating State, until
                                                            and unless such
                             Financing Agreement,
                                                            Participating State has: (i)
Disbursement                 Schedule 2, Section III. B.1                                  IBRD/IDA
                                                            enacted a law establishing
                             (c)
                                                            or supporting the
                                                            establishment of WUAs;
                                                            and (ii) approved an
                                                            appropriation for the O&M
                                                            requirements of WUAs.




                                                                                                      Page 6 of 86
          The World Bank
          Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



 I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT

 A. Country Context

1.      Nigeria, Africa's most populous country and home to the second-largest population living below US$2.15 per
day, possesses substantial untapped economic potential yet is one of the least developed nations globally. Nigeria is
among the largest economies in Africa, with a gross domestic product (GDP) of approximately US$363 billion in 2023, but
over 40 percent of its population live in poverty.1 Economic growth over the past decade has not maintained pace with
population growth: real income per capita in 2023 was US$2,455, lower than US$2,490 recorded in 2010. Nigeria’s key
development constraints include the high dependence on oil, insufficient economic diversification and inclusive growth,
and a poor scorecard on good governance and service delivery including investments in human capital. 2 As a diverse
federation of 36 autonomous states and 220 million people, federal-state coordination is a challenge. 3 Pathways for
development include improving economic governance and generating more trust in State institutions, boosting
government investments in human capital, expanding social assistance programs to sustain the move away from fuel
subsidies, and improving opportunities for the young and entrepreneurial to diversify the economy and invest in inclusive
economic growth.

2.       Elections in 2023 brought in a new President and administration committed to improving macroeconomic
stability and addressing fiscal and debt vulnerabilities due to low revenues and a dependence on global oil prices.
Macroeconomic stability steadily deteriorated over the past decade leading to an increasing difference between official
and parallel market exchange rates, a shortage of foreign exchange, and high inflation. Confronted with a fragile economic
reality, the new administration that took office in May 2023 made two critical macro-fiscal reforms: the increase in the
price of gasoline or premium motor spirit which was subsidized at a fiscal cost of 2.2 percent of GDP in 2022, and the
liberalization of the exchange rate.4 These policies are expected to help boost revenues from 6.7 percent of GDP in 2022
to 8.6 percent of GDP in 2024. Nonetheless, the fiscal deficit is projected to remain above 3 percent of GDP for 2024-2027.
This fiscal outlook limits scope for essential public investments and services and highlights the urgent need to mobilize
domestic revenues to shore-up fiscal sustainability and provide funding for government investments in inclusive and
sustainable development.

3.        The economic and fiscal outlook continues to be vulnerable to shocks and oil-dependence and to the challenges
associated with improving governance of the State. In recent years, the economy has been hit by the COVID-19 pandemic,
a fall in global oil prices, increasing insecurity, and weak domestic oil production. The post-COVID recovery was short-lived
with real GDP growth dropping from 3.6 percent in 2021 to 3.1 percent in 2022-2023, due to low oil production, flood-
related low agricultural output, and the disruptive currency demonetization policy instituted in Q1-2023. The fiscal space
is limited by the need to service debts (101.5 percent of revenues in 2022) and vulnerable to fully realizing the fiscal
transfers from the oil and gas sector, thus restricting public investments. Long-standing perceptions of corruption and
other governance challenges such as weak institutions and limited transparency and accountability also dampen business
sector confidence.

4.      Nigeria is considered as fragile and conflict affected, with most of its regions experiencing violence and
disturbance. The North-East faces insurgency and terrorism, primarily driven by Boko Haram and the Islamic State’s West

1 World Bank. 2022. A Better Future for All Nigerians: Nigeria Poverty Assessment 2022. Washington, DC. World Bank.
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/37295
2 See World Bank Systematic Country Diagnostic 2020. https://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/epdf/10.1596/33347
3 https://www.unfpa.org/data/world-population/NG
4 Subsidies were deducted from gross oil and gas revenues resulting in lower remittance of oil and gas revenues to the Federation.

                                                                                                                                 Page 7 of 86
          The World Bank
          Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



Africa Province, resulting in the displacement of over two million people. The North-Central and North-West regions are
plagued by banditry, identity clashes, communal conflicts, and herder-farmer disputes over land and cattle.

5.      Nigeria’s vulnerability to climate shocks has increased due to a combination of political, geographic, and social
factors and, specifically, the recent spike in insecurity in the country. The country is highly prone to climate change-
exacerbated river, urban, and coastal floodings; water scarcity; extreme heat; and wildfires. It ranks among the top 10
countries most susceptible to the detrimental effects of climate change and natural disasters.5 Projected climate change
impacts include increased average temperature and changes in precipitation patterns, leading to more frequent floods
and droughts. These climate-related risks can have severe implications for livelihoods and result in increased food
insecurity, famine, population displacement, conflicts, and biodiversity loss. Moreover, the country hydropower plants’
potential can also be affected—both by lower- and higher-than-average river flows. Climate inaction could cost Nigeria
between 6 and 30 percent of GDP by 2050, equivalent to a loss of US$100–460 billion.6

 B. Sectoral and Institutional Context

6.     Nigeria faces water security challenges, which affect water availability for drinking water, energy, and food
production and are increasingly exacerbated by climate change, putting livelihoods and economic development at risk.

7.        Harnessing the water storage and dam safety is central to climate change adaptation and mitigation in Nigeria.
It is a prerequisite to improving water management for water supply, irrigation, and hydropower generation and offers
protection from floods and droughts. Nigeria has over 400 dams and an estimated total combined storage of 59 billion
cubic meter (BCM). About 46 percent of dams are federally owned and are managed by the Federal Ministry of Water
Resources and Sanitation (FMWRS), through River Basin Development Authorities (RBDAs). About 48 percent of dams are
state owned and are managed by a state ministry.7 Many dams are incomplete, and more than 50 percent of the large
dams which were built in the 1970s and 1980s require rehabilitation. This situation is due in part to institutions responsible
for dam management, whether at the federal or state level, having inadequate budget, human resources, and capacity to
ensure dam management, operation, and maintenance (MOM) and nonadherence to operational manuals, where they
exist. As a result, structures and equipment in several instances broke down or functioned below the installed capacity,
limiting the dams’ potential to mitigate extreme weather events. The World Bank GRADE8 analysis of the 2022 floods
estimated the total direct economic damage to be around US$6.7 billion, equivalent to 1.6 percent of the estimated 2021
GDP. Combining addressing the root causes of poor dam operation and maintenance (O&M) and the rehabilitation and
retrofitting of existing dams would offer substantial opportunities to promote and entrench integrated storage
management and sustain the provision of productive and climate-resilient water services including mitigating water-
related natural disasters including flooding events.9

8.       Agriculture remains key in Nigeria’s economy, contributing an estimated 25.58 percent 10 of its GDP and
employing over 36 percent of the workforce. However, due to its heavy reliance on rain-fed agriculture, food production
is highly vulnerable to climate change-exacerbated droughts and floods. Nigeria is endowed with 70.8 million ha of
agricultural land area, broken down into eight agro-ecological zones capable of growing a variety of crops such as cassava,
palm oil, cocoa, maize, yam, cowpea, groundnut, beans, potatoes, and rice. Most agricultural areas are rain-fed and

5 Climate Scorecard 2019. https://www.climatescorecard.org/2018/11/nigeria-listed-as-one-of-the-10-most-climate-vulnerable-countries/.
6 World Bank Group. 2020. Country Partnership Framework for the Federal Republic of Nigeria for the Period FY21–FY25. Report No. 153873-NG.

November 16, 2020. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/35098.
7 Dams in Nigeria, Federal Ministry of Water Resources, 2020.
8 GRADE = Global Rapid Post-Disaster Damage Estimation.
9 In 2012 and 2022, devastating floods threatened lives, infrastructure, and livelihoods of people.
10 Nigeria Bureau of Statistics, May 2023.



                                                                                                                             Page 8 of 86
         The World Bank
         Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



therefore exposed to water scarcity, which constrains agricultural production in many areas. Nigeria has a tropical climate,
with historically longer rainy season in the south, receiving over 2,000 mm annual precipitation, and shorter rainy season
in the north, with annual precipitation of below 1,000 mm. Despite having an estimated 375 BCM of surface water and
156 BCM per year of groundwater potential, water is unevenly distributed, and availability per capita is expected to
decline. The yield of food-related crops has lagged population growth, leading to declining food self-sufficiency. This
situation is worsened by a decline in seasonal water availability due to climate change. For this reason, agriculture
production is increasingly dependent on the supplement water that irrigation provides. Otherwise, the overall crop
production will not grow in par with the anticipated population growth to maintain food security at its current level. About
26.5 million Nigerians are projected to be food insecure in 2024.11 The situation is expected to worsen with the population
projected to reach 400 million by 2050.12

9.       Increase in food production is a must in Nigeria and can be achieved through improving the performance and
management of existing irrigation and expansion of irrigation service area. Nigeria has set a national target of 500,000
ha of irrigated area by 2030 with the objective of being able to feed the growing population. The country relies largely on
federal and state Governments to continue developing large-scale irrigation development, which it sees as the fastest way
to reach that target. Presently, out of the 350,000 ha equipped for irrigation, 260,000 ha are large-scale irrigation systems,
the majority of which are owned by federal or state governments. The balance 90,000 ha are small-scale irrigation. The
institution responsible for MOM of federal- or state-owned dams is also managing downstream irrigation schemes, which
are both facing MOM limitations. The National Irrigation Development Program (NIDP), launched by the Federal
Government in 2016 and supported by the World Bank-financed Transforming Irrigation Management in Nigeria
(TRIMING) Project (P123112, 2014–2025, US$500 million), is part of Nigeria’s recent efforts to reform the irrigation sector
and improve its governance. The TRIMING Project, which was designed as a pilot under the NIDP, pioneered
transformational management initiatives consisting of introducing, training and empowering water user associations
(WUAs) as a new model for the MOM of secondary and tertiary irrigation canals in selected federally owned schemes,
which were until then the responsibility of the RBDAs. However, RBDAs remain in charge of managing the primary
irrigation canals. TRIMING successfully tested the MOM by WUAs as part of the rehabilitation of about 32,000 ha of large-
scale irrigation. It led to improved production and positive impacts on the livelihood of farmers. However, more work is
needed to further increase overall financial sustainability in the schemes.

10.     Reaching the NIDP target of 500,000 ha irrigation by 2030 will require enhanced cooperation between the
Federal Government and all states. Out of Nigeria’s 36 states, 31 expressed interest in cooperating on irrigation
development and management with the Federal Government within the Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria (SPIN
Project). Irrigation development and management have historically been divided between federal-owned schemes (38.7
percent), state-owned schemes (42.1 percent), and small-scale schemes with other ownership arrangements (13.3
percent), with no financial or technical cooperation between the parties. In February 2024, the FMWRS invited the 36
state governments and the Federal Capital Territory to present its ambition to scale up and promote WUAs as a
management model and the commitment, integrity, and capacity (CIC) related criteria to be supported and asked states
to express interest in participating in this effort under the SPIN Project; 31 states expressed their interest. Stakeholders’
engagement workshops were organized for each of the six geopolitical zones of Nigeria to explain what is expected of the
participating states, including the selection criteria for states, and identify an initial list of possible investments and the
time frame for next steps.

11.    Nigeria currently lacks an estimated 2,000 MW of capacity to cover current demand with acceptable reliability.
Hydropower development can play a significant role and can support economic growth and climate change mitigation.

11 Cadre Harmonisé analysis 2023a.
12 The Lancet Nigeria Commission 2022.



                                                                                                               Page 9 of 86
          The World Bank
          Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



About 60 percent of the Nigerian population had access to electricity in 2021, excluding 85 million people.13 The national
average annual per capita electricity consumption is 147 kWh, which is one-fifth of the average lower-middle-income
country consumption. Demand is projected to grow at 7–8 percent per year in the medium term. The total exploitable
hydropower potential in Nigeria is estimated at 14,120 MW, of which 85 percent is yet to be developed. Currently,
hydropower contributes up to 20 percent of Nigeria’s energy mix, and its development would play a big role in the energy
access and transition. As thermal plants in the country face gas supply shortages, Nigeria seeks to increase hydropower in
its energy mix, along with variable renewable energy technologies such as solar and wind, to lower energy prices and
replace or complement thermal plants as a base load power source. Hydropower is therefore a promising part of the
country’s energy transition journey.

12.      The currently compartmentalized efforts to increase food production through enhanced irrigation coverage and
energy generation through hydropower make the attempts of the Government more disjointed highlighting the need
for synergistic and holistic management of water resources. This would require cross-sectoral convergence and
interinstitutional collaboration to achieve a water-energy-food nexus.

13.      Relevant policy and institutional and regulatory frameworks exist in Nigeria for the governance of water
resources, but they need strengthening. The 2004 Water Resources Act (the Water Act) is the overarching law governing
water resources in Nigeria. It vests in the FMWRS, at the Federal Government level, the responsibility to use and control
both surface and groundwater in any water course affecting more than one state.14 The Water Act confers to the federal
minister extensive decision-making powers, which it exercises through 12 RBDAs and other parastatal institutions. The
Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) Commission, which has the mandate for water resources regulation,
exists based on a ministerial directive at the federal level but is not enacted by the Parliament. A comprehensive National
Water Resource Bill, combining the Water Act, the RBDA Act, Nigeria Hydrological Services, and the National Water
Resources Institute (NWRI), was presented to the Parliament in 2017 but has not been adopted. For dam safety, the
National Environmental (Dams and Reservoirs) Regulations, 2014, establishes the National Environmental Standards and
Regulations Enforcement Agency (NESREA) as the regulator to control the effects of dams and reservoirs on the
environment and human health. However, the dam safety regulations need to be strengthened to increase focus on MOM,
with complementary technical guidelines and protocols.

14.      Water resources and water infrastructure management in Nigeria is governed by the FMWRS and other
parastatal entities. The FMWRS is organized into several technical and non-technical departments including the
Department of Dams and Reservoir Operations (DDRO), River Basin Operation and Inspectorate, and Department of
Irrigation and Drainage (DID). The 12 RBDAs directly report to the FMWRS. Their role includes providing bulk water supply
and extension and other support services to farmers in irrigation schemes. At the state level, Departments for Water
Resources and/or Agriculture and State Water Agencies are responsible for sector management. In addition, there are
state-owned dams being utilized for water supply, hydropower generation, and public irrigation. Some of the states15 have
enacted a legislation to establish irrigation development authorities to identify, plan, design, and construct irrigation
schemes including regulation, supervision, operation, and maintenance of irrigation infrastructure for optimal
performance and water efficiency. All the states acquired considerable experience by implementing a series of National




13 About 11 percent of the urban and 74 percent of the rural populations have no electricity access, and 69 percent of those having no access to

electricity belong to the lowest income segment of the population. https://trackingsdg7.esmap.org/.
14 Other Federal legislations include the NWRI Act; River Basins Development Authorities Act, 1987; and Nigeria Hydrological Services Agency

(Establishment) Act, 2010.
15 Katsina State, for example.



                                                                                                                                 Page 10 of 86
         The World Bank
         Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



Fadama Development Projects (1992–2019) in institutionalizing a bottom-up approach involving community-driven
development and farmer-led irrigation development (FLID).

15.      The Federal Government of Nigeria (FGN), through the development of a Hydropower Master Plan (HMP), can
increase collaboration between the FMWRS and the Federal Ministry of Power (FMP) and attract private investments
and partnerships. The governance and oversight responsibilities for water resources development and hydropower
generation are split between the FMWRS and FMP. Past studies such as the 2013 National Water Resources Master Plan,
2019 Master Plan Study on National Power System Development, and 2016 Nigeria hydropower site screening do not
reflect IWRM to optimize both energy and water. Nigeria would benefit from building on these to update its National
Power System Development Plan and prepare a dedicated HMP, which could help (a) crowd in private financing to
modernize deteriorating hydropower systems, including through public-private partnership (PPP) models; (b) identify and
prioritize greenfield and brownfield hydropower investments across the country; and (c) improve coordination among the
key stakeholders, including the FMWRS and FMP.

 C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives

16.      The proposed project is aligned with the World Bank Group Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Nigeria
for the period of FY21–FY25 (Report No. 153873-NG). In particular, the proposed project is closely aligned to the CPF on
the following objectives: Core Objective 8 - Increase access to reliable and sustainable power for households and firms;
Core Objective 10 - Enhance climatic resilience; and Complementary Priority 6 - Modernize agriculture.

17.      The project is aligned with the Paris Agreement and Nigeria’s objectives on climate change. Nigeria’s updated
Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) to the Paris Agreement commits to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by
47 percent by 2030 from the 2018 business-as-usual projections, conditional on international support (20 percent
reductions without such support). 16 The SPIN Project is consistent with national climate commitments and supports
Nigeria’s emission reduction and climate change mitigation goals by promoting a more efficient use of water in irrigation,
thus reducing energy demand for pumping. It will also contribute to Nigeria’s National Adaptation Plan Framework, as it
prioritizes dam safety and climate-informed O&M in the rehabilitation of dams, making the communities living
downstream of these dams less vulnerable to the risk of dam failures, floods, and water shortages. Moreover, increasing
the irrigation sector’s water efficiency will enhance the communities’ resilience to droughts.

18.     The project is aligned with the FGN’s objectives of achieving sustainable energy access for all by 2030. This will
be achieved by ensuring 30 GW of electricity is available by 2030; 30 percent of which is generated from renewable energy
sources, with hydropower assisting as a base load to support penetration of other variable renewable energy. It will also
help Nigeria meet its updated NDC to mitigate GHG emissions by unconditionally cutting its emissions by 2030 by 20
percent. The FGN aims to achieve 95 percent development of hydropower generation potential from the current 15
percent, leading to the production of up to 10,000 MW of electricity by 2030.

19.     Although public financing remains crucial for the dams and irrigation sectors that primarily serve public
purposes, by preparing the master plan and studies, the project will support private capital enabling in hydropower
investments. It will also mobilize private capital through irrigation fees collected by WUAs. Irrigation fees collected from
private farmers and WUAs are considered as private capital mobilization for the project to improve the financial
sustainability of the sector. In Nigeria, hydropower development relies heavily on public funding due to perceived risks
and the absence of a suitable risk-sharing mechanisms and enabling environment for private investors. Private sector
participation is primarily limited to O&M through concession agreements, unlike in other countries where state utilities

16 https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/NDC/2022-06/NDC_File%20Amended%20_11222.pdf.



                                                                                                            Page 11 of 86
         The World Bank
         Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



are responsible for power generation. To attract private investors and reduce the financial burden on the public sector,
the project’s hydropower subcomponent will help prepare at least one large transformational project that will be
identified through the master plan, considering implementation arrangement under PPP model while seeking to resolve
some ecosystem challenges that will improve the enabling environment for private sector investment. It will offer
transaction advisory services for a build-operate-transfer PPP model. World Bank is collaborating closely with the
International Finance Corporation (IFC) with the objective to prepare potential PPPs for hydropower generation. World
Bank will also work closely with the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA).

Vision of the Project

20.      Nigeria is on a mission to improve its food, water, and energy security by 2030 with the vision of achieving 500,000
ha of irrigated agriculture through the Irrigate Nigeria Project;17 30 GW of sustainable energy; and improved resilience to
floods, droughts, and climate change. These objectives are independent and require strengthening the management of
water resources and infrastructure across sectors and between levels of government. The vision of the SPIN Project is to
make integrated management of water, energy, and food more effective and resilient in Nigeria. The SPIN Project will do
this by investing in the management and resilience of multipurpose water infrastructure as well as strengthening the
policies, institutions, capacities, and intergovernmental cooperation required. This vision builds on the results achieved
under the TRIMING Project and relies on cross-cutting synergies, as shown in Figure 1. Through the above aims, the project
will increase the country’s resilience to climate change-exacerbated droughts and floods.

                       Figure 1. The Role of Multipurpose Dams and Irrigation in the Water-Energy-Food Nexus




17 Irrigate Nigeria Project is a program of the Federal Government aimed at increasing food security through enhanced irrigation development and

management to adapt the food production system to the impacts of climate change, for example, erratic rainfall resulting in floods and droughts.

                                                                                                                               Page 12 of 86
          The World Bank
          Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



 II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

 A. Project Development Objective

PDO Statement

21.    The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to strengthen dam safety and improve management of water
resources for hydropower and irrigation in selected areas of Nigeria.

PDO Level Indicators

Strengthen dam safety
       (a) People protected from floods and droughts through enhanced dam safety and operations (Number)
Improve management of water resources for hydropower and irrigation in selected areas of Nigeria
       (b) Federal and state irrigation schemes under the Project managed by a functioning WUA18 (Percentage)
       (c) Area provided with new/improved irrigation or drainage services (Hectare)
       (d) Hydropower master plan prepared, and a PPP transaction structured for a hydropower project jointly by
           FMWRS and FMP (Yes/No)

 B. Project Components
                                         Figure 2. Current challenge which SPIN is aiming to address




18 A functioning WUA is defined as legally established, staffed, funded and operating irrigation services.




                                                                                                             Page 13 of 86
         The World Bank
         Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



22.     SPIN is structured as an Investment Project Financing (IPF). It includes two performance-based conditions (PBCs)
to incentivize legislation of enabling policies and building of long-term capacity. The project has four components. Figure
2 presents the current challenges and the transformational changes which the project will promote.

Component 1: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building for Water Resources Management (US$30 million)

23.      This component supports policy, institutions, and regulation at the federal, state, and river basin levels and
collaboration among irrigation, dam safety, and hydropower stakeholders to promote IWRM and help achieve the food-
water-energy nexus in Nigeria. The component will institutionalize and scale up the implementation structure, processes,
and design standards successfully piloted by the TRIMING Project while integrating lessons learned. It will, among others,
(a) strengthen regulation; (b) bundle irrigation rehabilitation and dam safety of related dams; (c) introduce criteria-based
funding allocation and prioritize investments in bundled irrigation and dam safety under the project; (d) promote and
institutionalize collaborative water resources management (WRM); and (e) strengthen integrated hydropower planning.
The component will support three institutional reforms: (a) the FMWRS will develop and adopt national dam safety
guidelines and protocols, which will be implemented in all SPIN target dams; (b) water laws will be developed or updated
to legally recognize WUAs in all SPIN participating states; and (c) FMWRS and FMP will jointly develop the HMP and prepare
at least one priority hydropower project. This component is structured into three subcomponents.

Subcomponent 1.1: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building for WRM and Hydropower Planning at Federal
Level (US$24 million)

Activity 1.1.1: Strengthening of dam safety institutional structure, including development and adoption of improved dam
safety technical guidelines and manuals (US$4 million)

24.      This activity will strengthen the capacity and improve the management framework for dam owners, operators,
and agencies overseeing dam safety to help address dam safety risks by (a) setting up a digital dam asset management
system; (b) strengthening the dam safety institutional structure and developing improved national dam safety technical
guidelines and manuals to complement NESREA’s checklist; and (c) institutionalizing capacity assessment and delivering
capacity building for the personnel involved in dam safety, including policy makers, owners, operators, and dam safety
organizations at the Federal, RBDA, and at dam site levels. It will help the FMWRS deploy multidisciplinary specialists and
purchase necessary equipment to perform dam safety mandates both at the federal and RBDA level, consistent with the
legislation for dam safety requirements.

25.    The development and adoption of national dam safety technical guidelines and manuals by the FMWRS is
designed as a PBC. The allocation of US$50 million out of the US$100 million allocation for dam safety investments under
Component 3 is linked to the achievement of the PBC. This will incentivize technical guidelines and manuals to be
developed, adopted, and applied to the rehabilitated large dams under SPIN.

Activity 1.1.2: Capacity Building of and Support to Federal Institutions and Agencies on Water Resources and Irrigation
Management (US$4 million)

26.    This activity will establish and operationalize a new framework for the co-management of federal irrigation and
drainage schemes with the state governments and WUAs. This activity sets the basis for the sustainability of the irrigation
investments under Component 2. Currently, federal schemes are developed, managed, operated, and maintained entirely
by RBDAs19 and, similarly, state schemes are managed by state agencies. The new framework will empower the WUAs (to

19 Except schemes under the TRIMING Project where WUAs have been established.



                                                                                                            Page 14 of 86
         The World Bank
         Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



be established through Subcomponent 2.1) with MOM responsibility of secondary and tertiary irrigation canals. The MOM
responsibility of primary canals will remain with federal and state governments owning the schemes. This framework
requires a new collaboration between federal and state levels and with WUAs. The states enact legislation to establish
WUAs for both federal and state schemes in the state, as piloted under TRIMING in Katsina and Gombe States. This
framework also requires new partnerships between RBDAs and WUAs to optimize the use of irrigation infrastructure,
ensure the sustainability of irrigation schemes, and make farmers more resilient to extreme weather events.

27.    This activity will also implement capacity building of federal agencies on irrigation modernization, water
accounting and irrigation monitoring system,20 and a nationwide review of the status of irrigation schemes. Improved
water monitoring and management systems support climate change adaptation by mitigating the impacts on agriculture
and farmers’ livelihoods of precipitation variability and water extremes, exacerbated by climate change.

Activity 1.1.3: Capacity Building of and Support to Federal Institutions and Agencies in Hydropower Development (US$16
million)

28.     This activity will support convergence between the FMP and FMWRS through a joint HMP, and feasibility study
and relevant Environmental and Social (E&S) instruments for at least one prioritized project and ensure alignment with
the water resources master plan. This activity will (a) prepare an HMP and climate-smart hydropower investment
planning; (b) explore PPP options and prepare at least one large transformative hydropower project; and (c) build the
capacity of and support federal institutions in developing studies, strategies, and plans for improving hydropower planning
and management. The activities contribute to both climate change adaptation (through improved inter-sectoral planning
of water storage and management) and mitigation (through renewable energy).

29.      A PBC is linked to the adoption of the HMP by the Project Steering Committee (PSC) and the preparation of one
priority hydropower project ready for PPP. The eligibility of US$10 million out of the US$16 million of this subcomponent
will be dependent on achievement of these (detailed in the Results Framework and Annex 4).

Subcomponent 1.2: Institutional Strengthening and National Knowledge Exchange on Water Resources Management
at State Level (US$1 million)

30.      This subcomponent will support the participating states to develop and adopt legislation to establish WUAs for
participatory irrigation management at the scheme level. There are currently only two states21 with legislation in place
supporting the WUAs. To incentivize the states to adopt such provisions, the adoption of a legislation for WUAs and the
provision of a dedicated state budget line to finance irrigation MOM through WUAs are the two eligibility criteria for a
state to get financial support for irrigation rehabilitation under Component 2. To support this process, this subcomponent
will provide technical support in the formulation of legislation to establish WUAs, based on experience from other
countries, through development of models and organization of national workshops and establish a knowledge exchange
and peer-to-peer learning platform between states on irrigation, the role of water infrastructure in climate change
adaptation, and disaster risk reduction and WRM.

31.     The transfer of appropriate level of MOM of irrigation schemes from RBDA to WUAs is necessary to address the
build, neglect, and rebuild cycle irrigation development is facing in Nigeria. Over time, RBDAs lost both adequate
budgetary provisions and human resources for irrigation MOM, leading to a growing number of schemes becoming
dysfunctional. Federal subventions are not sufficient, and user contributions are almost nonexistent. TRIMING addressed

20 In coordination with the Water Security and Governance Dialogue ASA (P178444).
21 Gombe State and Katsina State.



                                                                                                           Page 15 of 86
         The World Bank
         Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



this by introducing service agreements, whereby, in return for improved service, users pay a cost-reflective contribution
called irrigation service fee (ISF) and organize themselves in WUAs to take up MOM of secondary and tertiary irrigation
canals. The SPIN Project builds on early lessons from TRIMING.

Subcomponent 1.3: Improving WRM at River Basin Level (US$5 million)

32.      The SPIN Project will support RBDAs and state actors in refocusing their efforts on IWRM and resource planning
at the river basin level and in enabling partnerships with WUAs for MOM of irrigation and drainage facilities. This
subcomponent will (a) improve MOM of water resources’ infrastructural assets to increase the resilience to climate change
of downstream communities, including climate change-exacerbated droughts and floods; (b) strengthen hydrological
monitoring, water allocation, and WRM at the basin level through the installation of modern tools for the management
of reservoirs; (c) strengthen capacity for bulk water supply planning and irrigation scheduling at the scheme level to ensure
farmers receive water when and where needed; and (d) enhance cost recovery for MOM of assets through supply of bulk
water for various socioeconomic sectors, in particular irrigation schemes. The strengthening of bulk water supply planning
and monitoring, also prioritizes environmental flow, together with the enhanced cost recovery, promotes improved water
conservation and resource sustainability. While Subcomponent 1.2 supports state water legislations, SPIN will also
facilitate the revision of the RBDA Act to introduce legal recognition of WUAs and cooperation on WRM among states
sharing a river basin.

33.      To support such a decentralized management model, a field-level leadership (FLL) program will be established
by the federal government to support RBDAs, state governments, and WUAs, for performance improvements. The FLL
will include a leadership program for women focused on enhancing women’s technical and leadership skills in irrigation
management and preparing women for managerial roles, enabling them to make decisions that affect women farmers.

34.     The implementation of activities in support of RBDAs will be in close collaboration with the Department of River
Basin Operations and Inspectorate of the FMWRS. A technical working group will be established within the Department
of River Basin Operations and Inspectorate, involving technical persons from RBDAs to support centralized activities.
RBDAs will increase stakeholder participation in planning and complaint redress.

Component 2: Irrigation Modernization (US$350 million)

35.      Component 2 will support the rehabilitation and revitalization of 40,000 ha of irrigated command area, through a
comprehensive modernization program combining improving irrigation and drainage infrastructure while implementing
the policy, institutional, and regulatory reforms presented in Component 1. While potential investments sites were pre-
identified across all geopolitical zones (Figure 3), the federal and state schemes22 which will be supported by the SPIN
Project will be determined based on technical and implementation readiness criteria agreed with the FMWRS, as shown
in Figure 4 (and detailed in Annex 2). Component 2 is structured into three subcomponents.




22 Hereinafter, federal-financed schemes are referred as Model 1 and state-financed schemes are referred as Model 2.



                                                                                                                       Page 16 of 86
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



 Figure 3. Location of Potential Irrigation Schemes under SPIN and Irrigation Schemes Rehabilitated under the TRIMING Project




                                     Figure 4. Selection Criteria for Irrigation Investments




Subcomponent 2.1: Mobilization and Development of Water User Associations (WUAs) (US$20 million)

36.    This subcomponent will support the creation of WUAs in all irrigation schemes under the project and will
provide capacity building. Building on the achievements of the TRIMING Project, it will focus on organizing farmers sharing


                                                                                                              Page 17 of 86
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



tertiary irrigation and drainage canals in water user groups (WUGs), which will constitute the building blocks for
establishing WUAs to manage secondary and tertiary irrigation canals. The project will actively promote women’s
leadership and appointment at decision-making roles in WUAs by promoting inclusive internal operational procedures.
The subcomponent will build the capacity of WUAs to undertake their primary responsibilities: maintaining the secondary-
and field-level water conveyance system, facilitating crop planning, estimating water requirements, ensuring equitable
and sustainable irrigation scheduling and delivering irrigation services to members, and fixing and collecting irrigation and
drainage service fees from members to recover the MOM costs to help them sustainably manage the water conveyance
system. The WUA establishment and their capacity building on WRM will enable farmers to have direct responsibility of
the MOM and improve their adaptive capacity to water variability and climate change impacts. Moreover, well-maintained
irrigation and drainage systems contribute to mitigating the effects of both floods and droughts. The implementation of
Subcomponent 2.1 will be done by the Federal Project Management Unit (FPMU) in close collaboration with RBDAs and
states. The daily coordination of WUA activities and oversight will be taken up by the state governments through the desk
offices of the RBDAs reporting to the national desk office of the FMWRS The FPMU, RBDAs and States will set up a
dedicated WUA unit leveraging the existing national RBDA desk offices, as part of the bulk water supply to provide
facilitation support to WUAs at all levels. The activities of this subcomponent are further detailed in Annex 2.

Subcomponent 2.2: Irrigation and Drainage Infrastructure Investments (US$320 million)

37.      This subcomponent will support the rehabilitation and upgrading of water distribution and conveyance systems
aimed at increasing the irrigation command area, strengthening farmers’ resilience to climate hazards such as droughts
(through delivery of stored water) and floods (through drainage), minimizing conveyance losses, and improving the
reliability and timely delivery of irrigation and drainage services. The urgency of these upgrades is significantly affected
by the impacts of climate change on the assets’ economic lifetimes. This subcomponent will finance (a) studies and/or
design reviews of irrigation schemes; (b) based on approved technical design, preparation of relevant Environmental and
Social Framework (ESF) instruments, including Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs), Environmental and
Social Management Plans (ESMPs), and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) as required, and monitoring of their
implementation; (c) rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage civil works; (d) associated engineering supervision; and
(e) installation of critical canal monitoring system. Water resources for majority of schemes to be rehabilitated would be
supplied by existing dams. Rehabilitation of these existing dams are covered under Component 3.

Subcomponent 2.3: Irrigation Management Modernization (US$10 million)

38.      The aim of the subcomponent is to operationalize energy efficient management tools, information and
communication technology (ICT) equipment, and management information systems to make the irrigation
infrastructure deliver reliable, accountable, and sustainable irrigation and drainage services. This subcomponent will (a)
develop a comprehensive irrigation management system to track the condition of canal assets for optimizing maintenance
and investment planning; (b) establish water accounting systems, incorporating enhanced use of climate-related data to
monitor water availability, formulation of service delivery standards, and establishment of service regulations; and (c)
establish benchmarking systems of service delivery and performance assessment of the participating irrigation systems.
Such activities pertain to basin/sub-basin planning, water accounting, and data-driven allocation decisions across multiple
uses and multiple schemes. Energy efficiency design of such systems will be promoted, and the procured ICT equipment
will be aligned with the international standards on energy efficiency, such as Energy Star certification, with improvement
compared to the country benchmark. These activities will be implemented in parallel and in correspondence with the
construction works (rehabilitation or expansion) financed under Subcomponent 2.2 so that the rehabilitated or newly
constructed infrastructure is handed over to the WUAs and scheme operator from the contractor in a progressive manner.



                                                                                                            Page 18 of 86
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



39.     This subcomponent will also promote climate-resilient water management strategies and change irrigation
management strategies to reduce climate vulnerabilities (for example, irrigation schedules) and improve water and
energy efficiency of the rehabilitated systems. The energy efficiency of the irrigation schemes will be ensured as
investments will be on gravity irrigation, and when pumps are necessary, solar pumps will be installed. The resilience of
the communities to water-related disasters such as drought and flood will also be strengthened through the
operationalization of the irrigation monitoring systems. Moreover, the irrigation management modernization will improve
the quality of service provided by the operator. Key performance indicators will be defined among RBDAs and WUAs on
the performance satisfaction of the service provided against the water delivery plan.

Component 3: Improvements in dam operations and enhancing dam safety (US$100 million)

40.      This component will strengthen the dam safety management system in the country and will rehabilitate and
improve the safety of prioritized dams and associated appurtenances. The project will not finance the construction of
any new dam. Planned activities are not intended to alter the original schemes, change their nature, or expand dam
extents to make them appear as new or different schemes. Priority will be given to select dams that provide downstream
irrigation services to the schemes which will be identified under Component 2. The safety of dams is key to climate
adaptation by ensuring water delivery for water supply, hydropower, ecosystem conservation, and irrigation to mitigate
droughts; protecting against dam break flooding; and storing excess water to mitigate floods following high precipitation.

41.     This component will (a) conduct a Dam Safety Portfolio Risk Assessment Exercise including establishing and
implementing a risk indexing screening method for dams in Nigeria and selecting dams for rehabilitation works; (b)
prepare an Emergency Action Plan (EAP) and an O&M manual, including operational protocols, dam health monitoring
and reporting protocols, and an instrumentation plan for dam safety—the EAP will include safety protocols that address
safety concerns specific to women and persons with disabilities; (c) perform rehabilitation works including measures for
seepage reduction, hydrological and structural safety measures, strengthening of main dam body and foundation, and
improvement and operationalization of basic dam facilities and dam safety instruments; (d) prepare and implement
sediment management plans, through bathymetric surveys and feasibility studies, piloting of institutional models, and
plans for treatment of upstream drainage catchments with construction of sediment-retaining check dams and river bank
protection structures; and (e) apply nature-based solutions to dam/reservoir operation and management such as the use
of natural flood plains for flood risk reduction, and improved sedimentation management practices through improved
operation and mitigation of adverse land use practices within the catchment. Details on the activities are in Annex 3.

Component 4: Project Management (US$20 million)

42.      The main objective of this component is to effectively implement, monitor, and evaluate project activities. It
involves establishing the FPMU and Technical Units (TUs) at the federal level and State Project Implementing Units for the
state irrigation schemes to oversee and coordinate project implementation, as well as setting up a monitoring and
evaluation (M&E) system to assess the project activities and their impact. Component 4 will also support the establishment
of the PSC and Technical Steering Committee for the project, with ministerial representations from the FMWRS, FMP, and
other relevant agencies. The component includes financing for consultancies, trainings, materials, office equipment, and
operating costs.

 C. Project Beneficiaries

43.     Around 950,000 Nigerians will directly benefit from more reliable, climate-resilient, and efficient irrigation
water supply and increased agricultural productivity through improved irrigation water management. Direct
beneficiaries (950,000) will include (a) consumers getting more food as a result of the improved irrigation system; (b)

                                                                                                          Page 19 of 86
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



households, farmers, and livestock breeders, benefiting from improved water storage, supply, and irrigation services; and
(c) all institutional staff who will be directly involved in project activities and/or who will benefit from training. Thousands
of farmers will have access to rehabilitated irrigation and drainage services in the zones of command of rehabilitated
dams. Institutional beneficiaries include government agencies (FMWRS, FMP, RBDAs, and state agencies) and WUAs.
Additional indirect beneficiaries will include (a) downstream households protected by improvement of dam safety; (b) the
population involved in agricultural and pastoral value chains; (c) personnel of the institutions involved in project activities;
and (d) consultants and employees of the companies involved in project construction and consultancy activities.

D. Results Chain
                                                  Figure 5. Theory of Change




 E. Rationale for World Bank Involvement and Role of Partners

44.     The Government of Nigeria is in the middle of implementing the flagship NIDP (2016–2030), with an ambitious
target of developing 500,000 ha of land under irrigation by 2030. So far, the achievements stand at 350,000 ha (2023)
equipped, many of which became dysfunctional due to lack of means for MOM. The World Bank has demonstrated
experience in supporting the establishment of irrigation management models, which, combined with rehabilitation funds,
allow bringing irrigation schemes back to their full production potential. TRIMING has demonstrated the proof of concept
of WUAs in Nigeria, which the SPIN Project is bringing to the next level. The World Bank’s worldwide experience and
convening power allows facilitating greater coordination, institutionalization of the financing framework, oversight, and
monitoring, as well as tackling the challenges of adaptations to climate risks and mitigating vulnerabilities due to climate
change. The ongoing excellent partnership between the Government of Nigeria and the World Bank ensures high-impact
interventions in the sector.

                                                                                                               Page 20 of 86
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



45.      The World Bank is recognized for supporting dam safety and management improvement, including in federal
states, for instance, it supported the Dam Rehabilitation and Improvement Projects in India. It also had valuable expertise
and experience supporting client countries improve IWRM and optimize water resource allocation for climate resilience
and economic and environmental benefits.

46.      The World Bank brings experience and lessons learned from hydropower projects both in and outside West
Africa. Most notably within West Africa is the recent Nachtigal Hydropower Project in Cameroon, which was developed
on a PPP model with World Bank Group support. The World Bank has extensive experience of partnerships with technical
and financial institutions, including on complex dam construction and safety aspects, and in structuring complex and
innovative PPPs, building on a one World Bank Group approach that combines private investments with IFC support and
risks mitigation guarantees and products proposed by MIGA.

 F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design

47.     The preparation and design of the SPIN Project drew on international, regional, and in-country experiences of
similar irrigation programs using participatory irrigation management, by the World Bank and other development
partners. The main lessons and experiences that have been incorporated in the design of the SPIN Project include the
following:

        (a)   State governments. As the second tier of the Nigerian Government, state governments need to be
              incorporated in the implementation arrangement. State governments have considerable experience in FLID
              and livelihood support for irrigated agriculture in Nigeria, as implemented by Agro-Climatic Resilience in
              Semi-Arid Landscapes Project. They have a direct interest in ensuring that irrigation schemes perform to
              their full potential and are best placed to support WUAs and apex WUAs during and after the project period.
        (b)   The farmer institution model of WUA and Apex WUA to be scaled up. One of the key lessons emerging from
              the TRIMING project is the need for WUAs to be strengthened as inclusive, self-managed, and accountable
              institutions of farmers. The TRIMING Project showcased a successful three-tier farmer institution model—
              WUGs, WUAs, and Apex WUA—registered under state/federal law, taking over from RBDAs the MOM of
              secondary and tertiary level canals, thereby institutionalizing participatory irrigation and drainage
              management. The SPIN Project will adapt the WUA knowledge package/`WUA tool kit’ to scale up and
              strengthen the model.
        (c)   Water conveyance improvements in formal irrigation schemes can catalyze substantial FLID activities
              leading to additional beneficiaries. In TRIMING, around 10,000 ha was estimated as additional areas brought
              under production by farmers who invested private capital on land preparation and to abstract water from
              rehabilitated canals using pumps for upland farming. The SPIN Project will consider -where potential exists-
              increasing carrying capacity of irrigation and drainage facilities to accommodate potential FLID to avoid
              conflicts between irrigators in formal schemes and FLID farmers.
        (d)   RBDA institutional capacity to undertake mandated roles to be enhanced. RBDAs need organizational
              development and human resource capacity support to perform their mandated institutional functions of
              improving the O&M of head works and bulk water supply in federal schemes. RBDAs are also required to
              support state governments in the technical and oversight roles of state irrigation assets.
        (e)   Internalizing systems, procedures, and processes within the FMWRS and FMP a prerequisite for
              sustainability. It is important to internalize and institutionalize capacities within the Directorates of FMWRS
              and Directorates of FMP to sustain development efforts, process improvements, and performance of


                                                                                                            Page 21 of 86
         The World Bank
         Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



                investments initiated under World Bank-supported projects. The SPIN Project design incorporates setting up
                project management teams within the top management structure and technical facilitation arrangements
                embedded within the technical departments of the FMWRS and FMP.

 III. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS

 A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

48.      The FMWRS is the lead implementing ministry for the project, in collaboration with the FMP and participating
state government. Given the administrative structure, as defined by the constitution of Nigeria, the project will be
executed through the federal and state governments. The project implementation arrangements are to strengthen the
roles, responsibilities, and accountabilities of the administrative structure of the country and aim to reform the devolution
and institutionalization of the water sector architecture. An interministerial PSC will be set up with the mandate of
discussing the overall project direction, and concurring on project outputs for World Bank’s no objection. The PSC will
consist of the FMWRS, FMP, Federal Ministry of Finance (FMF), Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security (FMAFS),
Federal Ministry of Environment (FMEnv), Federal Ministry of Budget and Economic Planning, and commissioners of water
resources and agriculture in participating states, and any other relevant ministries, departments, and agencies, as further
detailed in the Project Implementation Manual. The PSC will be mandated to meet at least once every six months and will
be chaired by the Minister of FMWRS and co-chaired by the Minister of FMP. The Permanent Secretary of the FMWRS will
be the Secretary of the PSC. Establishment of the PSC and holding the first meeting will be an effectiveness condition for
the project. The Federal Technical Committee (FTC) will provide overall technical guidance. The FTC will be chaired by the
Permanent Secretary of the FMWRS and will include Directors of Irrigation and Drainage, Dams and Reservoir Operations
(DRO), River Basin Operations and Inspectorate of the FMWRS, Director of Renewable and Rural Power Access of the FMP,
relevant Directors from FMAFS and FMEnv, and FMF, and Managing Directors from participating RBDAs. The National
Project Coordinator for the project will be the secretary of the FTC. The mapping of project activities and institutional
reforms across the administrative structure of Nigeria is shown in Figure 6 and is consistent with the WRM responsibilities
mandated to them.

49.      The FMWRS will set up an FPMU staffed with competent multi-disciplinary experts from both the FMWRS and
FMP fully dedicated to managing the project. The FPMU will be lean, with only responsibility for coordination, fiduciary,
that is, procurement and financial management (FM), M&E, and environmental and social management. For Model 123,
State Focal teams appointed by State Governments will be part of the Project Management Unit (PMU). The technical
arm of the FPMU will be handled by Technical Units (TUs) hosted in the Departments of Irrigation and Drainage and DRO
of the FMWRS and the Department of Renewable and Rural Power Access of the FMP. The appointed experts from the
Infrastructure Concession Regulatory Commission (ICRC) and the Bureau of Public Enterprises (BPEs) will be part of the
Hydropower TU in the Department of Renewable and Rural Power Access of the FMP to support operationalization of the
PPP action plan and other activities around private sector participation in hydropower development. The TUs will be
responsible for preparing terms of reference for technical consultants, specifications, lead evaluations of technical
proposals, and other technical documents required for the project’s implementation.




23 See Annex 2 paragraph 2 for details on Model 1 and 2 design.




                                                                                                            Page 22 of 86
          The World Bank
          Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



                            Figure 6. Mapping of Project Activities and Reforms across Administrative Levels




50.     The FPMU, with expert staff from the FMWRS and FMP, shall be the principal implementing and coordination
agency for the project, and a single Designated (Special) Account under the administrative management of the FPMU will
therefore be established there. The FPMU will be responsible for putting in place the required FM infrastructure with
adequate staff to manage the Designated (Special) Account and withdraw funds from the Credit through replenishment
of the account and through direct payments. The project-established implementation units correspond to the
administrative levels and are shown in Figure 1.2 in Annex 1.
51.     Project components, subcomponents, and activities will be implemented through relevant departments of the
FMWRS and FMP, RBDAs and participating states. SPIN Model 1 states will sign a memorandum of understanding with
respective RBDAs in their states, while subsidiary agreements will be signed with states implementing SPIN Model 2. A
robust annual joint work programming process will be facilitated by the FPMU and State Project Implementation Unit
(SPIU).

52.      State selection, prioritization, and staging criteria. The Project’s geographic coverage will be nationwide;
however, states’ participation is subject to expression of interest and compliance with the eligibility and readiness criteria
agreed for the project. To date, 31 states drawn from all the six geopolitical zones of Nigeria have submitted
documentation expressing interest to participate in the project. The FMWRS and World Bank will use the documentation
to jointly assess interested states and group them into Category 1 and Category 2 states24. For both categories, states
would be assessed against a set of demonstrated CIC criteria as described in Annex 2. This is to inform transparent
decisions on state selection. Only states that have met the demonstrated commitment criteria will progress for
assessment of technical readiness. Passing both the demonstrated commitment and technical readiness criteria is
mandatory for admission into the SPIN Project. The number of states to be admitted into this phase of SPIN would depend
on the availability of funds.


24 Category 1 states would represent all states opting for SPIN Model 1 and Category 2 states represent states opting for SPIN Model 2. See Annex 2

paragraph 2 for details on Model 1 and Model 2.


                                                                                                                                Page 23 of 86
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



 B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements

53.     The FMWRS/FPMU will monitor all component activities and send progress reports in a form and substance
satisfactory to the World Bank. As needed, to review progress and address issues that may arise, the FMWRS/FPMU will
convene meetings with relevant stakeholders, including the FMF, FMP, RBDAs, and participating state governments.
Following the project Results Framework, monitoring results and outcomes will be reported in the project progress
reports. The in-house M&E capacity of the FMWRS/FPMU will be developed for data collection and processing, integration
of M&E data and findings, and coordination with the private sector. Participating companies will have their own
environmental and social management systems per the specifications set in the Project Implementation Manual.

54.      The World Bank will provide implementation support to the project over its lifetime and regularly monitor its
results and outcomes to evaluate achievement of the PDO and implementation performance. Also, a midterm review
will be conducted within two years after the start of project implementation to assess project performance and ensure
that lessons learned are considered in implementation over the remaining period.

 C. Sustainability

55.      The project builds on the lessons of the NIDP of the Federal Government and the World Bank-financed TRIMING
Project, reflecting in the project design concerted activities that focus on sustainability of institutions and investments
in public irrigation assets. The project will focus on institutional and financial sustainability at the WUA level by (a) building
the capacity and skills of user/farmer members to manage their own institutions and graduate to higher-level federated
arrangements; (b) managing O&M of assets devolved to them through the recovery of user fees and building systems for
demanding collection and accounting of member dues; and (c) ensuring legal recognition, oversight, and provision of
organization umbrella through legislation and anchorage by the state governments including assured supply of bulk water
and technical assistance from RBDAs. The sustainability of the implementation model will be ensured through reliance on
existing government structures at the federal level through convergence among the FMWRS, FMP, and other relevant
ministries as well as involvement of ministries, departments, and agencies at the state level for implementation. The
project design consists of PBCs with clearly defined results including co-funding and budget provisions both at the federal
and state levels including system building and human resource provisions for technical support. The investments at the
public water resource assets level for rehabilitation of irrigation assets and hydropower assets will be triggered through
PBCs. The investments for dam safety have been coupled with dam safety guidelines, international standards, operational
protocols, and so on for ensuring sustainability of public assets rehabilitated. Sustainability of public investments are
ensured through optimal utilization of the storage available and safety and security of the structures. Overall, the existing
institutional structures will be organizationally supported at the federal and state levels to ensure the continuation of the
processes and institutional reform put in place by the project focusing on building partnership among farmers and the
public and private sector to synergize the development outcomes in both the irrigation and hydropower sub-sectors.

 IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY


 A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis


Economic and Financial Analysis
56.      The project will produce economic benefits for existing and new water users by providing a new or improved
service. This service will be made available through the proposed investments in irrigation rehabilitation and upgrading


                                                                                                                 Page 24 of 86
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



(Component 2) and rehabilitation of existing dam structures and related facilities (Component 3). The detailed economic
and financial analysis (EFA), including sensitivity analyses, are provided in Annex 5.

57.     An economic analysis based on avoided costs carried out to assess the project’s economic viability shows that the
project is economically viable even without any consideration of environmental externalities. The project’s economic
internal rate of return and net present value (NPV) are calculated using a standard cost-benefit methodology. The
economic evaluation is confined to the project activities for which an economic value can be identified and measured. The
overall preliminary result obtained from the three analyzed schemes being implemented under the TRIMING Project
would justify the proposed SPIN Project investment, as it shows an economic rate of return (ERR) of 16.7 percent and an
NPV of US$ 488.4 million (with 6 percent as discount rate). The Standard Conversion Factor (SCF) used for valuing the
shadow value of costs and benefits for the economic analysis was 0.815, while 0.7 was used for the shadow cost of labor.

Technical Analysis
58.      The project has been technically designed to address the most pressing challenges in the safety and
maintenance of dams in Nigeria, including rehabilitation of priority assets and strengthening of MOM and surveillance.
Proposed interventions for each dam under Component 3 will be based on the results of a sound and resilient design in
line with international good practices, and the execution of works will be supervised by qualified engineers, supported by
the consulting service. A total of 15 priority dams have been identified by the DDRO of the FMWRS. Three of these dams
have been reviewed by the dam safety review panel (DSRP). Their comments are being integrated in their Report and
Project Screening Template.

59.       As per World Bank Dam Safety Good Practice Notes guidelines, Construction Supervision and Quality Assurance
Plans will be prepared before tender processes for rehabilitation works. The MOM, Emergency Preparedness Plans and
other relevant E&S instruments will be prepared before starting the rehabilitation works (including a specific section for
dam operation and flood management during the works). Instrumentation plans will be integrated into the MOM plan.
Dam break analysis will be performed for all selected dams under the project, to prepare associated dam safety plans
commensurate with the risk and as per the World Bank Dam Safety Good Practice Notes and Templates.
60.       The project will strengthen the risk management process for the whole national dam portfolio. Dam owners in
the nation, led by the FMWRS DDRO, have commenced preparation of assessment tools for the dam safety portfolio risk
management exercise to prioritize rehabilitation works of the 180 large dams in the nation. The activity will be completed
as part of the dam safety rehabilitation exercise under Component 3. Moreover, the FMWRS DDRO has started to consider
a list of guidelines required for dam safety. The FMWRS DDRO will commence drafting these guidelines and will complete
them as part of the activities under Component 1.

61.       To address the institutional aspects, the project will support the DDRO and RBDAs of the FMWRS and state
governments to be selected by enhancing their managerial and operational skills for dam safety. The maturity matrices
will be conducted for agencies to be selected for dam safety. The maturity matrices exercise will cover different elements
of the project in terms of dam safety such as governance, training, surveillance, dam maintenance, and emergency
preparedness. The exercise will be prepared for the dam owners and operators in Nigeria to provide a structured approach
to (a) assess the effectiveness of the dam safety project activities against the program of the DDRO/RBDAs; (b) identify
and prioritize areas for improvement based on the portfolio risk management exercise discussed above; (c) compare the
performance of the project activities over time; (d) inform the prioritization of resources for dam safety improvement;
and (e) communicate the effectiveness of the dam safety program to wider audiences. Progress for each dam, depending
on its risk category, will be tracked regularly with updated matrices.



                                                                                                          Page 25 of 86
         The World Bank
         Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



62.     The irrigation infrastructures to be rehabilitated or extended are irrigation perimeters with total water control,
mainly gravity fed. As presented in Annex 2, the irrigation schemes will be selected through a selection process. Feasibility
studies and some detailed designs are available for 16 irrigation schemes with the total irrigation area of 53,550 ha. Review
of the design and preparation of tender documents will start soon after the scheme selection is completed and relevant
E&S instruments are prepared.

63.     To further strengthen policy dialogue and joint planning of WRM among major stakeholders, the project will
ensure joint implementation of project activities. At the federal government level, HMP and feasibility study of priority
hydropower projects by FMP will be coordinated to ensure its harmonization with existing water resources master plan
of FMWRS. At the basin level, RBDA’s bulk water allocation exercise will ensure periodic dialogue among RBDA, WUAs and
state government to ensure accountability and improvement of monitoring of service performance at basin level.

64.     The operation is aligned with the goals of the Paris Agreement and presents climate-co-benefits on both
mitigation and adaptation.

65.      Assessment and reduction of adaptation risks. The main climate risks likely to have a material impact on the
operation (including assets and services) and its PDO are extreme heat, droughts, and floods. The project design considers
these climate risks and aims to mitigate them through (a) integration of climate change considerations in HMP to
determine requirements at the national scale to adopt to it in the sector; (b) rehabilitation of priority dams selected
through the Dam Safety Portfolio Risk Assessment Exercise under Component 3, including installing instruments for
monitoring the status of dams, measuring the quantity and quality of water resources (on-site and upstream), and/or
supporting early warning systems to improve the dam’s capacity to reduce flood risks and provide water storage during
droughts; and (c) reinforcing of dams to protect infrastructure and beneficiaries downstream during flood events,
including through the improved EAPs for each of the target dams. The project will rehabilitate irrigated perimeters for
agriculture to enhance resilience to climate change-exacerbated droughts/water shortages and floods/waterlogging to
improve food security. Further, the development of upstream and downstream services around the rehabilitated dams
will bolster farmers’ and other users’ resilience to extreme water-related weather events, improving water availability and
promoting efficient water use. All infrastructure activities will follow the guidelines of dam safety developed under
Subcomponent 1.1. These will be aligned with the Resilient Water Infrastructure Design Brief 25 to ensure that the
infrastructure itself is able to withstand climate change-exacerbated floods, and droughts. With these risk mitigation
efforts in place, the residual risk of climate hazards having a material impact on the project is Low.

66.      Assessment and reduction of mitigation risks. All project activities are universally aligned, and the project is at
‘Low Risk’ of having a negative impact on the country’s low GHG emissions development pathways. There is no lock-in
risk, as the hydropower dams to be rehabilitated/restored were impounded a long time ago (and therefore will have
relatively low GHG emission now). Moreover, the project will support gravity-fed irrigation and replace diesel pumps with
solar-powered pumps, leading to emissions reductions. No additional water storage will be created, as the activities focus
on the rehabilitation and restoration of priority dams and will not include new impoundments. Fish production/value
chain activities are outside the project’s scope, so the associated mitigation risks have not been included in the project
assessment. SPIN will not promote expansion into areas of high carbon stocks, areas of high biodiversity, lead to significant
conversion of natural habitat, or involve land use change that is likely to reduce carbon stocks. The Food and Agriculture
Organization’s Ex-Ante Carbon Balance Tool (EX-ACT) was used to estimate the project’s net GHG emissions. The project’s
net GHG emissions26 over its economic lifetime (5 years of implementation and 15 years for capitalization) are estimated
to be 1,167,470 tCO2eq, translating to average annual emissions reduction of 58,374 tCO2eq. Total emissions under the

25 https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/868981599035366969/pdf/Resilient-Water-Infrastructure-Design-Brief.pdf.
26 Ex ante GHG accounting carried out using EX-ACT, quantifying the net carbon balance as tCO eq.
                                                                                             2



                                                                                                                         Page 26 of 86
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



‘with project’ scenario are 3,267,284 tCO2eq while in the ‘without project’ scenario they are 4,434,755 tCO2eq. Reduction
in emissions resulted from changes in land use/farmland expansion, higher irrigation water use efficiency, and increase in
rice yields per ha, with the only increase in emission emanating from more urea use in one of the subprojects. Overall,
there is a net reduction of emissions by about 25 percent relative to a business-as-usual scenario. These results will be
updated once the subproject details are finalized with the appropriate agencies.

67.      Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation. The project has a strong focus on promoting climate change
adaptation and mitigation. Component 1 supports (a) the strengthening of dam institutional structure and dam safety
guidelines and manuals integrating the risks of climate change-exacerbated weather events; (b) the strengthening of
government agencies to monitor and manage irrigation systems to provide reliable water services to farmers; and (c) the
development of HMP and of at least one priority hydropower project. Component 2 supports investments in irrigation
rehabilitation and the establishment of WUAs and will contribute to protect farmers against climate change-exacerbated
water extreme events, as well as mitigate GHG emission by implementing gravity schemes and solar-powered pumps.
Component 3 will support investments in essential river channel works and maintenance in the abovementioned basins
to (a) protect communities against damages from flooding caused by high dam spillway discharges; (b) mitigate the
impacts of droughts on farmers and agriculture through improved water storage management; (c) support ecosystem
protection by ensuring environmental flows and sustainable reservoir management; and (d) mitigate impacts on
downstream riparian communities due to the reduction of dry season river flows from water abstraction for existing
irrigation schemes served by the dams with improved reservoir capacity to the original level. Moreover, procurement of
ICT equipment within the project will be aligned with the international standards such as Energy Star certification on
energy efficiency, with substantial improvement compared to the country benchmark.

 B. Fiduciary

(i) Financial Management

68.       The FM arrangement of the FMWRS under the existing TRIMING Project was assessed to determine its
acceptability and provide reasonable assurance that project funds will be used economically and efficiently for the
intended purposes. The FM arrangement for the FMWRS under the SPIN Project will model the same arrangements of
the TRIMING Project, which strongly rely on the country systems and are highly homogenous with several other projects
within the Nigeria portfolio. However, adequate mitigating measures will be applied to ensure that risks are lowered, and
FM performance is strengthened. The Federal Project Financial Management Department (FPFMD) at the federal level
and Project Financial Management Unit (PFMU) at the state level are responsible for providing FM functions and
Designated Account management for all World Bank-financed projects implemented at the federal and state ministries,
departments, and agencies. The FPFMD and PFMUs shall be responsible for deploying FM staff to the FPMU and Project
Implementation Units (PIUs), oversight of the project's financial and reporting arrangements, and the funds management
in all project management and implementing units. The FPMU will have FM staff from the FPFMD and shall be the principal
implementing unit for the project. The SPIU will have FM staff from PFMU.

69.      The overall FM risk for the SPIN Project is assessed as Substantial. The assessment of the control risks reveals
that the FMWRS needs to strengthen its internal control systems and employ timely resolution of key issues arising from
fiduciary reviews. To mitigate these risks, the FMWRS must review and update its Financial Procedure Manuals to ensure
that control mechanisms put in place are suitable for the SPIN Project, while FM implementation support will be consistent
with a risk-based approach to promptly address issues that may arise during project implementation. In addition, due to
the current macroeconomic condition of the operating environment, the project work plans and budgets may be exposed
to transactional risks arising from persistent and sizeable Foreign Exchange (FX) rate premiums, which could lead to


                                                                                                          Page 27 of 86
         The World Bank
         Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



significant cost variations during project implementation. To mitigate possible insufficiency of annual budgets resulting
from cost variation, the annual work plans and budgets will be reviewed and updated quarterly by the budget committee
of the FPMU to ensure timely identification of cost variances.

70.     With respect to project implementation at the state level, government agencies operating manual systems of
accounting have the risk of reporting financial transactions inadequately and generating financial reports that may not be
of acceptable quality. To mitigate this, the agencies must ensure that computerized accounting systems are introduced,
and participating states will be provided adequate training in World Bank fund flow and disbursement procedures for their
designated project FM staff.

(ii) Procurement

71.      Procurement for the federal-level interventions (including the irrigation schemes following the SPIN Model 1)
will be conducted by the SPIN FPMU to be constituted for the implementation, leveraging the already existing capacity
from the TRIMING Project, with the technical inputs and support from the TUs, that is, DID, DDRO, RBDA of the FMWRS,
and Department of Renewable and Rural Power Access under the FMP. The FPMU will have two procurement officers
headed by qualified government procurement officers. However, where needed, an individual procurement consultant
may be engaged. The procurements for the state-level interventions (including the irrigation schemes following the SPIN
Model 2) will be conducted by the SPIUs to be established under the State Ministry of Water Resources or Agriculture.
The FPMU has extensive experience in conducting World Bank-financed procurements, and it is fully staffed in
procurement. Procurement for the project will be carried out following: (a) the World Bank Procurement Regulations for
IPF Borrowers, dated September 2023; (b) Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and Corruption in Projects
Financed by IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants, dated October 15, 2006, and revised in January 2011 and as of July
2016; and (c) other provisions stipulated in the Financing Agreements.

72.      The procurement risk of the project has been assessed as Substantial. This is mainly based on not knowing the
participating states at this stage of the project, their procurement scope under the project, and the procurement and
contract management capacity of the state-level PIUs. Other identified risks are delay in procurement and contract
implementation; vulnerability of the implementing agencies to effectively manage the fraud and corruption issues; poor
procurement record management; capacity constraint in some of the states in conducting the procurement and contract
management effectively following the World Bank Procurement Regulations; difficulty in monitoring large number of civil
works across different geographic locations resulting delay in contract implementation, safeguard issues, and poor quality
of works; and shortage of service providers/contractors/suppliers in some of the States due to the fragility, conflict, and
violence situation. Procurement risks will be mitigated by engaging skilled procurement staff/specialist in each of the
SPIUs; starting the identified procurement activities (advance procurement) early; providing hands-on expanded
implementation support by the World Bank to the low-capacity states to conduct their major procurement activities;
closely monitoring progress through the Procurement Plan and contract implementation plan; providing extensive
procurement and contract management training in the initial phase of the project 27 ; using the World Bank’s online
procurement planning and management portal, Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP), to manage
procurement activities and store important procurement documents; conducting awareness training to combat fraud and
corruption; increasing the use of electronic procurement systems and data disclosure such as beneficial ownership
information; using an experienced supervision consulting firm to supervise implementation of the major civil works across
the country; conducting early market sounding to encourage bidders to participate in the procurement process; identifying
fit-for-purpose procurement approach based on the situation on the ground; and so on. For the state participation,

27 Subject to the request from the Borrower and approval from the World Bank




                                                                                                           Page 28 of 86
            The World Bank
            Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



    assessment of the procurement capacity and risk of the SPIUs will be carried out as and when the states are selected, and
    appropriate procurement risk mitigation measures and fit-for-purpose procurement approaches will be incorporated in
    the project.

.    C. Legal Operational Policies

       @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalpolicy#doctemplate
       Legal Operational Policies                                                            Triggered?
       Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                           Yes
       Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                     No


    73.     The Government of Nigeria has sent a notification to all riparian countries through the Niger Basin Authority (NBA)
    and the Lake Chad Basin Commission (LCBC). Both the NBA and LCBC have replied with ‘No Objection’ authorizing the SPIN
    Project to proceed.

     D. Environmental and Social

    74.       The project involves the rehabilitation of existing dams and their associated structures, technical studies
    (including Environmental and Social Assessments) for potential hydropower investments, sedimentation management,
    rehabilitation of underutilized irrigation schemes, and expansion to irrigable areas within the existing schemes. The
    project spans various states with varying geographical conditions and environmental and social sensitivities, making
    environmental and social considerations a high risk. The FMWRS has proposed about 10 to 20 dams (categorized as
    medium to large dams, earth-filled with multipurpose use) that will potentially be rehabilitated, but the exact dams and
    their safety status are not yet known. The SPIN Project will strengthen the capacity and improve the management
    framework for dam owners, operators, and agencies overseeing dam safety to help address dam safety risks of selected
    project dams. The project will help develop comprehensive dam safety guidelines consisting of standards, operational
    manuals, and rules to help dam owners and operators to improve their capacity of dam operation and maintenance and
    emergency preparedness and comply with dam safety requirements of the World Bank. Other interventions will include
    measures for seepage reduction, hydrological and structural safety, strengthening of the main dam body and foundation,
    and improving of basic dam facilities and safety instruments for storing water for potable supply, irrigation, and power
    generation. The project will also involve rehabilitation and expansion of around 15 existing irrigation schemes with the
    total irrigation service area of 40,000 ha. Works would include designing and retrofitting infrastructure for efficient water
    use, modernizing gravity systems, installing canal monitoring tools, and developing new conveyance infrastructures. In
    addition, the project will prepare hydropower master plan and feasibility study and ESIA of one prioritized yet unidentified
    hydropower project.

    75.     Potential environmental and social risks associated with the rehabilitation of dam and irrigation schemes
    include dam failure; issues related to mainly construction-related activities, which include dust due to earth movement
    and construction debris/waste; wastewater discharges including stormwater runoff from disturbed areas; siltation in the
    dam without effective sediment management resulting in the issue of dam safety; flooding; and thus, impacts at the
    downstream population. Other risks are occupational health and safety (OHS) of workers which include physical hazards,
    slips and falls, work at height and moving machinery, community health and safety issues, grievance because of poor
    implementation of the interventions, compensation (where it becomes relevant), inadequate dam O&M, emergency
    preparedness, and potential dam failure. Poor stakeholder engagements can also affect the project if stakeholders are not


                                                                                                                Page 29 of 86
          The World Bank
          Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



adequately consulted. The project is implemented in fragile, conflict-affected, and volatile settings, making security risk
level equally high. The capacity of staff to implement environmental and social measures at the state levels varies across
states and will be strengthened through the ESF technical support that will be provided under Component 4.

76.      Other social issues may include minor land acquisition and temporary loss of livelihood during the rehabilitation
of the existing irrigation schemes. Minor land take may also be required during civil works to provide campsites,
construction yards and working areas. However, upon completion of the rehabilitation, the land will need to be
redistributed among the original farmers who were affected. Experience from the TRIMING Project indicates that the land
tenure system differs from scheme to scheme. Land ownership in the scheme is acquired through several approaches,
including the farmer occupier system, the family inheritance system, the purchase of land, the user allocation system, the
sharecropping system, the re-leasing of leased land (commercial farms), gifts, and loan arrangements. During
implementation, detailed stakeholder engagement is critical, specifically on the land tenure/ownership structures at each
scheme/project site to understand the land relations and ownership in and around the scheme. The specific subprojects
are not yet selected, at this stage of project preparation. Therefore, the Client prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework,
which spells out the key objectives and principles of the policy and will give guidance for the preparation of subsequent
RAPs. It will be important, therefore, that site-special RAPs and feasibility study that will be prepared for the hydropower
investment also provide information on the legal status of farmers' rights, the typology of land tenure arrangements that
exist, any discernable trends in land markets and values, landlessness, and any potential concerns relating to tenure
insecurity or conflict over land that may result from or pose a risk for project implementation. Specific attention will be
given to payment of appropriate compensation to affected persons that will be indicated in the RAPs and the development
of grievance redress mechanism (GRM) at the community level that will be accessible to all stakeholders as well as
arrangements for monitoring the implementation of RAPs. In addition, robust assessments of other potential social
impacts related to land tenure and use will be conducted as part of the ESIA process at each of the project sites.

77.      To understand the potential environmental and social risks and impacts of the potential subprojects for dam
and irrigation rehabilitation, the client undertook initial due diligence assessments (ESDDs28) of three potential sites.29
These ESDDs reviewed the level of proposed work to be carried out and the impact on environmental and social
sensitivities. For the three reviewed sites, environmental and social impactswere determined to be mainly localized and
mostly related to OHS and community health and safety and, in one case, potential livelihood and legacy issues. For all
irrigation and dam sites selected under the SPIN Project, environmental and social assessments and plans will be carried
out through dam safety review panel visits. Thereafter, ESDDs or environmental and social audit for all subproject dams
will be conducted to identify any liability, legacy issues, how cumulative impacts were considered for the dam construction
and operation model, environmental flow, and the risk category. ESDDs or environmental and social audit will also include
dam safety assessments, site-specific environmental and social assessments, environmental and social specific plans,
including resettlement and livelihood restoration plans where needed, and adequate consultations will be undertaken
(including for downstream communities). The World Bank will clear all ESDDs and the assessment of the risk profile. Where
it has been described as low to moderate risks, a standard ESMP with relevant guidelines will be prepared and
implemented. All subprojects categorized as Substantial to High risk will undergo a detailed ESIA.

78.     During the implementation of the project, dam rehabilitation plans will be developed to include structural and
nonstructural measures identified through investigative studies, including systematic hydrological assessment, stability
analysis, geotechnical studies, and geophysical and bathymetric surveys. The dam safety plans will also include dam

28 Environmental and Social Due Diligence
29 Doma Irrigation/Dam (large) in Nasarawa State, Naka Irrigation/Dam in Benue State, and Wuro Keso retention pond (also known as Gassol) for

Lower Taraba Irrigation in Taraba State.


                                                                                                                             Page 30 of 86
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



safety instrumentation plans, emergency action plans, a Flood Forecasting and Warning System for Dam Operations
(FFWSDO), and integrated reservoir operations, including streamflow forecasting for climate-resilient dam management,
as well as an O&M plan. The dam sites will ensure the security and safety of personnel.

79.      As the precise scope and design of proposed activities are not yet selected at appraisal, the project employed a
framework approach and has prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) that provides,
among others, the detailed procedures for environmental and social screening of proposed activities/ subprojects and
suggests generic mitigation measures. The ESMF, which was disclosed in-country on July 30, 2024 and on the World
Bank’s external website on August 1, 2024, further lays down the procedures for screening that will lead to the preparation
of further environmental and social instruments for addressing the identified impacts and risks. TheESMF also includes
preparation, approval, and monitoring protocols to track ESMPs and provides institutional capacity-building approaches
for the project staff to effectively manage the requirements of environmental and social implementation as set out in the
ESMF/ESMPs.

80.     Other documents have also been prepared by the Borrower, including the Resettlement Policy Framework,
Labor Management Procedures (LMP), and Pest Management Plan (PMP), which will guide the preparation of site-
specific documents. The prepared Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) will support and guide effective stakeholder
engagement. The strategy outlines systems and processes to ensure stakeholders and the public participate actively in all
project design and implementation aspects. All ESF documents have been disclosed in-country and on the World Bank’s
external website. The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), LMP, SEP, PMP and the Environmental and Social
Commitment Plan (ESCP) were disclosed in-country on July 30, 2024, and on the World Bank’s external website (July 26,
2024, for the ESCP and SEP, August 1, 2024, for the ESMF, August 19, 2024, for the PMP and RPF and August 20,2024 for
the LMP).

81.     The ESMPs/ESIAs will specify the types of plans that need to be prepared as required under each applicable
ESS. These may include Biodiversity Management Plans, Waste Management Plans, Cultural Heritage Management Plans,
Labor Management Procedures, Dam Safety Management Plan, and OHS Plans. In addition to these plans, Environmental,
Social, Health and Safety and Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH)-related provisions will be
included in the bid documents. The ESCP, Security Management Plans and SEA/SH Action Plans will also be prepared.

82.     For the HMP that will be financed by the project, the client will prepare due diligence assessments including a
Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) during the implementation phase to systematically examine the
environmental and social risks/impacts and issues associated with the Government’s policies, plans, or programs in the
water resources and power sector for now and in the future. At later stages, individual projects identified under the master
plan would be subject to site-specific full assessments such as ESIAs or RAPs (where relevant). The ESIA will be used to
address impacts associated with the HMP such as downstream water quality, biodiversity loss, and fish migrations.

83.     Implementation of environmental and social requirements. The ESCP prepared by the Borrower and the World
Bank covers the material measures and actions required for the project to achieve compliance with the Environmental
and Social Standards (ESSs) over a specified time frame and responsibilities. The SPIN Project will be implemented through
two models, with Model 1 implemented by the FPMU in federal-financed schemes that are under the RBDAs, and Model
2 implemented by the states through the SPIUs. Regardless of the model employed, all SPIUs and RBDAs will engage
qualified environmental, social, and gender/gender-based violence (GBV) officer, and security focal points. SPIUs will
require qualified environmental/OHS officers from the State Ministry of Environment, social officers from the Department
of Lands and gender/GBV officers from the State Ministry of Women Affairs (SMWA) to be deployed as PIU officers no
later than one month after effectiveness. Security focal points shall be appointed by state security advisers across the


                                                                                                            Page 31 of 86
          The World Bank
          Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



participating states no later than three months after effectiveness. Through its Component 4, the project will provide ESF
training to officers, including leveraging training provided under existing projects.

84.      Gender social inclusion and citizen engagement. The project is aligned with the World Bank Group’s Gender
Strategy and commitments in terms of citizen engagement and disability inclusion. Women’s role is increasingly being
recognized globally as crucial to sustainable water management. At the local or informal level in Nigeria, the contribution
of women to water resources development, management, and use, as well as the need for their involvement, has also
long been recognized. Nigeria signed the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (A/RES/70/1) and its
Sustainable Development Goals in 2017 and its targets related to gender and water. 30 The project aims to empower
women in water management through various activities such as strengthening their representation and leadership in
water institutions, supporting female farmer organizations, and promoting women's entrepreneurship and ensuring
gender-equitable disaster risk management. The project will prioritize and support the representation of women in key
decision-making roles in water management, strengthening the results and efforts made under the TRIMING Project. It
will thereby focus on expanding women’s decision-making role in WUAs beyond just membership by supporting women’s
promotion to managerial positions. The irrigation schemes often do not have established WUAs, and thus no women in
decision-making position on water resources management. SPIN will scale-up to other irrigation schemes the effort
conducted in TRIMING schemes, where female WUA members accounted for around 6 percent of the total, and women
representation in WUA executive roles was promoted and achieved around 14 percent representation. Through
Component 1, the project will provide an FLL program targeted at women to enhance their technical and leadership skills
to prepare them for decision-making roles in government agencies and formally established WUAs. Through Component
2, the project will actively promote women’s leadership and appointment at decision-making managerial roles in WUAs
by developing internal operational procedures that remove barriers for women, such as gender-equitable promotion
policies, women quotas, and flexible work hours for women to accommodate their needs associated with their domestic
tasks.

85.      Citizen engagement is integrated into the project design through various citizen engagement mechanisms,
including consultations with project beneficiaries and satisfaction surveys. An SEP has been prepared and disclosed
which provides procedures and plans for engaging with the multiple stakeholders under this Project. It also informs the
consultation processes throughout project implementation to ensure high participation. As part of the preparation of the
SESA, high-level stakeholders across the regulatory and sector-specific Government institutions, Non-Governmental
Organizations, Civil Society Organizations, Private Sector organizations will be consulted. This approach in consultations
will also be employed throughout project implementation to discuss project implementation issues and provide a platform
to articulate and address concerns about the Project. Beneficiaries’ feedback, specifically on the rehabilitation of the
irrigation services, functionality of the WUAs, implementing agencies’ performance will be collected through focus group
discussions, surveys, and citizen report cards (leveraging on the experience from the TRIMING Project) and used to inform
the implementation of project interventions and will thereby allow for any needed course correction and include a process
to close the feedback loop with project stakeholders. Moreover, a project-specific GRM will be designed to allow affected
stakeholders to submit grievances and seek redress when they perceive that a negative impact has arisen from the project
interventions. The GRM will be designed in consultation with relevant government and nongovernment stakeholders. It
will establish accessible processes to submit complaints and clear procedures from investigation to resolution and
feedback. The GRM will include the provision for appeal if aggrieved parties are dissatisfied with the outcome. A

30 Target 5.5 of Goal 5 specifically requested member countries to realize women’s active participation in decision-making at all levels of economic,

political, and public areas; strengthen sound policies and legislations to encourage gender parity; and empower girls and women (Target 5.c).
Target 6.4 of Goal 6 directed member countries to improve water-use efficiency and significantly decrease the number of people (including
women) affected by water scarcity. Target 6.b on the other hand mandated member states to progress water and sanitation management by
strengthening the participation of local communities (including women) (United Nations 2016).

                                                                                                                                  Page 32 of 86
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



communication campaign will be implemented aiming at raising awareness and informing stakeholders on how to use the
GRM and explaining the investigation and resolution sequential process, timeline, and procedures. The GRM will include
GBV redress procedures to ensure that any allegations of SEA/SH in the project-financed activities are handled safely and
ethically. The project will also develop a plan to facilitate accessibility for persons with disabilities. Targeted outreach and
communication campaigns will be conducted to sensitize the community on project activities and timelines, emergency
plans and early warning systems, GRM channels for effective complaint resolution, and to encourage participation in
project activities.

 V. GRIEVANCE REDRESS SERVICES

86.     Grievance redress. Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a project
supported by the World Bank may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance mechanisms or the World Bank’s
Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to address
project-related concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the World Bank’s
independent Accountability Mechanism (AM). The AM houses the Inspection Panel, which determines whether harm
occurred, or could occur, as a result of World Bank non-compliance with its policies and procedures, and the Dispute
Resolution Service, which provides communities and borrowers with the opportunity to address complaints through
dispute resolution. Complaints may be submitted to the AM at any time after concerns have been brought directly to the
attention of World Bank Management and after Management has been given an opportunity to respond. For information
on how to submit complaints to the World Bank’s GRS, please visit http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For information on
how to submit complaints to the World Bank’s AM, please visit https://accountability.worldbank.org.

 VI. KEY RISKS

87.    Overall risk rating of the project is rated Substantial, due to high Political and Governance, Macroeconomics, and
Environmental and Social risks, as well as substantial Sector Strategies and Policies and Fiduciary risks.

88.      Political and Governance risk is rated High. The political and governance risks are high given the nature of
Nigerian federalism, with high levels of state autonomy. The recent Supreme Court of Nigeria decision emphasized the
political and financial autonomy of local governments. This is not expected to impact the project and the respective roles
and commitment of the state and local governments as the water resources management is conducted along the
hydrological boundaries and not political ones. Security concerns in northern Nigeria, such as banditry and kidnapping,
further affect foreign investment and is closely monitored. Access to irrigation, water, and hydropower is a political issue
with broad support and extensive stakeholder engagement, including citizen representatives, ensures buy-in at all levels,
with ongoing engagement throughout project preparation.

89.     Macroeconomic risk is rated High. The outlook for Nigeria’s growth is uncertain and dependent on external
factors and the government’s policy response to longstanding issues which could affect the project. Though the
government has made some key policy response that could impact the outlook, the impact of these reforms is yet to be
seen. The World Bank will continue to monitor the macro-economic outlook and support the government through other
interventions. The reforms that are supported under the Reforms for Economic Stabilization to Enable Transformation
Development Policy Financing and the Accelerating Revenue Mobilization Reforms Program are designed strengthen
Nigeria’s macro-economic policy framework and to increase revenue, which should mitigate fiscal pressures over the
medium-term


                                                                                                               Page 33 of 86
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



90.      Sector Strategies and Policy risk is rated Substantial. Although these strategies and policies generally meet
adequate standards and undergo regular reviews, further strengthening is necessary to ensure close alignment with
parallel policies in agriculture, bulk water supply, hydropower generation, and irrigation use. The National Water Policy
and Nigeria’s National Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Policy serve as pivotal frameworks for coordinating and
implementing various policies and legislation in the sector. However, effective coordination between the FMP and FMWRS
is crucial, especially when addressing challenges related to large water infrastructures, such as hydropower generation
and dam safety. Strengthening coordination, integrating policies across sectors, and adhering to international best
practices will drive comprehensive implementation of these policies and strategies, leading to the maximization of
multiple benefits derived from water utilization in the country.

91.      Fiduciary risk is rated Substantial. Key risks in FM for the SPIN intervention include potential misuse of funds,
fraud, political interference, high personnel turnover, delayed financial reporting, and noncompliance with fiduciary
requirements. To address these risks, a robust action plan and implementation support will be put in place. The project
will build on the existing FM arrangements managed by the FPFMD at the Federal level, which have been deemed
adequate. These arrangements ensure efficient fund utilization, accurate reporting, asset safeguarding, and independent
audits. The FPFMD, under the Office of Accountant General of the FGN, has a proven track record in managing World
Bank-financed projects. Additionally, the SPIN Project will leverage key elements of FM arrangements, including a
comprehensive Financial Procedures Manual, computerized accounting system, trained staff, segregation of duties, robust
control environment, independent internal auditors, alignment with the Government’s FM system, and lessons learned
from previous implementations.

92.     Environmental and Social risk is rated High. Potential key risks include issues associated with community health
and safety, particularly in the event of dam failure, labor-related risks encompassing OHS issues and SEA/SH issues,
security risks that can be exacerbated by project activities pollution of water resources and the ecology, air quality impact,
land use impacts, including issues related to land acquisition; temporary loss of livelihood for farmers and water users
during rehabilitation works; and inadequate compensation, complaints and grievances, poor stakeholder engagements,
and the possibility of displacements. To effectively manage and address these risks, the project will undertake
comprehensive assessments and align its frameworks with the ESF to ensure compliance with international standards.




                                                                                                             Page 34 of 86
          The World Bank
          Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)




                                                             VII.      RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padannexresultframework#doctemplate
PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes

   Baseline                    Period 1                     Period 2                       Period 3                   Period 4                 Closing Period
                                                                               Strengthen Dam Safety
   People protected from floods and droughts through enhanced dam safety and operations (Number)
   Jan/2025                       Dec/2025                    Dec/2026                     Dec/2027                   Dec/2028                 Dec/2029
   0                              0                           20,000                       50,000                     100,000                  150,000
                                           Improved Management of Water Resources for Hydropower and Irrigation in selected areas of Nigeria
   Share of Federal and State irrigation schemes under the Project managed by a functioning WUA (Percentage)
   Jan/2025                       Dec/2025                    Dec/2026                     Dec/2027                   Dec/2028                 Dec/2029
   0                              0                           10                           20                         40                       60
   Hydropower master plan prepared, and a PPP transaction structured for a hydropower project jointly by FMWRS and FMP (Yes/No)
   Jan/2025                       Dec/2025                    Dec/2026                     Dec/2027                   Dec/2028                 Dec/2029
   0                              0                           0                            0                          0                        1
   Area provided with new/improved irrigation or drainage services (Hectare(Ha))
   Jan/2025                       Dec/2025                    Dec/2026                     Dec/2027                   Dec/2028                 Dec/2029
   0                              2,000                       5,000                        10,000                     20,000                   40,000
   Number of people with enhanced resilience to climate shocks (including floods and droughts) (Number)
   Jan/2025                       Dec/2025                    Dec/2026                     Dec/2027                   Dec/2028                 Dec/2029
   0                              0                           20,000                       50,000                     100,000                  150,000


Intermediate Indicators by Components

   Baseline                    Period 1                    Period 2                      Period 3                     Period 4                 Closing Period
                                               Institutional strengthening and capacity building for Water Resources Management
   Digital Dam Asset Management System established (Yes/No)
   Dec/2024                                                                                                                                    Nov/2026
   No                                                                                                                                          Yes




                                                                                                                                                                Page 35 of 86
 The World Bank
 Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)




Improved businesses and sector practices of FMP to plan for hydropower development, project modelling and financing strategies (Text) PBC
Jan/2025                        Dec/2027                                                                                                           Dec/2028
No systematic                   Hydropower master plan is                                                                                          PPP guidelines for preparation
masterplans, financing          prepared and a priority                                                                                            of the selected HPP are
strategies for hydropower       project is prepared for                                                                                            prepared so that private
sub-sector in congruence        financing with full                                                                                                sector can take on the project.
with water resources            Feasibility Study and ESIA
sector plans.                   completed.
States legislation and state budget line adoption for Water User Association Support. (Number)
Jan/2025                        Dec/2025                    Dec/2026                     Dec/2027                    Dec/2028                      Dec/2029
0                               3                           7                            10                          12                            15
Safer operation of dams by dam owners and operators by practicing Dam Safety Guidelines approved and adopted by Project Steering Committee. Guidelines are thereafter
implemented by the project. (Text) PBC
Jan/2025                        Dec/2025                    Dec/2027                                                                               Dec/2029
No customized dam safety        Dam safety standards,       Dam safety guidelines are                                                              Dam safety guidelines are
guidelines adopted by           practices and procedures    implemented by 30% of                                                                  implemented by 50% of dam
Government of Nigeria           prepared and adopted by     dam operators under SPIN                                                               operators under SPIN project
                                the Government. The         project (Yes/No)                                                                       (Yes/No)
                                guidelines to contain i)
                                Standard dam design code;
                                ii) Guidelines for
                                hydrologic review; iii)
                                Guidelines of dam safety;
                                and vi) Manual for
                                assessing structural safety
                                of existing dams and v)
                                Guidelines for preparation
                                and installation of dam
                                safety instruments
                                (Yes/No)
Basins utilizing hydrological information generated by the hydro- Meteorological stations and irrigation management systems under the project for water allocation (Number)
Jan/2025                        Dec/2025                    Dec/2026                     Dec/2027                    Dec/2028                      Dec/2029




                                                                                                                                                                          Page 36 of 86
    The World Bank
    Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)




0                           1                            3                            5                           7            8
                                                                          Irrigation Modernization
Irrigation fee recovery rate by WUAs (Percentage)
Jan/2025                        Dec/2025                      Dec/2026                     Dec/2027                 Dec/2028   Dec/2029
0                               0                             10                           20                       40         60
WUA/Farmer contributions towards O&M of irrigation infrastructure rehabilitated through project interventions (Amount(USD))
Jan/2025                        Dec/2025                      Dec/2026                     Dec/2027                 Dec/2028   Dec/2029
0                               0                             100,000                      300,000                  400,000    500,000
Women managers in formally established WUA governing bodies (Percentage)
Jan/2025                        Dec/2025                      Dec/2026                     Dec/2027                 Dec/2028   Dec/2029
0                               0                             5                            10                       15         20
People fed as a result of increased agricultural/food production (Number of people) CRI
Jan/2025                        Dec/2025                      Dec/2026                     Dec/2027                 Dec/2028   Dec/2029
0                               0                             200,000                      500,000                  700,000    950,000
   ➢People fed as a result of increased agricultural/food production - Female (Number of people) CRI
Jan/2025                        Dec/2025                      Dec/2026                     Dec/2027                 Dec/2028   Dec/2029
0                               0                             100,000                      250,000                  350,000    475,000
   ➢People fed as a result of increased agricultural/food production - Youth (Number of people) CRI

Jan/2025                        Dec/2025                      Dec/2026                     Dec/2027                 Dec/2028   Dec/2029
0                               0                             60,000                       150,000                  210,000    270,000
Cropping intensity (by scheme) (Percentage)
Jan/2025                        Dec/2025                      Dec/2026                     Dec/2027                 Dec/2028   Dec/2029
115                             115                           130                          150                      170        180
                                                              Improvements in dam operations and enhancing dam safety
Dams with improved and climate-resilient operational procedures and dam safety measures under the Project (Number)
Jan/2025                        Dec/2025                      Dec/2026                     Dec/2027                 Dec/2028   Dec/2029
0                               0                             2                            5                        10         15
Dam rehabilitation priorities analysis completed based on Dam Safety Portfolio Risk Management Analysis results (Text)
Dec/2024                        Dec/2025                      Dec/2026                                                         Nov/2027




                                                                                                                                          Page 37 of 86
    The World Bank
    Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)




   No risk management            Risk prioritization index       Dam safety portfolio risk                                    Detailed risk assessment is
   analysis conducted yet        tool is adopted                 management analysis is                                       carreid out for high-risk dams
                                                                 completed for all large                                      defined by the Analysis
                                                                 dams
   People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure (Number of people) CRI
   Jan/2025                       Dec/2025                       Dec/2026                        Dec/2027          Dec/2028   Dec/2029
   0                              0                              20,000                          50,000            100,000    150,000
     ➢People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure - Female (Number of people)    CRI

   Jan/2025                       Dec/2025                       Dec/2026                        Dec/2027          Dec/2028   Dec/2029
   0                              0                              10,000                          25,000            50,000     75,000
     ➢People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure - Youth (Number of people) CRI
   Jan/2025                       Dec/2025                       Dec/2026                        Dec/2027          Dec/2028   Dec/2029
   0                              0                              6,000                           15,000            30,000     45,000
                                                                                      Project Management
   Grievances registered and addressed within the GRM timeframe (Percentage)
   Dec/2024                       Nov/2025                       Nov/2026                        Nov/2027          Nov/2028   Nov/2029
   0                              60                             70                              80                90         90
   Farmer beneficiaries satisfied with the irrigation services received (Percentage)
   Jan/2025                       Dec/2025                       Dec/2026                        Dec/2027          Dec/2028   Dec/2029
   0                              0                              10                              20                30         40


Performance-based Conditions (PBC)

   Period                                                                                      Period Definition
   Period 1                                                                                    year 1
   Period 2                                                                                    year 2
   Period 3                                                                                    year 3
   Period 4                                                                                    year 4
   Period 5                                                                                    year 5




                                                                                                                                                     Page 38 of 86
 The World Bank
 Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)




Baseline                     Period 1                     Period 2                    Period 3                       Period 4                  Period 5
1:Safer operation of dams by dam owners and operators by practicing Dam Safety Guidelines approved and adopted by Project Steering Committee. Guidelines are thereafter
implemented by the project. (Text )
No customized dam safety     FMWRS prepared and                                       Guidelines are                                           Guidelines are implemented
guidelines adopted by        adopted safety standards                                 implemented by 30% of                                    by 50% of the project dams.
Government of Nigeria        and guidelines of dam                                    the project dams.
                             safety customized for
                             dams in Nigeria. The
                             guidelines to contain i)
                             Standard dam design code;
                             (ii) Guidelines for
                             hydrologic review; iii)
                             Guidelines of dam safety;
                             and vi) Manual for
                             assessing structural safety
                             of existing dams and v)
                             preparation and
                             installation of dam safety
                             instruments (Yes/No).
0.00                         30,000,000.00                0.00                        10,000,000.00                  0.00                      10,000,000.00
PBC allocation                                            50,000,000.00               As a % of Total PBC Allocation                           83.33%
2:Improved businesses and sector practices of FMP to plan for hydropower development, project modelling and financing strategies (Text )
No systematic                                             Hydropower master plan is                                  PPP guidelines for the
masterplans, financing                                    prepared and one project                                   selected HPP are prepared
strategies for hydropower                                 prepared for financing                                     in consultation with key
sub-sector in congruence                                  with full Feasibility Study                                stakeholders including
with water resources                                      and ESIA completed                                         private sector.
sector plans.                                             (Yes/No).
0.00                         0.00                         5,000,000.00                0.00                           5,000,000.00              0.00
PBC allocation                                            10,000,000.00               As a % of Total PBC Allocation                           16.67%




                                                                                                                                                                    Page 39 of 86
     The World Bank
     Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)




                                                         Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: PDO Indicators
                                                                                                        Methodology for Data      Responsibility for Data
Indicator Name                             Definition/Description       Frequency      Datasource
                                                                                                        Collection                Collection
                                           The indicator measures
                                                                                                        The number of
                                           people in the downstream
                                                                                                        populations residing in
                                           protected from climate
                                                                                                        the downstream flood
                                           shocks because of the safe
People protected from floods and                                                       Progress         plain areas of the dams
                                           and secure operations of      Annual                                                   FPMU
droughts through enhanced dam safety                                                   Reports          with improved
                                           the dams owing to adoption
and operations (number)                                                                                 operations with
                                           of dam safety guidelines,
                                                                                                        enhanced safety as
                                           practice of safety standards
                                                                                                        identified by the dam
                                           and the dam safety
                                                                                                        break analysis.
                                           rehabilitation investments.
                                           This indicator measures the
                                           share of irrigation schemes
                                           under federal and state
Federal and State irrigation schemes
                                           governments. A functioning
under the Project managed by a                                           Annual        Reports          Project M&E system        FMPU
                                           WUA is defined as legally
functioning WUA (Percentage)
                                           established, staffed, funded
                                           and operating irrigation
                                           services.
                                           This indicator measures the
                                           total area of land provided
Area provided with new/improved            with irrigation and
                                                                                       Progress
irrigation or drainage services            drainage services under the Annual                           Project M&E system        FPMU
                                                                                       report
(Hectare(Ha))                              project, including in (i) the
                                           area provided with new
                                           irrigation and drainage
                                           services, and (ii) the area


                                                                                                                                                Page 40 of 86
    The World Bank
    Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)




                                          provided with improved
                                          irrigation and drainage
                                          services, expressed in
                                          hectare (ha).
                                          This indicator measures
                                          joint and collaborative
                                          consultation and decision
                                          making between FMWRS
                                          and FMP, wherein the
                                          hydropower master plan is
Hydropower master plan prepared and a
                                          in congruence and informed
PPP transaction structured for a
                                          by the water resources     Annual           Reports        Project M&E system     FPMU
hydropower project jointly by FMWRS
                                          master plan. The Project
and FMP (Yes/No)
                                          Steering Committee co-
                                          chaired by ministers of
                                          FMWRS and FMP become
                                          the platform for
                                          consultation and decision-
                                          making.




                                               Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: Intermediate Results Indicators
                                                                                                    Methodology for Data   Responsibility for Data
Indicator Name                            Definition/Description        Frequency   Datasource
                                                                                                    Collection             Collection
                                          The indicator measures: (i)               Progress
Digital Dam Asset Management System                                     Annual                      Project M&E system     FPMU
                                          improvements to the asset                 report
established (Yes/No)
                                          management system and


                                                                                                                                           Page 41 of 86
     The World Bank
     Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)




                                           the digital dam depository
                                           as a comprehensive digital
                                           application for safe and
                                           efficient utilization of dam,
                                           irrigation and hydropower
                                           assets including access to
                                           information in real time;and
                                           (ii) provide comprehensive
                                           estimation of funds for
                                           regular MoM and
                                           rehabilitation requirements.
                                           The indicator measures the
                                           preparation of a
                                           comprehensive hydropower
                                           masterplan showcasing
                                           potential climate smart
                                                                                                   Confirmation of
                                           hydropower investments
                                                                                     FMP report    achievement of PBRs by
Adoption of Hydropower Masterplan by       which is complemented and
                                                                         As and      on            FMP and approved by
the PSC and Preparation of Priority        informed by the water                                                          FPMU
                                                                         when PBRs   achievement   Project Steering
Hydropower Project Ready for PPP (Text)    resources master plan also
                                                                         achieved    of PBRs       Committee
PBC                                        detailing a priority project
                                           readied for financing with
                                           full feasibility study,
                                           completed ESIA and PPP
                                           guidelines for the HPP to be
                                           implemented by private
                                           sector.




                                                                                                                                 Page 42 of 86
     The World Bank
     Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)




                                          The indicator measures the             State
                                          number of states                       Legislation   The states will submit
States legislation and state budget line
                                          demonstrating readiness       Annual   and           legislative orders and   FPMU
adoption for Water User Association
                                          and commitment to legally              approved      approved budget to
Support. (Number)
                                          recognize and support                  budget        FMWRS
                                          Water User Associations.
                                          The indicator measures
                                          whether dam safety
                                          standards, practices and
                                          procedures prepared and
                                          adopted by the
                                          Government. The guidelines
                                                                                 FMWRS         The claim report for the
                                          to contain i) Standard dam
Development and Adoption by FMWRS of                                             report on     PBRs will be technically
                                          design code; ii) Guidelines   Annual                                          FPMU
National Dam Safety Technical Guidelines                                         completion    verified and clearedy by
                                          for hydrologic review; iii)
and Manuals(Text) PBC                                                            of the PBRs   the DDRO
                                          Guidelines of dam safety;
                                          and vi) Manual for assessing
                                          structural safety of existing
                                          dams and v) Guidelines for
                                          preparation and installation
                                          of dam safety instruments
                                          (Yes/No)
                                          The indicator measures the
Basins utilizing hydrological information improvements in water
generated by the hydro- Meteorological    allocation by RBDAs among              Progress
                                                                        Annual                                          FPMU
stations and irrigation management        irrigation, hydropower, and            Report        Project M&E system
systems under the project for water       other uses of water by
allocation (Number)                       utilizing hydro-met data as
                                          generated, stored and



                                                                                                                               Page 43 of 86
     The World Bank
     Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)




                                           shared by the hydro-
                                           Meteorological stations on
                                           inflows into the storage as
                                           well as downstream water
                                           allocation volume confirmed
                                           by irrigation management
                                           system
                                                                                              The actual production
                                                                                              figures for the increase
                                           The indicator measures
                                                                                              in production of main
                                           people fed as a result of
                                                                                              crops due to enhanced
                                           increased agricultural
                                                                                              access to irrigation and
                                           production owing to the
                                                                                              drainage services will
                                           improved irrigation and
                                                                                              be directly collected.
                                           drainage services provided
                                                                                              The sum of the
                                           by the project including (i)
                                                                                              increased production of
                                           the area provided with new
                                                                                              food commodity ( rice
People fed as a result of increased        irrigation and drainage                 Progress
                                                                          Annual              paddy, maize, tomato     FPMU
agricultural/food production (Number of    services, and (ii) the area             Report
                                                                                              etc) from the area
people) CRI                                provided with improved
                                                                                              provided with new/
                                           irrigation and drainage
                                                                                              improved irrigation and
                                           services. This includes
                                                                                              drainage services
                                           increased production from
                                                                                              adjusted for the 10%
                                           40,000 ha of irrigated area
                                                                                              post-harvest losses,
                                           under Component 2.The
                                                                                              multiplied with unit
                                           indicator will be further
                                                                                              calorie contained in
                                           disagregated for Sex (
                                                                                              these food
                                           Female) and youth.
                                                                                              commodities, is then
                                                                                              divided by 365 times



                                                                                                                              Page 44 of 86
     The World Bank
     Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)




                                                                                              the minimum daily
                                                                                              calorie requirement
                                                                                              (2000 Kcal) to arrive at
                                                                                              the number of people
                                                                                              with strengthened food
                                                                                              and nutrition security.
                                            The indicator measures the
                                            efficiency of recovery of              Progress
Irrigation fee recovery rate by WUAs                                      Annual                                         FPMU
                                            operation and maintenance              Report     Project M&E system
(Percentage)
                                            cost by collecting irrigation
                                            fees from its members.
                                            The indicator measures the
                                            amount of contribution
                                            towards O&M expenses of
                                            the irrigation infrastructure
WUA/Farmer contributions towards O&M
                                            operationalized. The
of irrigation infrastructure rehabilitation                                        Progress
                                            amount collected include      Annual              Project M&E system         FPMU
through project interventions (amount                                              Report
                                            the contribution towards
USD)
                                            bulk water fees and fees
                                            paid by individual farmers
                                            towards irrigation and
                                            drainage services fee
                                            The indicator measures
                                            women’s representation in
Women managers in formally established the leadership positions of                 Progress
                                                                          Annual              Project M&E system         FPMU
WUA governing bodies (Percentage)           the various governance and             Report
                                            operational committees of
                                            WUAs.




                                                                                                                                Page 45 of 86
     The World Bank
     Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)




                                         The ratio of the harvested
                                         irrigated areas over the area
                                                                                Progress
Cropping intensity (by scheme)           equipped for full control     Annual                                        FPMU
                                                                                report     Project M&E system
(Percentage)                             irrigation actually irrigated
                                         (times 100 to give it in
                                         percentage).
People benefiting from climate resilient The indicator measures
infrastructure (Number of people) CRI    people in the downstream
                                         protected from climate                            The number of
                                         shocks because of the safe                        populations residing in
                                         and secure operations of                          the downstream flood
                                         the dams owing to adoption             Progress   plain areas of the dams
                                                                       Annual                                        FPMU
                                         of dam safety guidelines,              Reports    with improved
                                         practice of safety standards                      operations with
                                         and the dam safety                                enhanced safety as
                                         rehabilitation investments.                       identified by the dam
                                         The indicator will be further                     break analysis.
                                         disagregated for Sex
                                         (Female) and youth.
Dams with improved and climate-resilient The indicator measures
operational procedures and dam safety    number of dams where
measures under the Project (Number)      safety guidelines elaborating
                                         principles, practices,
                                         protocols and tools covering           Progress
                                                                       Annual              Project M&E system        FPMU
                                         structural and non-                    Report
                                         structural measures of dam
                                         safety are utilized by
                                         owners, operators and dam
                                         safety institutions. In



                                                                                                                            Page 46 of 86
     The World Bank
     Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)




                                        addition, more reliable
                                        climate resilient and stable
                                        dam operations are ensured
                                        through dam safety
                                        rehabilitation works under
                                        component 3 following the
                                        dam safety design standards
Dam rehabilitation priorities analysis  This indicator measures
completed based on Dam Safety Portfolio completion of the results of
Risk Management Analysis results (text) Dam Safety Portfolio Risk
                                        Management (DSPRM)
                                        Analysis conducted by
                                        Government. During the
                                        first year the risk
                                        prioritization index tool is to          Progress
                                                                        Annual              Project M&E system   FPMU
                                        be customized and adopted.               report
                                        During the second year,
                                        DSPRM analysis will be
                                        completed for all large
                                        dams. By project closure
                                        DSPRM will be carried out
                                        for all high risk dams
                                        defined by the analysis.
                                        Grievances registered and
                                        addressed within the GRM
Grievances registered and addressed     framework established for       Annual   Progress
                                                                                            Project M&E system   FPMU
within the GRM timeframe (Percentage) the project within the                     report
                                        agreed time limits service
                                        standards



                                                                                                                        Page 47 of 86
      The World Bank
      Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)




                                                    Using publicly disseminated
                                                    scorecards (suitably adapted
                                                    from TRIMING experience)
                                                    for each scheme are
                                                    debated annually, drawing
Farmer beneficiaries satisfied with the
                                                    on an information system       Annual                 Assessment          Project M&E system             FPMU
irrigation services received (Percentage)
                                                    which facilitate farmer
                                                    satisfaction scores reflecting
                                                    information on reform
                                                    progress, results achieved,
                                                    and access to services

Verification Protocol Table: Performance-Based Conditions

PBC 1: Development and Adoption by FMWRS of National Dam Safety Technical Guidelines and Manuals (Text)
Formula                     The total value of the PBC is US$50 million. Achievement of the PBC will enable reimbursement of funds for the dam safety rehabilitation works under
                            component 3.
Description                 PBC 1 will involve one PBC mainly consisting of preparation and approval of dam safety guidelines. PBC 1 is text and non-scalable. The dam safety guidelines
                            have to elaborate principles, practices, protocols, and tools covering structural and nonstructural measures of dam safety to be utilized by owners, operators,
                            and dam safety institutions.
                            The guidelines will include (a) standard dam design code, (b) guidelines for hydrologic review, (c) guidelines of dam safety, (d) manual for assessing structural
                            safety of existing dams, and (e) guidelines for preparation and installation of dam safety instruments.
                            The achievement of the PBC in full will enable reimbursement of the US$50 million allocated for the rehabilitation works identified under Component 3. Funds
                            releases will be made for the rehabilitation works ready to be awarded. The eligible expenses include all items of all services, goods, and works in the approved
                            contracts for rehabilitation.
Data Source/Agency          DDRO of FMWRS - dam safety guidelines
Verification Entity         Technical clearance of DDRO of FMWRS.
Procedure                   The DDRO will submit a report on completion of actions and showcasing the results achieved to the FPMU. The FPMU will assess the performance and will
                            submit its report and recommendation to the World Bank and PSC. The PSC will approve the report with ‘no objection’ from the World Bank.
PBC2: Adoption of Hydropower Masterplan by the PSC and Preparation of Priority Hydropower Project Ready for PPP (Text)
Formula                     A total of US$10 million is allocated.
Description                 PBC 2 consists of PBR 2.1. and 2.2, which are text and non-scalable.



                                                                                                                                                                                 Page 48 of 86
     The World Bank
     Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)




                              •    PBR 2.1. The master plan for hydropower development consisting of identified and ranked hydropower projects as showcased opportunities for
                                   potential developers/investors. One feasibility study and ESIA for a prioritized project from master plan will also be prepared.
                              •    PBR 2.2 Guidelines for PPP consisting of (a) selection of PPP projects; (b) institutional, legal, and administrative framework and policy support; (c)
                                   Identification of private sector financing; (d) public sector involvement; (e) options of PPP model; and (f) preparation of tender process and
                                   documents.
Data Source/Agency       FMP, ICRC and BPE
Verification Entity      Independent verification entity consisting of a team of international and local panel of experts to be engaged by the Hydropower TU with FPMU
Procedure                The FMP will submit its claims for project support with detailed activities undertaken and results achieved to the FPMU. The FPMU will engage the
                         independent verification entity who will submit the report and recommendation to the World Bank. The PSC will approve the report and payments with ‘no
                         objection’ from the World Bank.




                                                                                                                                                                                Page 49 of 86
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



                                 ANNEX 1: Implementation Arrangements and Support Plan

Implementation Arrangement

1.       The Government of Nigeria intends to mainstream the key implementation models, processes, and tools piloted
through TRIMING within the existing organizational structure of the FMWRS for ensuring sustainability of the
investments and improvements in the service delivery. The project implementation arrangement aims at developing the
human resource capacity of the FMWRS and addressing the organization development aspects of the different
institutional entities within the FMWRS. The arrangement also reflects the recommendations and outcomes of various
consultations, studies, and assessments carried out as part of the preparation. The implementation arrangement
summarizes the key structure, overall composition, main roles, and accountabilities. The elaboration of the
implementation arrangements including detailed composition, process steps, and procedures for implementing the
project are in the Project Operational Manual (POM).

2.      The main features of the implementation arrangement include (a) the FMWRS continuing to be the main
implementing agency for most of the components, while the FMP implements the improvements envisaged in the
hydropower sector with support from the ICRC and BPE on aspects around the PPP framework and action plan; (b)
evaluating and adopting appropriate areas of reforms as part of institutionalization and policy support initiatives; and (c)
implementing appropriate organizational development activities including systems improvement to mitigate the risks and
uncertainties emanating from the challenges of climate change.

Overall Institutional Model and Implementation Arrangement

3.       The overall implementation arrangement is multilayered to cover Federal-, river basin-, state-, and scheme-
level arrangements. The project implementation will be the primary responsibility of the FMWRS at the Federal level,
RBDAs at the basin level, the designated departments at the state level, and WUAs at the scheme and farm levels. To
strengthen the capacity for coordinating and implementing the project, a lean and efficient FPMU will be set up within
the Office of the Permanent Secretary, FMWRS. Also, to augment skill gaps and have a dedicated technical backstopping
support for project implementation, three TUs will be set up within the DID, DRO, and Department of Renewable and
Rural Power Access at the FMP. In the long run, these skills and competencies will also be internalized within the FMWRS
and FMP. The arrangement is also structured thematically mapping the main roles of (a) project governance and oversight;
(b) coordination and operations management; and (c) technical partnerships and collaborations. The SPIUs will be
established in those states that will be implementing activities on state-owned irrigation and dams. The overall
institutional model is summarized in Table 1.1.

                              Table 1.1. Overall Institutional Model for the SPIN Project
 Implementation      Project Governance and      Project Coordination and Operations            Technical Partnerships and
      Level                 Oversight                       Management                                 Collaborations
Federal             • FMWRS, FMP                • PMU within the Office of the              •   FMF
                    • PSC                          Permanent Secretary, FMWRS               •   FMEnv
                    • Federal Technical         • TUs of the PMU within the                 •   Federal Ministry of Agriculture
                       Committee                   Departments of Irrigation and                and Rural Development
                                                   Drainage; DRO; and Department of         •   NWRI, Kaduna
                                                   Renewable and Rural Power Access,        •   Nigeria Hydrological Services
                                                   FMP, and designated staff from the           Agency
                                                   ICRC and BPE                             •   NESREA


                                                                                                                 Page 50 of 86
         The World Bank
         Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



 Implementation      Project Governance and        Project Coordination and Operations       Technical Partnerships and
       Level                Oversight                         Management                           Collaborations
River basin         • RBDA                        • Dam safety unit of RBDA              •   Relevant state ministries (water
                                                  • Irrigation unit of RBDA                  resources or agriculture)
State               •   State Ministry of Water   • SPIU                                 •    RBDA
                        Resources
                    •   State Ministry of
                        Agriculture
                    •   State Technical
                        Committee
Scheme              •   RBDA                      •   WUA (Apex and Sector)              •   Producer organizations
                    •   State                                                                (cooperatives), private service
                                                                                             providers), and agribusinesses

Federal-Level Implementation Arrangement

4.      In addition to the existing government structures, the project will establish dedicated special purpose
implementation and coordination arrangements at the Federal level. The project-related special purpose arrangements
are only transitionary and to be internalized within the FMWRS in the long run. The Federal-level implementation
arrangement is summarized in Table 1.2.

5.       The FMWRS will be the implementing agency for most of the components of the project, while the FMP with
support from ICRC and BPE will be the agency responsible for implementing the Subcomponent 1.3 (Hydropower
Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building). The FMWRS remains the government vehicle for delivering water
resources infrastructure and irrigation and drainage services to farmers in the country. The project will strengthen the
FMWRS to function as the guardian of rules for the sustainable development and use of water resources in the country.
In addition to upgrading the skills and competencies of the department, the FMWRS will be strengthened with systems,
equipment, and tools such as operating standards and design standards to function as the agency to mitigate the risk and
uncertainty emanating from the challenges of climate change and extreme events such as floods and droughts. In the long
run, the FMWRS will be able to successfully showcase IWRM and realize the government's vision.

6.       The PSC is the principal apex governance body having senior management representation of all ministries and
institutions mandated with project implementation responsibilities.

7.      The FTC provides technical backstopping, collaborations, and partnerships for ensuring feasibility, viability, and
sustainability of interventions and investments at the national level.

8.     The FPMU is established within the office of Permanent Secretary, FMWRS, to coordinate overall project
implementation, monitoring, and reporting. The PMU will also function as Secretariat of the Steering Committee and will
be responsible for all reporting requirements to the World Bank.

9.      TUs will be established within the Departments of Irrigation and Drainage, Dam and Reservoir Operations, and
Department of Renewable and Rural Power Access at FMP. They will be strengthened with technical oversight and
technical efficiency capacities for enhancing the effectiveness of the investments and implementation processes.




                                                                                                              Page 51 of 86
         The World Bank
         Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



State-Level Implementation Arrangement

10.      The State Technical Committees provide technical backstopping, collaborations, and partnerships for ensuring
feasibility, viability, and sustainability of interventions and investments in the participating states.

11.     The SPIU will be established within the Office of the Commissioner, Department of Irrigation/Water Resources of
each participating state to coordinate overall project implementation, monitoring, and reporting of the state-financed
project. The SPIU will also function as the Secretariat of the State Technical Committee and will be responsible for all
reporting requirements to the World Bank.

                                           Table 1.2. Implementation Arrangements
   Responsible                   Composition                     Roles and Responsibilities              Accountabilities
      Entity
  FMWRS/FMP          • Headed by minister/Permanent          • Guardian of rules                   • Realization of sector
                       Secretary                             • Adoption of sector policies           vision of the Government
                     • Organized into departments            • Setting and achieving of              of Nigeria
                                                               reforms agenda
  Project Steering   • Chaired by Minister of FMWRS and      • Approving policy briefs to be       • The investments and
  Committee            co-chaired by Minister of FMP           recommended to the                    other project programs
                     • The members of the Steering             minister/Council of Ministers         conform to national
                       Committee include FMF, FMP,             for approval                          priorities and state’s
                       FMEnv, FMAFS, NWRI,                   • The POM including Standard            demands
                       representatives from the states and     Operating Procedures (SOPs)
                       RBDAs.                                  on irrigation, dam safety and
                     • Meets biannually (twice a year)         other operational aspects, and
                                                               financial and accounting
                                                               manuals for approval by
                                                               ministers/Council of Ministers
                                                             • Approving and recommending
                                                               to the FMF, the annual budget
                                                               for project implementation
                                                               and the required allocations in
                                                               the Federal budget
                                                             • Administrative approval of
                                                               proposals for investment
                                                               under the project
  Federal            • Chaired by Permanent Secretary,       • Phasing and technical               • Ensuring that the
  Technical            FMWRS                                   prioritization of investments         investments conform to
  Committee          • Technical experts from relevant       • Assessing technical feasibilities     national standards
                       departments                             of investment proposals
                     • Technical experts from                • Technical approval
                       collaborating institutions
                     • Technical experts from RBDAs
                     • Meets at least quarterly
  FPMU               • Headed by the national project        • Day-to-day operations and           • Attaining the PDO-level
                       coordinator                             overall coordination of the           and intermediate-level
                     • Reporting to Permanent Secretary,       project                               indicators
                       FMWRS                                 • Planning, budgeting,                • Attaining the PBCs
                                                               procurement, and reporting

                                                                                                                 Page 52 of 86
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



    Responsible                  Composition                      Roles and Responsibilities            Accountabilities
       Entity
  TUs               • Headed by team leader                   • Day-to-day responsibilities of    • All technical
                    • Dedicated technical experts from          technical aspects of the            interventions are
                      the departments                           project, for example, technical     feasible, functional, and
                    • Three TUs for (a) DRO, (b) irrigation     evaluation of proposals, design     conform to national
                      and drainage, and (c) hydropower          reviews, and construction           priorities.
                                                                supervision
  State Technical   • Chaired by the Permanent Secretary      • Coordination between state        • Ensuring that the
  Committee           of Agriculture/Water Resources            government and PSC                  investments conform to
                    • Technical experts from relevant         • Technical approval                  national standards
                      state departments
                    • Technical experts from RBDAs
                    • Meets at least quarterly
  State Project     • Headed by the state project             • Day-to-day operations and         • M&E of project
  Implementation      coordinator                               overall coordination of the         indicators
  Unit              • Reporting to Commissioner of              project
                      Irrigation/Water Resources              • Planning, budgeting,
                      Department                                procurement, and reporting


                                   Figure 1.2. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements




12.      Institutional reforms and PBCs. SPIN will support three institutional reforms: (a) the FMWRS will develop national
dam safety guidelines and protocols, and the PSC will adopt them to be implemented in all SPIN target dams; (b) water
laws will be developed or updated to legally recognize WUAs in all SPIN participating states; and (c) the FMWRS and FMP
will jointly develop the HMP and prepare at least one priority hydropower project based on it. To incentivize such reforms,
SPIN includes the following provisions: (a) the development and adoption of the national dam safety guidelines and

                                                                                                                Page 53 of 86
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



protocols is a PBC for the amount of US$50 million of Component 3; (b) as part of the selection criteria for irrigation
investments, each state needs to have the legal establishment of WUAs (detailed in Annex 2); and (c) the joint
development and adoption of the HMP by the FMWRS and FMP and the joint preparation of at least one hydropower
project is a PBC for the amount of US$10 million. Two PBCs are included in the project to incentivize the institutional and
policy reforms. They are the development and adoption of the dam safety guidelines by the FMWRS, which is designed as
one PBC to incentivize the critical objective for national dam safety, and the preparation of the HMP, one feasibility, study
and ESIA and PPP guidelines for hydropower project.

Procurement

13.     Procurement for the project will be carried out following the World Bank procedures: (a) the World Bank
Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers, dated September 2023; (b) Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud
and Corruption in Projects Financed by IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants, dated October 15, 2006 and revised in
January 2011 and as of July 1, 2016; and (c) other provisions stipulated in the Financing Agreements. Procurements under
the fund allocated for PBC shall also follow the above procedures and will be subject to World Bank’s prior/post review.

14.      Procurement for the federal-level interventions (including the irrigation schemes following the SPIN Model 1) will
be conducted by the SPIN FPMU to be constituted for the implementation, leveraging the already existing capacity from
the TRIMING Project, with the technical inputs and support from the TUs, that is, DID, DDRO, RBDA of the FMWRS, and
Department of Renewable and Rural Power Access under the FMP. The procurements for the state-level interventions
(including the irrigation schemes following the SPIN Model 2) will be conducted by the SPIUs to be established under the
State Ministry of Water Resources or Agriculture. The FPMU has a procurement team consisting of a senior procurement
specialist and an assistant procurement specialist with considerable experiences in procuring high-value irrigation and
dam safety contracts (such as rehabilitation of existing dams and its associated structures, rehabilitation of irrigation and
drainage works, and consultancy services for the preparation of hydropower development master plan.

15.      The SPIN Interim Project Preparatory Team has already prepared a Project Procurement Strategy for Development
(PPSD) and Procurement Plan for the first 18 months of the project. PPSD notes that FPMU of FMWRS has gained
significant experience through the implementation of World Bank-financed projects, particularly TRIMING while
assessment of the procurement capacity and risk of the State PIUs will be carried out as and when the States are selected.
The Procurement Plan identified activities with a total of US$91 million estimated cost covering mostly the consultancy
services (US$19 million) and civil works (US$72 million) of which, the major two procurement packages are
construction/rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage works (US$32 million) and rehabilitation of the existing dams and
their associated structures (US$32 million). The PPSD and the Procurement Plan will be updated as and when necessary.
Details of the procurement packages with related procurement method and arrangement with specific market approach
are stated in the PPSD and Procurement Plan.

16.     The appropriate World Bank Standard Procurement Documents will be used for all international competitive
procurement. For national competitive procurement, the Federal Government standard bidding documents including the
amendments incorporated in line with the paragraphs 5.2 and 5.3 of the World Bank Procurement Regulations will be
used. The latest versions of Standard Procurement Documents as published on the World Bank’s external website shall be
used for all international competitive procurements.

17.    There is a state procurement agency in each of the states of Nigeria with trained procurement staff that could be
deployed to support the SPIN Project’s SPIUs. However, the engagement of such procurement staff shall be subject to
World Bank clearance based on qualifications and experiences in managing development partner-supported projects. The
procurement specialist at the FPMU would also provide fiduciary support to the state teams to ensure timely

                                                                                                             Page 54 of 86
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



implementation of procurement activities. Training on the World Bank’s Procurement Regulations and the online STEP
would be provided to the SPIN procurement team within 30 days of the project signing, and refreshment training will be
organized from time to time.

Financial Management

18.      The FPFMD and PFMUs are departments/units in the Office of Accountant General of the Federation/States
responsible for providing FM functions and Designated Account management for all World Bank-financed projects
implemented at the federal and state ministries, departments, and agencies. The FPFMD and PFMUs shall be responsible
for deploying FM staff to the FPMU and SPIUs, oversight of the project's financial and reporting arrangements, and the
funds management in all project management and implementing units. The FPMU will be established at the FMWRS
headed by a national project coordinator and financial management staff from FPFMD and shall be the principal
implementing unit for the project. The SPIU will be established within the Ministries of Irrigation/Water Resources of each
participating state and shall be headed by a project coordinator supported by experts from the Ministries of
Irrigation/Water Resources along with FM staff from the PFMU.

19.     Planning and budgeting. To prepare annual work plans and budgets under the SPIN Project, heads of sections
within the FPMU/PIUs shall prepare work plans derived from the project’s components; these will be consolidated by the
project coordinator into the FPMU/SPIU’s annual work plans and forwarded to the World Bank for review and
concurrence. The approved annual work plan shall be the basis for developing the annual budget. The project accountant
shall prepare the draft annual budget after consultations with the heads of sections and project coordinator in the
FPMU/SPIUs. The FPMU/SPIU’s budget committee chaired by the project coordinator, shall review the draft annual budget
and forward the same to the steering committee for final approval. The project coordinator shall send a copy of the annual
budget to the World Bank at least two months before the beginning of the applicable budget year, and the budget should
be cleared by the World Bank at least one month before commencement of the applicable budget year. The project
coordinator shall ensure the final budget is circulated to the concerned project staff.

20.      Accounting. The project accountants at the FPMU and each SPIU shall be primarily responsible for ensuring
adequate record keeping and financial reporting of the project funds. At the FPMU and each SPIU, project funds will be
accounted on a cash basis in accordance with the International Public Sector Accounting Standards; the books of account
shall preferably be automated and maintained using accounting software; and the chart of accounts will be structured to
reflects all project activities, financing, and expenditures as described in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) and
Financing Agreement. The project accountants at the FPMU and each SPIU shall ensure that interim financial reports (IFRs)
and audit reports are submitted to the World Bank at the times specified in the Disbursement and Financial Information
Letter and Financing Agreement, as all IFRs and audit reports will be prepared separately by the FPMU and each SPIU. The
‘Generic Project Financial Manual for Donor Funded Projects in Nigeria’ issued by the FPFMD shall be adopted by the
FPMU/SPIUs as the Financial Procedures Manual for the SPIN Project.

21.     Financial reporting. The FPMU and each SPIU shall prepare and submit separate IFRs to the World Bank biannually
which shall be due 45 days after the end of each semester. The IFRs shall include, at minimum, (a) sources and uses of
funds; (b) uses of funds by project components; (c) US dollar Designated Account activity statements; and (d) reconciliation
statement for the Designated Account, drawdown accounts, any other project account, and their relative bank
statements. The IFRs shall encompass the total project activities at the FPMU and PIUs as described in the PAD and legal
agreements. They should reflect all financing and expenditures from government contributions (if received). They will be
subject to limited reviews by the FPMU’s and each PIU’s external auditor/internal auditors, as agreed with the World Bank,
before submission.


                                                                                                            Page 55 of 86
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



22.     Internal control. The internal controls of the project shall include a framework of the Financial Manual for Donor
Funded Projects in Nigeria issued by the FPFMD and adopted by the FPMU/SPIUs, segregation of functions/duties,
experienced and qualified project FM staff who are well trained in World Bank procedures and disbursement requirements,
and independent and well-trained internal auditors. The FM staff will be appointed by the Accountant General for the
Federation, and states, subject to clearance by the World Bank. The FPFMD and SPIUs will be responsible for internal audit
functions in the project. The Internal Audit Units will carry out a risk-based internal audit review in addition to the
traditional compliance audit and nonfinancial or operational internal audit. Biannual internal audit reports will be
prepared by the internal auditors and shared with the World Bank for review.

23.     External auditing. The FPMU and each SPIU shall prepare separate annual project financial statements, covering
project activities at the FPMU and SPIUs. The annual financial statements will be prepared in accordance with the
International Public Sector Accounting Standards. They shall be audited by an independent external auditor appointed by
the FPMU and each SPIU. The external auditor’s appointment shall be based on terms of reference acceptable to the
World Bank. The auditor shall express an opinion on the annual financial statements in compliance with International
Standards on Auditing. In addition to the audit report, the external auditors will prepare a management letter. The project
accountants at the FPMU and each SPIU shall submit a copy of the audited financial statements along with the
management letter to the World Bank not later than six months after the end of each financial year.

24.     Funds flow. The FPMU at the FMWRS shall maintain one Designated Account in US dollar at the Central Bank of
Nigeria, along with one drawdown account denominated in Nigerian naira. Funds from the Designated Account will be
credited to the drawdown account to finance eligible expenditures. The FMP will also be required to maintain and operate
one drawdown account in Nigerian naira at the FPMU. For the states having subsidiary loan agreement with the FMF, each
state’s PIU shall maintain one Designated Account in US dollars along with one drawdown account denominated in
Nigerian naira at a commercial bank acceptable to the World Bank. Funds from the Designated Accounts will be credited
to the drawdown accounts to finance eligible expenditures. Based on request from the FPMU or the SPIU, the World Bank
will advance financing proceeds into their respective designated accounts. Advances into the Designated Accounts shall
be made in the currency of the Designated Accounts, and the FMPU/SPIU shall draw down funds from their respective
Designated Accounts into their drawdown accounts on a need basis to finance eligible project expenditures.

25.     Disbursement. After initial advance to the Designated Accounts, replenishment will be done against withdrawal
applications supported by the Statements of Expenditures. Authorized account signatories for the federal and state FPMU
and SPIUs will be as listed in panels (A and B) in Table 1.3. One signatory from each panel will jointly sign the project
financial documents/instruments.
               Table 1.3. Authorized Account Signatories for the Federal and State Project Financial Management
                                             Panel A                                              Panel B
 Main                 The project coordinator                                 Director FPFMD (Federal)/Head of PFMU (State)
 Alternate            A director in the implementing department               Project accountant

                                           Table 1.4. Categories of Eligible Expenditure
                                Category                          Amount of the               Percentage of
                                                               Financing Allocated         Expenditures to be
                                                               (expressed in USD)                Financed
                                                                                           (inclusive of Taxes)
                (1) Goods, works, non-consulting                    115,000,000                    100%
                    services, consulting services,
                    Training, and Operating Costs for


                                                                                                                  Page 56 of 86
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



                                 Category                          Amount of the                Percentage of
                                                                Financing Allocated          Expenditures to be
                                                                (expressed in USD)                 Financed
                                                                                             (inclusive of Taxes)
                     Parts 1.1.1, 1.1.2, 1.1.3, 1.3, 2
                     (except 2.2), 3, and 4 of the Project

                 (2) Goods, works, non-consulting                      5,000,000                    100%
                     services, consulting services,
                     Training, and Operating Costs for
                     Parts 1.2 and 4 of the Project

                 (3) Goods, works, non-consulting                    320,000,000                    100%
                     services, consulting services,
                     Training, and Operating Costs for
                     Part 2.2

                 (4) Eligible PBC Expenditures for Parts              60,000,000                    100%
                     1.1.3 and 3 of the Project

                 TOTAL AMOUNT                                        500,000,000


26.      FM implementation support mission arrangement. FM implementation support will be consistent with a risk-
based approach. The implementation support frequency will be based initially on the assessed FM risk rating and
subsequently on the updated FM risk rating during implementation. On-site review will cover all aspects of FM, including
internal control systems, the overall fiduciary control environment, and tracing transactions from the bidding process to
disbursements, as well as Statement of Expenditures review. Additional implementation support activities will include
desk review of periodic IFRs, quarterly internal audit reports, audited annual financial statements, and management
letters, as well as timely follow-up of issues that arise and updating of the FM rating of the project as appropriate.

                                                      Table 1.5. FM Action Plan
 No.                            Action Plan                                   Timeline                  Responsible Entity
  1    Appointment of project FM staff by the Office of Accountant    Within 30 days after         FPFMD/FMWRS and
       General subject to clearance by the World Bank                 effectiveness                SMWR/PFMU
  2    Update/create chart of accounts in new or existing             Within 30 days after         FPFMD/FMWRS and
       computerized accounting system for the SPIN Project            effectiveness                SMWR/PFMU
       activities
Note: SMWR = State Ministry of Water Resources.

Environmental and Social

27.      The project will be implemented using the guidelines provided in the ESF documents. Site-specific instruments
will be prepared for each dam and irrigation scheme, following the steps articulated in the ESMP, RPF, and ESCP. When
the dams and irrigation schemes are identified, the client will be required to screen each subproject. Based on the
screening, the recommended instruments (ESIAs/ESMPs/RAPs/site-specific plans, including biodiversity and OHS plans)
will be prepared.



                                                                                                                    Page 57 of 86
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



28.     Project implementation will require each SPIU/RBDA to engage an environmental/OHS and social officer,
including a gender officer. SPIUs will require qualified environmental/OHS officers from the State Ministry of Environment
and social officers from the Department of Lands and Gender/GBV officers from the SMWA to be deployed as PIU officers
before project effectiveness. A Security Adviser will be hired no later than three months after effectiveness. The Project
Implementation Manual will include detailed tasks and responsibilities of the officers. The FPMU shall set up an E&S unit,
leveraging the experience available from the TRIMING Project. The environmental and social officers will work closely with
the dam safety experts engaged by the SPIUs/FPMU.

29.     Although the project will not construct a hydropower dam, the preparation of the HMP will necessitate the
preparation of environmental and social instruments. The client will prepare a SESA and site-specific full assessments such
as ESIAs.

30.     Per the ESCP's requirements, quarterly reports will be submitted to the World Bank, while the contractors will
submit monthly reports to the SPIUs/RBDAs. The FPMU/SPIU/RBDA shall operationalize a GRM with committees
established at the FPMU, SPIU, RBDA, and dam scheme levels. The roles and responsibilities of the GRM committee will
be indicated in the GRM Manual, which will be developed by the FPMU, including alternative channels for grievance. The
project shall also operationalize a GBV-sensitive GRM and a labor GRM for contractors and their workers.

31.      Land acquisition, restrictions on land use, and involuntary resettlement. The activities under the project,
especially those related to the expansion of irrigation, may likely result in land acquisition/displacement or disruption of
income or livelihood sources. Given that the locations of subprojects are not yet known at this stage of the project
preparation, the project prepared and disclosed an RPF. The RPF aims to clarify resettlement principles, organizational
arrangements, and design criteria to be applied to subprojects or project components to be prepared during project
implementation. When specific subproject locations are identified, an RAP or Livelihood Restoration Plan proportionate
to the potential risks and impacts of the project will be prepared. While the project is not expected to entail significant
land acquisition and displacement, its activities may cause temporary loss of livelihood during the rehabilitation of the
irrigation schemes and physical and economic displacements. Moreover, the project activities will not commence until
such specific plans have been finalized and approved by the World Bank and prompt compensation and resettlement
assistance payments are made to project-affected persons. For the Model 2 participating states, costs associated with
compensation and resettlement assistance will be provided through the state counterpart funds, while for Model 1
arrangement, the FPMU will cover the cost for compensation and resettlement assistance similar to the TRIMING Project.
Specific attention will be given to payment of appropriate compensation to affected persons as indicated in the RAPs and
the development of GRM at the community level that will be accessible to all stakeholders as well as arrangements for
the monitoring the implementation of RAPs.

Overall Implementation Support Needs

32.     The World Bank team will comprise members with different skills and required experience for successful project
implementation. Tables 1.6 and 1.7 outline the expected staff/weeks and travel needed to ensure the actions and
schedules are appropriately resourced.




                                                                                                            Page 58 of 86
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



                                             Table 1.6. World Bank Implementation Support
                                                                                                               Resource Estimate
    Time                              Focus                                Skills Needed from Task Team
                                                                                                                    (US$)
  First 12     • Pipeline project readiness                          Irrigation, dam safety, WRM, water            500,000
  months       • Procurement preparation pre-award                   institutions, hydropower experts,
               • Capacity building                                   procurement, FM, environmental, social,
                                                                     and gender/GBV
  12–48        • Review of progress in tender process and            Irrigation, dam safety, WRM, water             1,500,000
  months         construction                                        institutions, hydropower experts,
               • M&E, ESF and FM                                     procurement, FM
               • Capacity building
  48–60        • Closing out open contracts                          Irrigation, dam safety, WRM, and                600,000
  months       • New pipeline development                            hydropower experts
               • M&E, ESF, and FM
                                               Table 1.7. Required Support Skills
                                                      Number of           Number of Trips
               Skills Needed                                                                              Comments
                                                     Staff Weeks             per Year
Team leaders (water/irrigation specialist)                20                   3–4             Task Team Leader and co-Task
                                                                                               Team Leader based in Abuja
Hydropower specialists                                  24–30                       3–4        One based in
                                                                                               Abuja/Washington, DC
Energy specialist                                       10–15                       n.a.       Based in Abuja
Water specialist                                        10–15                       n.a.       Based in Abuja/Washington DC
Dam safety specialist                                     5-6                       1-2        Based in Washington DC
Procurement specialists                                 10–15                       n.a.       Based in Abuja
FM specialist                                              6                        n.a.       Based in Abuja
Environmental specialists                                 5–6                       n.a.       Based in Abuja
Social specialists                                        5–6                       n.a.       Based in Abuja
GBV specialists                                           2–3                       n.a.       Based in Abuja
Gender specialists                                        1–2                       n.a.       —
Operational support                                      5–10                        2         —
Specialized technical experts                            5–10                       3–5        Initially 5, reduced to 3 later
Administrative support                                   5-10                       n.a.       Based in Abuja




                                                                                                                   Page 59 of 86
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



                        ANNEX 2: Irrigation Investment - State Selection and Investment Staging

1.      This annex describes the process for selection of states and subprojects on irrigation that would be financed under
the project, based on transparent prioritization and performance criteria. It also describes in detail the activities to be
undertaken under Subcomponent 2.1 on WUAs.

I.      State Selection and Investment Staging

2.      The Federal Government has a vision to achieve 500,000 ha of irrigated land by 2030. This vision cannot be
achieved by the Federal Government alone; partnership between the Federal Government and states to achieve the target
has become imperative, as highlighted during the National Council on Water Resources meeting of 2018. The SPIN Project
provides a good platform to pilot a Federal Government-State partnership model on irrigation and drainage development.
SPIN aims to support the national and state irrigation and drainage development programs over a five-year period (2025–
2031). The project would promote two distinct irrigation and drainage management models, which is an improvement on
the TRIMING model, as outlined in Figure 2.1.

                         Figure 2.1. Evolution of Irrigation Management Models from TRIMING to SPIN




State Selection

3.        Eligibility criteria. The geographic coverage of the program is nationwide; however, states’ participation would
be subject to compliance with the eligibility and readiness criteria agreed for this project. The project will strengthen the
institutional and technical aspects of irrigation and drainage management in Nigeria. The number of state schemes to be
included in the project will be subject to availability of project funds.

4.      To be considered, interested states must do the following:

        •    Submit in writing, expression of interest to implement either SPIN Model 1 or SPIN Model 2 (Figure 2.1).
             Table 2.4 provides the tentative list of investments for Models 1 and 2. In both cases, the states must
             demonstrate readiness for project implementation and readiness to allocate counterpart funds.
        •    For SPIN Model 1, the expression of interest must state the Federal (RBDA) scheme on which the state is
             willing to partner with the Federal Government.


                                                                                                             Page 60 of 86
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



        •    For both SPIN Models 1 and 2, the state must submit documentation demonstrating the state’s CIC (Figure
             2.2). The project will implement only rehabilitation and expansion of existing schemes and not development
             of new schemes.

                                       Figure 2.2. Prioritization and State Staging Process




5.      To date, 31 states have expressed interest in SPIN and were subsequently invited to document and submit their
compliance with both the demonstrated commitment and technical readiness criteria during the stakeholders’
engagement workshops organized at the six geopolitical zones of Nigeria. The responses submitted by the states to
document the criteria were assessed in the plenary during the workshops held between May 12 and 15, 2024, for South-
East, South-West, and North-East zones and May 19 and 22, 2024, for North-Central, North-West, and South-South. The
outcome of the state selection process and prioritization criteria would also be presented to the Nigeria Governors’ Forum.
Table 2.1 presents the list of interested states.

                                            Table 2.1. States that Expressed Interest in SPIN

                                                            Model 1
               North-Central    North-East      North-West        South-East       South-West   South-South
               Benue            Borno           Jigawa            Abia             Lagos        Akwa Ibom
               Kogi             Taraba          Katsina           Anambra          Osun         Cross River
               Kwara            Yobe            Kebbi             Enugu            Ekiti        Delta
               Nasarawa                         Sokoto            Imo                           Edo
               Plateau                          Zamfara
               Niger




                                                                                                              Page 61 of 86
            The World Bank
            Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



                                                                Model 2
                  North-Central      North-East     North-West         South-East        South-West         South-South
                                     Adamawa        Kano               Ebonyi            Ekiti              Cross River
                                     Bauchi
                                     Borno          Katsina
                                     Gombe          Kebbi

6.       Prioritization and state staging criteria. The FMWRS and the World Bank will use the documentations to jointly
assess interested states and group them into Category 1 and Category 2 states. Category 1 states would represent all
states opting for SPIN Model 1 and Category 2 represents states opting for SPIN Model 2. The ability to participate in SPIN
from among eligible states depends upon the demonstrated commitment and implementation readiness based on a set
of prioritization criteria. Eligible states must submit to the FMWRS a detailed proposal demonstrating their commitment
and readiness, which will be assessed, and states will be selected based on the criteria. The prioritization criteria include
three minimum conditions, which need to be compulsorily complied by the states before submitting their proposal.

7.       The minimum conditions for prioritization are (a) availability of/willingness to pass necessary legislation to create
public irrigation units/entities, adopt participatory irrigation methodology, and provide corporate body status to
WUAs/Apex WUAs; (b) resolution to participate in the SPIN program and avail loan from the World Bank by signing
subsidiary financing agreement; and (c) budget provision committing capital and operation maintenance expenses of
existing state public irrigation assets and committing co-financing requirements. To help the FMWRS verify the minimum
conditions, states must include documents for verifications, which may include (a) existing state policies, state
enactments, investment plans, and annual and master plans; (b) statements of the state/resolutions; and (c) passed
budgets, audited financial statements, procurement committee minutes, and so on.

8.       Both Category 1 and Category 2 states would be assessed against the demonstrated commitment criteria and
technical readiness criteria, as presented in figure 2.2, to inform transparent decisions on state selection. Only states that
have met the demonstrated commitment criteria will be progressed for assessment of technical readiness. Passing both
the demonstrated commitment and technical readiness criteria is mandatory for admission into the SPIN program. In
addition, Category 1 states would have to sign a memorandum of understanding with the RBDA overseeing the federal
irrigation scheme which the state is interested in. Compliance with the criteria would have to be achieved no later than
12 months after project effectiveness.

9.       With the minimum conditions as the primary filter, the FMWRS will evaluate the states self-proposing for
inclusion under SPIN for their commitment and readiness objectively using prioritization criteria. The FMWRS, in
collaboration with RBDAs, will sensitize the commissioners of all eligible states to the prioritization criteria, steps for
evolution, means of verification, and so on, which are further elaborated in the Project Implementation Manual. The
prioritization criteria for identifying states to participate in the project are included in Table 2.2.

                                                    Table 2.2. Prioritization Criteria
  Sl. No.                                  Prioritization Criteria                                         Means of Verification
     1         Primary feasibility. Existence of a dam with adequate filled water                Feasibility study reports
               storage/adequate catchment area of reliable water source, which can
               feasibly be rehabilitated to harness adequate storage with potential to
               irrigate at least 500 ha
    2          Asset management. Assessed technical feasibility for the rehabilitation           Project feasibility reports
               and development of both storage and conveyance structures optimally
               leveraging the sunk cost for achieving the potential

                                                                                                                               Page 62 of 86
            The World Bank
            Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



  Sl. No.                                   Prioritization Criteria                                   Means of Verification
     3         Potential for irrigated agriculture. Proposed command area has               Study reports documenting the agro-
               prevalence of suitable agro-climatic-, land-, and soil-related factors       climatic and soil descriptions cultivation
               conducive for crop husbandry, with a potential to achieve cropping           practices and such other status reports
               intensity and crop diversification.
    4          Conflicting uses. No pronounced externalities with other uses of water and   Detailed description of externalities if
               no conflict with other users including interstate water issues               any.
    5          Social relevance. The existence of majority small farmers and                Detailed statics of type of farmers with
               sharecroppers including women farmers expected to be benefiting from         classification criteria
               irrigation
    6          Financial capacity. Commitment for counterpart funding including cost of     Statement of the state committing
               setting up initial readiness aspects until project funds are available       budget allocation/budget statement
               including awareness campaigns, setting up the state PMU, and so on.
    7          Human resource capacity. Especially related to technical personnel and       Existing organogram showing filled in
               social, environmental, and financial management                              positions
    8          Environmental factors. No adverse environmental impacts both from            Environmental assessment by the World
               storage and conveyance rehabilitation and proven capacity to implement       Bank
               environmental safeguards.
    9          Social aspects. No adverse social impacts including major rehabilitation     Social assessment by World Bank
               and resettlement issues. Adequate capacity to implement social
               safeguards aspects
    10         Institutional assessment. Proven fiduciary capacity for both FM and          Fiduciary assessment by the FM and
               procurement functions                                                        procurement teams of the World Bank
    11         Convergence and coordination. The state department/units responsible         Statement of the state with directive to
               for environment, agriculture, finance, procurement, planning, and women      the sub-sector agencies
               development are working in close coordination and are committed to
               converge their activities at the scheme level involving WUAs and Apex
               WUA including commitment of sub-sectoral budgets and ongoing
               programs.

10.      The participating states will be allocated project funds based on graduating stages, but the actual release will
depend upon assessment of performance. The state staging consists of readiness condition and milestones to be achieved
to access funds capped at each stage. The entry-level stage mainly consists of funding for planning studies, activities to
satisfy achievement of minimum capacity, system establishment, technical assistance, and so on. Stage 2 consists of tasks
that are based on agreed work plans covering the devolved activities. The work plans will clearly specify the milestones
and deliverables. Stage 3 consists of larger allocation to continue with the updated work plans. The stage-wise allocation
is predetermined, increasing by stages but incentivized based on assessed performance. The stage-wise readiness criteria,
allocation, potential activities for each stage, assessment methodology, and the basis for dynamic allocation for financing,
and so on are further described in the Project Implementation Manual.

11.     A further criterion on implementation and disbursement readiness will apply to Category 2 states only, as they
are expected to have state-level implementation units. Implementation in Category 1 states will be managed at the
Federal-level PMU.

12.      The managed allocation of project funds to participating states is intended to promote implementation
performance. States will access growing levels of funding based on their compliance with readiness and performance
conditions. At entry, states will benefit from federally implemented technical assistance and planning studies, toward
satisfying commitment and readiness conditions (Stage 1). The states having satisfied capacity and readiness conditions
will have access to an initial capped amount of investment funding to start implementing an agreed work plan on their

                                                                                                                      Page 63 of 86
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



preferred scheme identified during the states’ engagement held between May 12 and 15, 2024, for South-East, South-
West, and North-East zones and May 19 and 22, 2024, for North-Central, North-West, and South-South (Stage 2). Each
state will have the opportunity to subsequently access larger capped tranches of funding to scale up scope of their
approved investments (Stage 3), based on their performance in Stage 1. In all stages, state performance will consider the
timeliness and compliance of consultancies, design, procurement, and implementation tasks. Excessive delays or
compliance deviations in procurement or in implementation will be factors in potential decisions for reduced or deferred
allocation of new funding or even for a reallocation of noncommitted funding. The proposed starting and fund allocation
mechanisms are further discussed in Table 2.3.

                                                     Table 2.3. State Staging Process

                               Stage 1                               Stage 2                              Stage 3

 Overall          • Expressed interest                • Available legislation for establishment of WUAs in the irrigation
 Commitment       • Commitment to support               and drainage sector
                    WUAs and budget line              • Available budget line for WUAs O&M needs
                                                      • Counterpart financing commitment released to Designated
                                                        Account
                                                      • Project security
                                                      • Compliance with ESDD

 Component 1      • Technical assistance support      • Establishment of WUAs across all eligible schemes
                    to eligible states at entry to
                    meet overall commitment
                    criteria to unlock Stage 2
                    investments

 Component 2      • Rapid review of feasibility,      • Initial investment package              • Additional investment
                    design, and bidding                 approved for preferred scheme up          package for scale-up
                    documents                           to US$5 million                           approved up to US$10
                  • Initiate procurement process                                                  million
                    up to award stage only
 Component 3                                          • Investment package approved for
                                                        water source (dam) connected to
                                                        the preferred schemes
                                                      • Investment package approved for
                                                        dams identified via Risk Analysis
                                                        Assessment and selected for
                                                        rehabilitation

13.      States are expected to progress through the various stages toward full implementation of the planned project
activities. This will be based on regular reviews of state performance every six months, based on the recommendation of
the National Project Management Unit and concurrence of the World Bank. In addition, the annual performance of states
will be assessed to determine whether the state should continue at that stage or be dropped. The implementation
performance criteria will include SPIU performance (related to overall project activity facilitation, technical, fiduciary, and
ESF) and state investment implementation performance including scheme completion, WUA establishment, and O&M
budget provision or other sustainability conditions.




                                                                                                                    Page 64 of 86
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



II.     Mobilization and Development of WUAs

14.       The homegrown model of WUAs initiated under the TRIMING Project will be replicated and scaled up in project
areas. Subcomponent 2.1 will focus on mobilizing WUGs of farmers around ‘secondary’ irrigation and drainage canals as
building blocks for establishing WUAs as legally registered entities taking over fully the O&M at scheme levels
built/rehabilitated under the project. WUAs will be strengthened as inclusive, self-managed and accountable institutions
of farmers. WUAs are primarily responsible for maintaining the secondary- and field-level water conveyance system,
facilitating crop planning, estimating water requirements, ensuring equitable and sustainable irrigation scheduling,
delivering irrigation services to members, and fixing and collecting irrigation and drainage service fees from members to
recover the O&M cost to help them sustainably manage the ‘last mile’ water conveyance system. The main aim of
Subcomponent 2.1 is to reverse the management of public irrigation from ‘top down’ to ‘bottom-up’ and enhance the
level of ownership and acceptance by member farmers irrigation and drainage services.

15.     The management and running of the WUAs shall ensure social, economic, environmental, and institutional
sustainability. WUAs must follow good governance procedures, implement social accountability mechanisms, and
optimize water resources utilization. Special attention shall be given to vulnerable sections of the membership such as
small farmers, sharecroppers, and women-headed farm holds so that they are meaningfully included in WUA leadership
and membership and benefits. The management of infrastructure and planning for resource utilization shall be climate
smart to ensure resilience from extreme climate events.

16.      WUAs have to function in a gender-sensitive manner. The key principles to be followed in developing WUAs
include participation of women members of the farm families in the membership and activities, ensuring systematic
engagement of women as participants and decision-makers in WUAs. In addition, targeted leadership development for
women members should include structured consultations with women on key decisions to be made, women-friendly
training and learning events, and so on.

17.     The timing for initiating and developing of WUAs must start sufficiently early to ensure that the users are
engaged up front. The initiation of WUAs must synchronize with the physical development of the irrigation system. By the
time the schemes are developed and ready for handing over, WUAs should have been established and initial capacity
building completed. WUAs must be readied to take over and operate the schemes as soon as the facilities are handed over
including engagement of technical staff for operation, decision-making on ISFs, and systems for collecting receivables from
the members.

18.    To mobilize, empower, and build the institutional capacity of farmer organizations and WUAs and help them
graduate into higher-level federated arrangements, Apex WUAs will be formed. Organically aggregating and functionally
networking WUAs into an Apex WUA as a federation will help maximize the performance and results of member WUAs.
The Apex WUAs will help enable greater bargaining power to farmers, broad-based representation, and aggregation of
demands and services for achieving economies of scale, thereby deepening transformation of the irrigation sector.

19.       In partnership and collaboration with RBDAs and state governments, WUAs are expected to ensure not only
critical irrigation to agriculture but also sustainable and resilient management of the public irrigation system. The
activities include enhancing organizational and human resource capacity of WUAs and formalizing the interrelationship
with state governments and RBDAs. In geographic areas where state governments are not coming forward to partner with
the FMWRS to take up implementation of SPIN Model 1, RBDAs will continue to provide support to WUAs.




                                                                                                           Page 65 of 86
          The World Bank
          Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



20.      WUAs will be established in all irrigation schemes under the project and capacity building will be provided. Main
activities to be carried out and to be financed under the project will include

          (a)   Sensitizing, mobilizing, and establishing the organizational structure, processes, and functions of WUAs
                through the provision of technical assistance including adapting, updating, and/or customizing model bylaws,
                rules of business, and SOPs to guide management of WUAs;
          (b)   Building awareness and developing a shared understanding among members of WUAs on key principles and
                rules of participatory irrigation model, including member’s rights and duties;
          (c)   Building the skills and competencies of WUA leadership and committee members, including staff of WUAs,
                to plan MOM, continued management and operation of irrigation services, transparent fiduciary
                management (including fixing of service charges, recovery of MOM expenses, and transparent accounting
                and reporting), accountable decision-making, and so on;
          (d)   Facilitating cross learning from well-performing WUAs and organizing peer-to-peer learning and sharing from
                implementation champions—both farmer members and WUA staff.;
          (e)   Installing simple user-friendly software systems for billing and collection of user fees and other payments
                from members, including easy-to-use member database to help crop planning and irrigation scheduling
                including training of user farmers/staff;
          (f)   Implementing a performance tracking and grading mechanism as a tool to implement organization
                development activities to address performance challenges and ensure sustainability of WUAs;
          (g)   Providing support to establish offices, computers, and operating systems and other initial investments
                required for smoother functioning of WUAs;
          (h)   Providing transitional contributions to MOM costs of irrigation schemes on a declining basis as block grants;31
          (i)   Formalizing the devolved co-management arrangement for the O&M of the irrigation schemes through the
                signing of a tripartite memorandum of understanding among WUAs/Apex WUAs with state governments
                and RBDAs, detailing the roles and accountabilities of each of the parties including the consensus on assured
                bulk water supply, bulk water pricing, major periodic maintenance of the system, basis of measurement, and
                so on;
          (j)   Facilitating link-up and collaboration with agriculture production enhancing and marketing/processing
                initiatives and agencies, both public and private sector;
          (k)   Establishing Apex WUAs and supporting the setting up of their offices and minimum administrative and
                technical staff; and
          (l)   Training dedicated WUA facilitators at the state level and within RBDAs where states opt out of MOM
                responsibilities.

21.   As already showcased by the TRIMING Project, women will play a critical role as members of WUAs to deliver and
manage water resources effectively. The outcome will be assessed by an appropriate indicator measuring the number of
women decision-makers in WUAs. Implementation of Subcomponent 2.1 will be done by the FPMU in close collaboration



31 WUAs are expected to prepare a business plan covering four years of activities and the project will support block grants to the tune of 80 percent

in year 1, 60 percent in year 2, and tapering to 20 percent in year 4. The steps and formats for preparing the business plans will be elaborated in
the knowledge package for WUAs and the POM.

                                                                                                                                    Page 66 of 86
         The World Bank
         Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



with RBDAs and states. The coordination of activities and oversight will be taken up by the state governments. RBDAs will
set up a dedicated WUA unit as part of the bulk water supply to provide facilitation support to WUAs and the states.

Potential List of Model 1 Irrigation Schemes
22.     Devolution of scheme-level irrigation systems from the federal scheme to state governments (Public Irrigation
Devolution Model 1) has been discussed in the main text. Table 2.4 provides the potential list of Model 1 schemes, which
have been identified by the FMWRS based on the selection criteria discussed above. The final list will be confirmed as
soon as the state selection processes are completed before the project effectiveness.

                                   Table 2.4. List of Potential Irrigation Schemes under Component 2
              No.                Scheme                          State                        RBDA            Service Area (ha)
               1        Kampe                          Kogi                                Lower Niger              3,000
               2        Middle Ogun                    Ogun                                Ogun-Oshun               3,000
               3        Ada Rice                       Enugu                               Anambra Imo              3,000
               4        Turunku                        Kaduna                              Upper Niger              1,250
               5        Duke Lade                      Kwara                               Lower Niger              3,000
               6        Lower Ogun                     Ogun                                Ogun-Oshun               3,500
               7        Guyuk                          Adamawa, Gombe, and Borno           Lower Benue             17,000
               8        Lower Taraba (Wuro Keso)       Taraba                              Upper Benue              5,000
               9        Cham Dam                       Gombe                               Upper Benue              3,000
              10        Balanga32                      Gombe                               Upper Benue              2,800
              11        Doma                           Nasarawa                            Lower Benue              2,000
              12        Naka                           Benue                               Lower Benue              1,000
              13        Obagaji                        Benue                               Lower Benue              1,000
              14        Tede                           Nasarawa                            Lower Benue              3,000
              15        Oguma                          Kogi                                Lower Niger              1,000
              16        Wase                           Plateau                             Lower Benue              1,000
                        Subtotal                                                                                   53,550




32 Balanga Irrigation scheme under Gombe State government and is considered as a candidate for Model 2. All other schemes are under the Federal

Government (Model 1).

                                                                                                                             Page 67 of 86
          The World Bank
          Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



                                                  ANNEX 3: Technical Note on Dam Safety

I. Detailed Project Description

Activity 1.1.1: Strengthening of dam safety institutional structure, including development and adoption of improved dam
safety technical guidelines and manuals (US$4 million)

1.      This activity will strengthen the capacity and improve the management framework for dam owners, operators,
and agencies overseeing dam safety to help address dam safety risks in line with the ESF including those from climate
change-exacerbated floods and droughts33 by (a) setting up a digital dam asset management system; (b) strengthening
the dam safety institutional structure and developing improved dam safety technical guidelines and manuals to
complement NESREA’s checklist; and (c) institutionalizing capacity assessment and delivering capacity building for the
personnel involved in dam safety. It will help the FMWRS deploy multidisciplinary specialists and purchase necessary
equipment to perform dam safety mandates both at the federal and RBDA levels, consistent with the legislation for dam
safety requirements.

2.     Nigeria’s digital dam asset management system will be built on and complement the existing Digital Dam
Repository Application developed under the TRIMING Project. It will estimate the funds required to meet the regular
MOM and rehabilitation requirements of dams over a multiyear period. It will also monitor the utilization of the
investments and allow dam owners, operators, and dam safety staff to access and update transactions information in real
time.

3.       The project will help develop comprehensive dam safety guidelines consisting of standards, operational
manuals, and rules to help dam owners and operators comply with dam safety requirements. The guidelines will cover
structural and nonstructural dam safety measures and will include operating standards, reservoir operation manual,
reporting requirements, MOM planning and budgeting, emergency action planning, warning system, information to
prepare public awareness campaigns, and strategies to tackle climate change. The guidelines will also contain the oversight
and monitoring mechanism including formats for reporting on dam safety aspects. By reducing the risk of dam breaches
and failures—through the development and adoption of safety standards and regulations—and ensuring staff are properly
trained to adjust operations under low- and high-water conditions, the resilience of the project area residents to extreme
water-related weather events will increase.

4.       The development and adoption of the dam safety guidelines by the FMWRS is designed as a PBC to incentivize
this critical objective for national dam safety. Upon completion of the PBC, US$50 million out of the US$100 million
allocation for dam safety investments under Component 3 will become eligible for disbursement.

5.      The component will also implement dam safety capacity building for policy makers, owners, operators, and
dam safety organizations at the federal, RBDA, and dam levels, including the DDRO and IWRM Commission under FMWRS,
RBDAs, state agencies, and NESREA. It will disseminate the dam safety guidelines and have a particular focus on emergency
action planning for all disaster management agencies and rescue agencies including awareness raising of the public.



33 Low water levels can change the load distribution on dam structures, which can result in stress and structural integrity issues. In addition,

reduced inflows can lead to increased sedimentation in reservoirs, which can reduce storage capacity and affect dam operation. In a drought
situation, extremely low water levels may limit the electricity generation potential. Prolonged low water levels can expose parts of the dam and
intake structures to the air, leading to corrosion and other maintenance challenges.

                                                                                                                                     Page 68 of 86
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



II. Dam safety portfolio risk analysis

6.      Nigeria has over 400 dams that were constructed for irrigation and for hydropower production. To ensure the
safety of these important infrastructure, a dam safety management framework needs to be in place to ensure that the
structures are maintained in a way that minimizes the threat to life safety, economic risks, and environmental risks. As
one of the first initiatives, Nigeria intends to rehabilitate 180 large hydropower and irrigation dams located in various river
basins across the country. A first step in this program will be to develop the risk profile of the portfolio. This will involve
the development and application of a qualitative risk-informed tool that will rank the dams according to the dam safety
risks they impose to the public and the environment. Thereafter, the tool developed will identify and prioritize the
preliminary order of the rehabilitation program, accounting for the dams that present the greatest dam safety risks.

7.       In January 2024, the FMWRS conducted, with technical assistance of the World Bank, a series of workshops to
introduce the proposed tool. Over the course of two days, the theory and application of the tool was presented to a group
of Nigerian dam safety stakeholders. During the discussions, changes to the proposed tool that would allow for a better
reflection of conditions in Nigeria were identified, and the tool was modified to reflect these recommendations.

8.      The FMWRS thereafter created, within its DDRO, a team of dam experts to oversee the application of the tool and
provide training for dam owners/operators in the use of the tool. In May 2024, another workshop was conducted with the
tool applied to 30 large dams. The FMWRS will continue to lead discussions and application of tools, summarizing the
exercise results to achieve the goal of obtaining a risk-informed prioritization of identified dams needing rehabilitation by
the end of 2025, which is one of the initial outputs envisaged under Component 3.

III. Representative Dams for Assessment

9.       Within the portfolio of proposed dams to be supported under the SPIN Project, Dam Safety Assessments have
been carried out for three dams, through field visits conducted by DSRP for the preparation of the SPIN Project. The
assessment results are reflected in the DSRP report and Project Screening Template report. These field visits include dam
safety assessments to (a) inspect and evaluate the safety status of the dams, their appurtenances, and performance
history; (b) review and evaluate the O&M procedures; and (c) update the quality control checklist for ‘Case 2 - Existing
Dams and dams under construction - project finances rehabilitation or upgrading of existing dams’, supplied by the Global
Solution Group on dam safety team. The dam rehabilitation plan will include structural and nonstructural measures
identified through investigative studies including systematic hydrological assessment, stability analysis, geotechnical
studies, and geophysical and bathymetric surveys. Based on the DSRP and Project Screening Template reports, the ESDD
report is prepared and will determine the level of environmental and social impact. If the level of environmental and social
impact is determined as ‘low’ or ‘medium’, the ESMP will be prepared. If the level is determined as ‘Substantial’ or ‘High’,
a detailed ESIA will be conducted. The prioritized dams for the first phase include the following:

        •     Naka Dam, under the responsibility of Lower Benue RBDA, situated in Benue State, is a multipurpose dam
              serving 1,000 ha of irrigation area and providing 0.2 million m3 of water to 10,000 habitants downstream.
              The dam has a height of 8.5 m and a length of 500 m. Rehabilitation measures recommended are (a) clearing
              of site and dam toe; (b) treatment of upstream and downstream slopes; and (c) grading and surfacing of the
              dam crest. The total cost of rehabilitation is estimated at US$1 million.
        •     Doma Dam, under the responsibility of Lower Benue RBDA, situated in Nasarawa State, is a 27 m high earth-
              fill dam with a crest length of 500 m and a central clay core built in 1988. Doma Dam is the water source of
              the Doma Irrigation System that serves 2,000 ha of irrigation service area. The field visit found that severe



                                                                                                               Page 69 of 86
          The World Bank
          Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



                erosion on the downstream surface of the main dam body, which requires immediate rehabilitation. Dam
                crest settlement was also observed during the visit.
         •      Wuro Keso Dam (weir) under the responsibility of Upper Benue RBDA, situated in Taraba State, is an intake
                weir comprising a homogeneous embankment of about 3.5 m high constructed to create a reservoir for a
                diversion channel from Taraba River. The DSRP report recommended required works in site clearing,
                reservoir area clearing, and construction of living quarters for dam operators.

IV. Other Technical Details

10.       Dam safety instrumentation will be considered an essential requirement to improve the basic safety of dams and
appurtenant structures. Based on an assessment carried out during preparation of the project and feedback from the DRO
staff, it was recognized that there is a major lack or shortage of dam safety instrumentation, for example, (a) day-to-day
access and mobility at sites; (b) communication facilities; (c) basic equipment needs for surveillance and monitoring,; (d)
safety equipment for inspections and emergency repair works; (e) standby power supply; and (f) reservoir transportation
facilities (boats) and so on. In general, the supply and/or installation of the minimum package of dam safety instruments
will be considered during the early stage of project implementation. The experience with procurement and installation of
the basic dam safety instrumentation during the TRIMING Project’s dam safety activities points to a number of important
lessons. The approach to be adopted under the SPIN Project will explore service contract provisions to sustain the
provision of basic spares and maintenance measures, as well as sustained capacity building and support during the project
period. This will be provided on a decreasing basis to correspond with increasing capacity within the FMWRS and RBDAs
to assume longer-term sustainable operations.

11.     EAP is an operational tool to reduce the likelihood of failure and potential impacts caused by dam failure. The
contents of the plan will include preventive actions to be undertaken to avoid failure; a flow chart listing authorities
involved in the notification process, ranging from dam operator to local emergency authorities; and inundation maps
delineating the area that will be flooded in the event of a dam failure and identified evacuation procedures. Till date, the
FMWRS and RBDAs have conducted dam break analysis,34 which will lead to development of EAPs for about five dams, of
which all have been financed by the TRIMING Project. During preparation, the downstream communities that would be
affected by dam failure and the provincial and local authorities responsible for early warning, evacuation, and post-flood
assistance, are required to be consulted.

12.     FFWSDO and integrated reservoir operations including streamflow forecasting for climate-resilient dam
management. The preparation and operationalization of a flood forecasting and warning system is the most effective
method for reducing the risk of loss of life and economic losses. The study 35 conducted under the TRIMING Project
revealed that cascade operation of reservoirs under the 2022 flood conditions would have reduced the peak in Benue
River basin by 30 percent. The SPIN Project will support a comprehensive program to enhance capacity with respect to
flood forecasting for dam operations. This will include telemetry to facilitate real-time data for each dam and a relay
station to the office on site, RBDA offices, and Central Dam Safety Office under the DRO of the FMWRS. Nature based
solutions will also be promoted, such as improved sedimentation management practices through improved operation and
mitigation of adverse land use practices within the catchment.

13.    Hydroclimatic stress testing. To assess the potential impact of climate change on dam safety and operations, the
Tiga Dam was chosen as the sample dam in Nigeria and was subjected to a comprehensive stress test to evaluate its

34 Consulting service for dam break flood inundation hazard and exposure assessment for supporting the storage agenda for a More Resilient

Development in Nigeria.
35 Automated Detection and Estimation of Dam Volume of Reservoirs and Dam Bodies Using Satellite Images in Nigeria.


                                                                                                                              Page 70 of 86
         The World Bank
         Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



response under a wide range of hydroclimatic changes driven by climate change. This assessment utilized the Water GP’s
Hydroclimatic Stress Testing Tool. The tool synthetically generates time series of precipitation and temperature which are
then translated into terrestrial river flow and hydrological conditions via water system model. The generation of these
series used historical climatological conditions, with adjusted parameters informed by the outputs of projections.36 The
findings indicate that the Tiga Dam performs adequately under future changes in annual mean daily discharge by the mid
of the century. Most climate scenarios suggest that the baseline (current) inflow to the dam will be sustained or in fact
increase. However, this apparent robustness may be compromised under extreme conditions. The analysis highlights that
the Tiga Dam faces a substantial risk of increased flooding, as indicated by the annual maximum daily discharge. Although
the risk of water scarcity is not currently estimated to be very high, further analysis is necessary, as the minimum flow
upstream of the dam may not be met, even with low future increases in temperature and slight decreases in precipitation.
This analysis identifies how climate change may affect the operational activities, expected outcomes, and benefits of the
Tiga Dam. The tool will be expanded to assess hydroclimatic risks to other dams and relevant infrastructure within the
SPIN Project. These analyses will be conducted throughout the project's execution and will inform the design of climate-
robust and resilient strategies.




36 Global climate models (GCMs) from the sixth Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phases (CMIP6)


                                                                                                          Page 71 of 86
         The World Bank
         Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



                              ANNEX 4: Technical Description of the Hydropower Component

I. Project Activity Details

Activity 1.1.3: Capacity Building of and Support to Federal Institutions and Agencies in Hydropower Development (US$16
million)

1.      The objective is to support the Federal Government in (a) preparation of an HMP and climate-smart hydropower
investment planning; (b) PPP options for a large transformative project for Nigeria; and (c) capacity building of and
support to federal institutions and agencies in hydropower planning and management. The activities contribute to both
climate change adaptation (through improved inter-sectoral planning of water storage and management as well as
improved dam and reservoir O&M, including emergency procedures during floods and droughts) and mitigation (through
the generation of renewable energy and avoided GHG emissions associated with fossil fuels).

2.      Preparation of an HMP and climate-smart hydropower investment plans. Consistent with the mandated
accountabilities of the FMWRS, FMP, and its agencies coordinating large investments in hydropower projects and tasks of
flood control, navigation, and water supply and providing power across Nigeria, this component will provide strategic
support to prepare a master plan and select optimized hydropower projects through cooperation between the FMWRS
and FMP. SPIN will support the preparation of a hydropower development master plan, which would include better
synergies with existing water resources master plan and serve as input for Nigeria’s Integrated Energy Resource Plan and
broader least-cost power development plan considering the role of hydropower in integrating other renewable energy
sources. It will also support the establishment of a screening criteria agreed by both the FMWRS and FMP and developed
through a stakeholder process for the selection of transformative and climate-resilient projects from the master plan. The
selection criteria can then be applied to candidate projects proposed by the ministries. For this, the SPIN Project will
finance a qualified international transaction adviser who will be assisted by local consultants. The master plan is expected
to include stakeholder engagement; characterization of the water resource, environmental and social conditions in the
watersheds being considered for development; and identification of a portfolio of hydropower projects including
multipurpose projects. The HMP would also analyze the hydropower capacity and energy capabilities for a series of
development scenarios, including the potential for hybrid operation of solar energy resources with hydropower that can
increase the total dispatchable energy yield of the combined systems. For one selected project from the HMP, a feasibility
study and ESIA will be conducted, and SPIN will assist in development planning to identify a program for PPP procurement,
project design, construction tendering, construction, and operation. This would include the development of a project
development agreement and so on. Optimizing the development of hydropower in Niger River sub-basins and its gradual
integration with solar power and the national energy grid will make the hydropower sector more resilient to climate
change-exacerbated precipitation and river flow variability.

3.       PPP options for large transformative projects for Nigeria. The support will cover, among others, the following:
(a) reviewing an investment program; (b) defining the PPP procurement process; (c) gaining clarity on the legislative
processes; (d) defining the role of the implementing agency; and (e) updating the ICRC Swiss Challenge. The ICRC and BPE
will be supported to operationalize the PPP action plan, aimed at leveraging private sector participation in the power
sector along with reform and liberalization of hydropower projects. This will help develop the right PPP processes to
support some of the transformative projects identified through the HMP for investments.

4.     A PBC is linked to the adoption of the HMP by the PSC and the preparation of priority hydropower projects
ready for PPP. The eligibility of US$10 million out of US$16 million of this subcomponent will be dependent on the
achievement of these objectives (detailed in the Results Framework).

                                                                                                            Page 72 of 86
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



5.       Capacity building of and support to federal institutions and agencies in hydropower development. This
subcomponent aims at building human resources and institutional capacity for hydropower development in the federal
institutions and its agencies. This includes developing studies, strategies, and plans for improving hydropower planning
and management. Activities under this subcomponent are (a) studies and policies for benefit sharing among stakeholders
for hydropower development; (b) studies and action plans for asset development, ownership, and operation (including
potential interprovincial assets, PPPs, and so on); and (c) strategy for integrating variable renewable energy including
solar-hydro hybridization into the national grid.

II. Hydropower (Rural Electrification Rehabilitation Analysis)

6.      As part of the SPIN Project preparation, the team assessed the hydropower potential in Nigeria and observed that
there were several greenfield and brownfield opportunities across Nigeria, estimated at 14 GW. From the list of brownfield
projects in the country, it was seen that there were three categories of possible hydropower projects.

        •    The first category comprised purely rehabilitation projects that already had provision for hydropower but
             needed rehabilitation of electro-mechanical equipment and possibly repairs to civil works. There are two
             projects totaling 13 MW in this category: Oyan in Oyo State (10 MW) and Bakalori in Zamfara State (3 MW).
        •    The second category includes partially built projects that have provisions for hydropower. There are eight
             projects totaling 78 MW. The smallest is Galma in Kaduna State (2 MW) and the largest is Kiri in Adamawa
             State (40 MW).
        •    The last category of brownfield projects comprises existing dams that may have the potential to
             incorporate the hydropower component. There are 36 projects totaling 105 MW in this category. The largest
             is Gubi in Bauchi (40 MW) and the smallest is the Nkari in Akwa Ibom (2 KW). All these multipurpose dams
             belong to either the FMWRS, FMP, or the state government.

7.       Most of these brownfield projects may not be large enough for utility-scale electrification projects. However, their
impact can be transformational at the national level, from an aggregated standpoint, and make a significant dent in the
energy access and energy transition agenda of the FGN. The small to medium hydropower projects could be used to power
unelectrified rural communities and augment power from the grid to underserved rural/peri-urban communities near
these hydro dam locations. Further, the evolving role of state governments, driven by the Electricity Act 2023, presents
an opportunity for subnational entities to leverage the potential of small to medium hydro dams to define the
electrification pathways for the states, which are backed by an enabling policy and regulatory framework.

8.       To investigate these opportunities, the World Bank engaged the services of Village Data Analytics (VIDA), a
consulting firm to support due diligence of the rural electrification potential of small to medium hydro dams across Nigeria,
leveraging VIDA’s geospatial-based software platform. VIDA analyzed 46 potential brownfield sites for their viability for
off-grid electrification. Based on the assessment carried out by VIDA on the 46 dams, it was discovered that 3 dams may
have the potential to provide electricity for the off-grid market, 9 dams may be good candidates for a hybrid solution
(combination of on-grid and off-grid), and 34 dams located next to the grid are most likely already connected.

9.       The Federal Government currently retains the ownership of the transmission assets through the FMF Incorporated
(management under concession), with the generation assets concessioned and distribution sectors fully privatized. A
generation license authorizes the licensee to construct, own, operate, and maintain a generation station for generation
and supply of electricity in accordance with the Electric Power Sector Reform Act, 2005. Subject to this act, the holder of
a generation license may sell power or ancillary services to any of the classes of persons specified in the license. An
electricity generation license is needed for any power generation activity beyond 1 MW. As the generation and distribution

                                                                                                             Page 73 of 86
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



sectors are managed by the private sector, there is no business case for the Government of Nigeria to lend money to the
ministries or states to develop these projects in the public domain. Hence, under SPIN, unless the Ministry of Finance
borrows IDA resources and lends to the private sector to develop the brownfield hydropower project, financing of
brownfield hydropower projects has not been considered. There are other hydropower projects that may be considered
in the future for a subsequent SPIN program. These would be priority government projects that may not meet the return
expectations of the private sector. The structure for this intervention cannot be determined at this stage of this
Government’s administration. Moreover, beyond the upstream ecosystem support needed to design a process and
framework, including standard contractual templates to guide the tendering of hydropower sites to the private sector
with key institutional roles clearly defined, the US$750 million Nigeria Distributed Access to Renewable Energy Scale-up
(DARES) Project, approved by the World Bank Board in December 2023, is a private sector-led results-based financing
program, which is agnostic to renewable energy technology types and could accommodate the few dams suited for off-
grid and hybrid electrification.

PPP Options for Large Transformative Projects for Nigeria

10.     The SPIN Project will cover, among others, the following:

        (a)   Review of an investment program and identification of a financing strategy for projects identified in the
              master plan and screened for potential interest to private sector for projects considered for a PPP structure.
        (b)   Defining of the PPP procurement process for the SPIN Project. It is important to have a well-defined process
              for PPP procurement. While such a process already exists in Nigeria, it is important to refine it in light of the
              SPIN program and gain clarity on the parts where there are ambiguities or foreseeable problems.
        (c)   Gaining of clarity on the duality of legislative regimes (hydro resources and power). Develop a clear
              methodology for determining whether the FMWRS or FMP (or both through joint representation) should
              have responsibility for any particular hydropower project, especially in the SPIN program.
        (d)   Nomination of BPE as the implementing agency. Even though the ministers, departments, and agencies can
              legally implement the projects on their own, it is recommended to include BPE as the implementing agency
              to gain the benefits of their specialization in PPP procurement.
        (e)   Inclusion of relevant states due to duality of legislative regimes (PPP). In addition to the ICRC Act and ICRC
              Regulations, federating states are not prohibited from passing laws in relation to the implementation of PPP
              projects within the relevant states. Therefore, it important to include the relevant states in the stakeholder
              discussions.
        (f)   Removal or modification of the ICRC Swiss Challenge. The ICRC Swiss Challenge is acting as a deterrent to
              international sponsors from developing PPP projects in Nigeria. In case of an unsolicited proposal, it is
              recommended to either completely remove the ICRC Swiss Challenge from the SPIN process or modify it to
              include a shareholding in the project or cash payout to the original proponent equivalent to the amount
              invested by them on relevant studies, instead of the right to match the best offer.

11.     The ICRC and BPE will be supported to operationalize the PPP action plan, aimed at leveraging private sector
participation in the power sector along with reforms and liberalization of hydropower projects.




                                                                                                               Page 74 of 86
          The World Bank
          Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



                                                ANNEX 5: Economic and Financial Analysis

I.        Introduction

1.       The EFA is necessary for verifying if the US$500 million proposed investment for improving the utilization and
safety of existing water storage facilities for irrigation and other uses, and strengthening institutional arrangements for
IWRM in Nigeria is justified, both from the point of view of the beneficiaries and the Nigerian economy. The project aims
to secure and maximize the socioeconomic value of existing water storage to develop the untapped potential of irrigation
(agriculture production), protect people from floods and droughts in face of climate change (mitigating loss and damage),
and add to energy security through hydropower development.

II.       Methodology for the EFA

2.      This annex presents the EFA of the investments for irrigation development, dam safety, and flood protection in
Nigeria. The rationale for verifying the joint justification of the proposed investment is that, without a reliable flood
protection system in place, irrigation investment would not be feasible due to the increasing frequency of floods affecting
the downstream areas. During the rainy seasons, the river basins experience heavy rainfall, and these areas suffer floods
leading to massive displacement, loss of life and property, disease outbreaks (mainly waterborne and water related), and
agricultural crops and fields being washed away. Two of the main quantifiable benefits to be obtained through the
proposed SPIN investments are (a) increased agricultural production and (b) reduced costs and damages from drought
and flood events.

3.       This EFA was prepared based on relevant data collected from the impact of the predecessor TRIMING Project 37
likely to be closed in January 2025. The EFA methodology was based on building ‘with’ and ‘without project’ scenarios
quantifying the incremental benefits to be attained with the proposed investments. The scenarios and results from
irrigation (US$350,000) are presented in section III. 38 Section IV presents the estimation of additional benefits to be
obtained from Component 3 ‘Improvements in Dam Operations and Enhancing Dam Safety’ (US$100 million) aiming to
increase the safety of selected dams and strengthen dam safety management in the country. Dam safety will reduce flood
risks, considerably mitigating material and nonmaterial damages from the flood hazards. Flood risk benefits were assessed
based on the expected value of the annual average damages (AAD) to be avoided grounded on the spatial analysis, flood
maps, and results of the Flood Exposure of Population and Agricultural Fields reported by the Fukushima University
consultants.39

4.       The indicators for the study include (a) the financial impact of investments at the level of the irrigation
beneficiaries (family net income increases) using 2023 market prices; (b) the economic impact from dam safety; and (c)
the aggregate irrigation and dam safety investments for the Nigerian economy. The last two economic indicators used are
the ERR and the economic NPV of the project’s incremental costs and benefits. Relevant conversion factors were used to
estimate the shadow values of costs and benefits for the country, net of market imperfections (taxes and subsidies). A
sensitivity analysis was also prepared to verify the effect of major risks on the proposed interventions.




37 Financial and Economic Analysis, Final Report 2023, Matrix Universal Services Ltd. November 2023; and other sources.
38 FARMOD software was used for the construction and analysis of the alternative scenarios. Tables are available in the project files.
39 Dam Break Flood Hazard and Impact Assessment to Support Data Storage Program for More Sustainable Development in Nigeria.


                                                                                                                                   Page 75 of 86
          The World Bank
          Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



III.      Irrigated Agricultural Production

5.      Nigeria is the largest producer of rice in Africa, producing about 8.4 million tons annually. However, Nigeria is also
the third highest importer of milled rice in the world, importing about two million metric tons of rice. Rice is and will
continue to be the primary and most important production activity in the irrigated areas. Developing an efficient rice
production value chain should be crucial and necessary for justification of the proposed investment. One of the major
hindrances to produce local rice for small farmers has been the lack of appropriate technologies.40 Other higher-value
crops and activities (tomato, onions, fruits, aquaculture, and so on) could offer even higher potential returns, but
developing adapted production technologies, adequate value chains, and market links are difficult and will take some
years.

6.       Considering the nature of the proposed investments and that the specific irrigation schemes to be supported
under SPIN are still in the process of being selected, this EFA is based on the performance of three of the five TRIMING
irrigation schemes under implementation41 involving 25,652 ha already improved and handed over under (a) the Kano
River Irrigation Scheme (KRIS); (b) the Bakolori Irrigation Scheme (BIS); and (c) the Hadejia Valley Irrigation Scheme
(HVIS).42 The other two TRIMING subprojects, the Middle Rima Valley Irrigation Scheme (MRVIS) and the Dadin Kowa
Irrigation Scheme (DKIS), are still to fly with the major improvements: the MRVIS due to refusal of irrigators to pay and
remit irrigation fees, while in DKIS, irrigation is still on hold to allow for the rehabilitation works.

7.      EFA scenarios. The development of the ‘with’ and ‘without project’ scenarios started with the preparation of
representative crop and activity budget models. Crop yields, relevant prices, input and labor use, family on-farm
consumption, production costs, and resulting revenues were averaged for the main crops and activities to quantify
benefits obtained before the project improvements and the changes that are being detected after project interventions
at the farm level. Support activities including infrastructure improvements, technical assistance, and other backing
services for enhancing productivity and value chain developments were also modeled. The second assessment level was
the preparation of farm and agri-business models: crop and activities are combined under the dominant production
systems for quantifying beneficiaries’ income changes. This allows checking if farmers will be willing to take the risk of
changing their traditional production practices. The third level is the aggregation of farmers´ activities within each scheme
to quantify the benefits and costs involved for the development of each subproject, and finally, for the overall project
from the country’s economy point of view.

8.      Crop and activity models. On average, farmers cultivate less than 0.5 ha of land with irrigation, planting mainly
rice and eventually other market-oriented crops in two main seasons every year: in the dry season and in the wet season.
Farmers usually also cultivate some land outside the irrigated perimeter for growing traditional food crops for self-
consumption under rain-fed conditions (mainly millet during the wet season and sorghum in the dry season).


40 Nigeria’s rice consumption per capita is about 32 kg, which is lower than the global rice consumption (53.9 kg). Locally produced rice accounts for

about 57 percent of the rice consumed in Nigeria, while the deficit is smuggled or imported into the country illegally.
41 The original objective of the TRIMING Project was to support performance improvement of about 50,000 ha through rehabilitation and new

development in five schemes downstream of existing storage reservoirs. Implementation delays and challenges led to project restructuring during
the midterm review, and the target was reduced to about 36,700 ha.
42 The KRIS planned area to be rehabilitated was about 15,000 ha. About 14,444 ha was completed and commissioned by May 2023. The BIS plan

was to rehabilitate 8,000 ha of a gravity system (Lot 1) and gravitate about 13,000 ha of an abandoned sprinkler area (Lot 2). The construction
contract for Lot 1 was able to rehabilitate only 4,578 ha before stopping works due to insecurity in the area. The designers of the conversion works
under Lot 2 reduced the area to be developed to about 5,556 ha due to significant siltation of the dam reservoir, leading to reduction of its
capacity, cost considerations, and sustainability. The contractor was only able to deliver about 970 ha before construction work was also stopped
due to insecurity. The planned intervention at HVIS was to develop about 6,000 ha. A net area of about 5,750 ha was completed, commissioned,
and handed over to the farmers in January 2023.

                                                                                                                                   Page 76 of 86
          The World Bank
          Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



9.       The crop budget ‘with’ and ‘without’ project was calculated, including input and output 2023 prices. The
calculations cover crop budgets per hectare for wet season and dry season rice, maize, tomato , and onion. Production
parameters, costs, and resulting revenues are accounted as the new technologies are adopted, following what is being
attained under the TRIMING Project, with new practices such as the Urea Deep Placement and the System of Rice
Intensification (SRI) package43 being adopted and improving efficiency. The SRI includes the use of laser land leveling and
alternate watering and drying (AWD) 44 irrigation method, which reduce the amount of water and other inputs used,
thereby lowering production costs. Induced changes include a slow mechanization process of several activities (laser land
leveling, land preparation, transplanting, harvesting, and so on) and improved post-harvesting handling (rice milling, onion
dying, and so on) with project support.

10.      Based on the results being attained from the TRIMING Project—through enhanced infrastructure, adoption of
improved technologies, better post-harvest handling of products—it can be reasonably expected that outcomes would
result in (a) more than 100 percent average increase in rice yields, from 2.2 metric tons per hectare in the wet season and
3.2 metric tons in the dry season to 5.5 metric tons and 7.4 metric tons, respectively; (b) a 20 to 30 percent reduction in
the use and cost of irrigation water, seeds, fertilizers and pesticides washed away with the excess water; and (c) a
reduction in the use of labor (by using small equipment including harvesting machines). The resulting net revenues per
hectare of rice before family labor would increase significantly, from NGN 111,500 to NGN 871,650 in the wet season, and
from NGN 343,950 to NGN 1.31 million in the dry season.

11.      Other crops also show similar higher returns due to project improvements. Table 5.1 shows the summary costs
and revenues being achieved from cropping in the KRIS according to the TRIMING M&E system field observations. Budgets
were also prepared for the BIS and HVIS. Many other higher-value crops with reliable irrigation offer relevant
diversification options in the project areas. Fruits (papaya, banana, passion fruit, pineapple, mango, guava, and so on) and
vegetables (tomato, capsicum, eggplant, watermelon, melon, and so on) could also provide significant contributions to
further improve production for the irrigated areas, if adequate value chain support is provided.

               Table 5.1. Crop Models ‘Without’ (before) and ‘With’ (after) the Project (in NGN, thousands per hectare)

                                  Gross Revenue          Input Costs       Income Before Labor   Labor Costs          Net Revenue        Increments
 Table    Crop Budget              WoP      WP          WoP       WP         WoP        WP       WoP     WP           WoP     WP         (before labor)
A6-Ap2 Rice Wet Season   580.0  1,441.0 468.5                     569.4      111.5     871.7     136.5     177.0     - 25.0    694.7        782%
A6-Ap3 Rice Dry Season   830.0  1,916.0 486.1                     605.8      343.9    1,310.2    142.5     186.0      201.4    1,124.2      381%
A6-Ap4 Maize Wet Season 302.0    640.0   86.2                     196.9      215.8     443.1      39.0      63.0      176.8     380.1       205%
A6-Ap5 Maize Dry Season 424.4    838.0   115.1                    231.6     309.3 606.5           39.0     63.0      270.3 543.5            196%
A6-Ap6 Tomate           5,320.0 8,176.0 582.5                     884.0    4,737.5 7,292.0       136.5     201.0    4,601.0 7,091.0         154%
A6-Ap7 Onions           2,880.0 5,580.0 473.0                     841.5    2,407.0 4,738.5       157.5     240.0    2,249.5 4,498.5         197%

12.      As can be seen in Table 5.1, the main crops would significantly increase the current revenues before labor costs,
making this the most relevant indicator for beneficiaries’ financial results from the project improvements. Most farming
activities are done with family labor, which has few job opportunities in the project areas. Tomato and onion provide

43 The SRI is an innovative agro-ecological climate-smart technology that aims to increase yields and farmers’ profits by creating the most suitable

environment for the rice plants to grow stronger and produce higher yields.
44 AWD is a water management system that reduces the water use in irrigated rice fields without lowering productivity. Under AWD, rice fields are

alternately flooded and un-flooded rather than kept continuously submerged as under conventional rice farming. By reducing the plant density per
hectare, the roots can better develop, reaching more nutrients and oxygen, resulting in bigger and healthier plants with more and heavier grains.
Besides water use is reduced, allowing for the expansion of the irrigation area.

                                                                                                                                   Page 77 of 86
          The World Bank
          Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



notably higher returns than rice (even applying improved SRI technology), provided that adequate post-harvesting and
storage facilities are in place, and proper market links are developed. Other higher-value crops such as other fruits and
vegetables, or activities such as aquaculture (tilapia and catfish) could also offer higher returns but require adequate
technical support for production and marketing.

13.     Farm models. Three farm models based on what is being done and achieved on the average farms in KRIS, BIS,
and HVIS are shown in Table 5.2 to represent the beneficiaries’ typical farming systems and the expected benefits in the
SPIN Project areas. These models allow quantification of the family income changes that could be attained from the
proposed project. The assumed cropping pattern was defined following the average crops being grown in each of the
three scheme areas on which this assessment is based, with rice occupying 70, 80, and 95 percent of the cropped areas,
respectively. In addition to the 0.5 ha of irrigated crops, the models include another 0.5 ha with millet (dry season) and
sorghum (wet season) under rain-fed situations for self-consumption.

                                             Table 5.2. Farm Models for Phase I for Existing Farmers

 T able      T ypical F arm       M ain Irrigated              Gro ss Value           N et Value      F amily labo r use      R eturns per
number    B eneficiary (0.5ha         C ro ps 1/               P ro ductio n         P ro ductio n       in farming         family day wo rk
                                                                                                                                             Inco me
 in the  irrigated plus 0.5ha                                   (in '000 Naira)    (in '000 Naira)   (person days/year)       (in Naira)    increase
A ppendi with rain fed millet & Witho ut      With          Witho ut      With  Witho ut With Witho ut With Witho ut With
    x          so rghum)        P ro ject P ro ject         P ro ject P ro ject P ro ject P ro ject P ro ject P ro ject P ro ject P ro ject
A6-Ap8 FM 1 based on KRIS R,M ,T & O R,M ,T & O 1,427             3,705             938       2,621      110       191       8,527     13,723     179%
A6-Ap9 FM 2 based on BIS R,SP,T & O R,SP,T & O 1,253              3,336             759       2,286      118       194       6,432     11,784     201%
A6-Ap10 FM 3 based on HVIS R,M ,T & O R,M ,T & O 1,095            2,959             471       1,817      135       195       3,489     9,318      286%
        1/ R: rice, M: maize, T: tomato, O: onion, SP: sw eet potato

14.      Production services and post-harvest agribusiness models. The financial and economic impact from development
of the irrigation infrastructure costing US$350 million (Component 2) also depends on (a) adopting improved technologies
allowing significant land and water productivity increases;45 (b) enhancing the value chains adding worth to their main
products; and (c) linking the more efficient and increased production in the field with the access to higher market niches
offering higher prices. These targets must be developed together to create the benefits required for justifying the large
investment, needing the ‘software’ support interventions for ensuring adequate support services, including training and
capacity building.

15.     Some production service models were prepared as viable examples for the promotion of operators to offer soil
preparation and leveling services with small equipment, as well as for planting and harvesting of rice. Models for post-
harvest handling and processing of rice, onions, and tomato were also prepared. As field production grows, these services
need to be developed by individuals or groups of farmers with adequate project support.46 As examples of machinery
services providers, two cases are considered, the first for a small land monoculture equipment and the second, for the
operation of a small harvesting and threshing equipment for servicing about 60 ha (120 to 150 small farms). In both cases,
the service provider could need to be supported with a small US$5,000 to US$10,000 soft loan (or grant) covering 80–90



45 Poor land levelling and preparation is identified as the single most limiting factor in the irrigation perimeters resulting in efficiency losses of 30

percent or more in water use, nitrogen leakage, soil compaction, and ultimately poor production. The adoption of SRI technologies requires
adequate land levelling to ensure proper water distribution in the rice fields.
46 Similar business plans after the necessary feasibility studies, detailed designs, and selection processes could be supported and co-financed with

small loans and/or other projects’ matching grants covering about 30 to 80 percent of the investment with SPIN’s technical support to develop
adequate productive alliances among farmers, marketing agents, and financial institutions.

                                                                                                                                         Page 78 of 86
         The World Bank
         Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



percent of the investment. The financial rate of return (FRR) in these two cases would be 49.2 percent and 56.6 percent
even if developed with soft loans to be fully repaid in three years.

16.      Three post-harvesting and processing models are considered. The first one involving rice milling for removing
hulls and brans from paddy grains to produce polished rice with a mini rice mill unit (capacity of 360 metric tons of paddy
per year) costing NGN 4.5 million (US$6,300)47 including the required installations. About 80 percent of the investment
(US$5,000) could be covered with a soft loan (or a grant). In addition, about NGN 9.5 million would be needed as working
capital that could be financed by the benefited farmers or the entrepreneur. With this small plant, paddy from 30 ha (wet
season and dry season) could be handled, adding value to the rice. Polished bagged rice (40 percent of polished rice from
paddy plus 20 percent of broken rice) was assumed to be sold at NGN 700 per kg. With an FRR of 45 percent, the group of
farmers or individual implementing this unit would significantly help improve the farm gate prices.

17.      The onion drying and storage model was assumed having a capacity for storing 20 metric tons of onions at harvest
time. After two to four months, about 16 metric tons of dry onions off-season could be sold at about NGN 330 per kg
instead of NGN 180 per kg if sold during the harvesting season. Three cycles could be stored per year. The investment
required was estimated at NGN 7 million (US$15,185)48 for the required cool, dry, dark, and ventilated, rustic warehouse.
In this case, it was assumed that 90 percent of the investment (US$13,666) would be financed and repaid in three years.
With an FRR of 14.7 percent, the operator or group of farmers implementing this unit could also promote production and
improve the onion price being paid in the area. Similarly, the case for a tomato packing facility with an investment of NGN
36 million (US$78,000), with a loan covering 90 percent of the investment, shows an FRR of 34.7 percent.

18.     Irrigation modernization and support results. Table 5.3 shows the aggregation of farm and activity models within
the supported irrigation schemes. The aggregation allows estimating the benefits of irrigation modernization to the
Nigerian society. It also helps assessing the expected volumes of production and the inputs and labor expected to be
mobilized in this enhanced activity. As mentioned before, the three TRIMING schemes assessed as representative of the
investment to be carried out under the new project were (a) KRIS with 14,444 ha modernized, and about 45,000 small
farmers planting rice in about 70 percent of the area, and other crops (tomato in 13 percent of the area, maize in 8 percent,
onion in 5 percent, and other crops); (b) BIS with 5,750 ha rehabilitated (80 percent with rice, 9 percent with sweet potato,
and 8 percent with tomato) involving more than 24,000 farmers; and (c) HVIS with 5,448 ha rehabilitated (95 percent of
rice) and benefiting about 20,000 farmers.

                                  Table 5.3. Main Results Indicators per Scheme and for Component 2
                                                                     Value of
                                                                   Production at         Internal Rate of    Net Present Value
                     Num ber            Investm ent
                               Area                                  Maturity               Return (%)       (6% discount rate)
                        of
                             Total (ha)   (USD Mill)            Gross       Net                          Financial Econom ic
                      Farm s                                                         Financial Econom ic
                                                               (USD Mill) (USD Mill)                     (USD Mill) (USD Mill)
KRIS                   45,000        14,444            109.1      114.5       76.0       22.1      23.0     175.5      190.6
BIS                    24,000         5,750             82.3       36.5       21.9       10.0      10.9      24.7       30.3
HVIS                   20,000         5,448             63.9       35.8       20.4       17.7      18.7      53.1       58.8
Total Irrigation
                       89,000        25,642            255.3       186.8         118.3     17.5       18.5     253.3       279.7
Modernization




47 Exchange rate used for the study conducted in July 2023 was 1 USD = 714 NGN


48 Exchange rate used for the study conducted in March 2023 was 1 USD = 461 NGN




                                                                                                                   Page 79 of 86
          The World Bank
          Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



19.     The total TRIMING investments involved in the still ongoing three assessed schemes was estimated at about
US$255.3 million including about 73 percent of the total IDA disbursed amount. 49 Table 5.3 summarizes the main
parameters and results indicators for the three schemes and their aggregation. Considering that these are representative
of those to be supported under the SPIN Project, the proposed new investment for improving irrigation would be justified,
as it would have an ERR of 18.5 percent and an NPV of US$279 million. This result excludes the corresponding share of the
project management Component 4 costs that are included in the overall analysis in section V. The SCF used for valuing the
shadow value of costs and benefits for the economic analysis was 0.815, while 0.7 was used for the shadow cost of labor.
IV.      Avoided Damages from Dam Safety Investments

20.     The project will play a primary role in reducing the frequency and severity of flooding. Floods are the most
common natural hazards in Nigeria, with severe consequences on life and property. Lower basin states throughout
southern Nigeria have experienced a 20 percent increase in volumes of torrential rains over the past decades, accelerating
gully erosion in areas where many riverbanks have collapsed. Flooding degrades the environment and destroys crops,
farm settlements, livestock, and grain store facilities. These events reduce harvest and affect the next planting
season, resulting in food shortage crisis. Livestock are killed or lose pastures, and many times inundated farmlands become
unsuitable for cultivation.

21.     Nigeria is now experiencing floods every year and food insecurity is a growing problem. In 2012, flooding affected
almost every Nigerian state damaging or destroying 600,000 houses, displacing over two million people, and causing the
death of 363 people. Floods in 2018 resulted in 301 new deaths. In 2021, 7 out of 10 Nigerians did not have enough to
eat. The 2022 floods affected 3.2 million people, displaced 1.4 million, destroyed over half a million hectares of farmland
and resulted in the deaths of more than 600 people. The magnitude and impact of the 2022 events have surpassed
the 2012 damage. Again, in October 2023, general disruptions due to flooding took place across Adamawa State,
especially following the release of water into the Niger and Benue River basins from the Lagdo Dam in neighboring
Cameroon, displacing more than 57,000 people.

22.     The Nigeria Post-Disaster Needs Assessment of the 2012 floods estimated that about US$7.1 billion would be
required to cover the flood damage.50 Of this amount, about US$5.5 billion would finance disaster-resilient reconstruction
of assets that were destroyed and US$1.6 billion would be allocated for ensuring economic recovery. About US$4.2 billion
(59 percent of the needs) would cover reconstruction and recovery of housing (about 1,377,450 affected houses), with an
average cost per house estimated at US$3,050. Adding other reconstruction and recovery needs (41 percent of needs for
health, education, productive assets, and infrastructure), the average needs per affected house added to US$5,170.

23.      The FGN with the World Bank support assessed the damage and loss derived from the 2022 devastating floods.
The total direct economic damages were in the range of US$3.79 billion to US$9.12 billion, with a median estimate at
US$6.68 billion including impacts on livelihood, damages to residential and nonresidential buildings, infrastructure,
productive sectors, and agriculture. 51 Overall, 64 percent of households in the most damaged states were affected.
Monetary cost of damage to houses was estimated by the affected people at an average cost of US$4,246. The average
cost for the 2012 and 2022 hazards per house damaged was US$3,648.


49 IDA funds disbursements up to the end of 2023 were US$ 350.3 million: (a) US$53.6 million under Component 1 for WRM and dam operations

improvement; (b) US$246.7 under Components 2 and 3 (including other irrigation schemes) for improving irrigation and enhancing agricultural
production; and (c) US$50.1 million under Component 4 for institutional development and project management.
50 Nigeria Post Disaster Needs Assessment. 2012 Floods, Federal Government of Nigeria with support of World Bank, United Nations, Global Facility

for Disaster Reduction and Recovery, the European Union, and Japanese International Cooperation Agency.
51 Nigeria Flood Impact, Recovery and Mitigation Assessment Report 2022–2023, Nigeria Bureau of Statistics, National Emergency Management

Agency, and United Nations Development Programme.

                                                                                                                               Page 80 of 86
          The World Bank
          Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



24.      The objective of Component 3 ‘Improvements in Dam operations and Enhancing Dam Safety’ (US$100 million) is
to increase the safety of selected dams and strengthen the dam safety management system in the country. The target is
to improve safety of 10 to 20 prioritized dams and associated structures that provide downstream irrigation to schemes
to be identified under Component 2. The benefits of the enhanced dam safety including planning, management and
rehabilitation, preventive measures, and development of FFWSDO and early warning systems (EWS) are to reduce the
likelihood and costs of dam failure and reduce material and nonmaterial damages from flood hazards, inducing economic
activities and increasing agricultural output.

25.      Valuing the expected avoided damages is challenging. It needs to establish the likely annual flood damages in the
future and compare its value with the annual cost of preventing those damages from occurring. Measuring risks and
avoided damages with the project-proposed dam safety investments mainly comprise three steps: (a) identification of
hazard that is likely to result in disaster in both scenarios (‘with’ and ‘without’ the project); (b) estimation of the risk of
such event in each scenario; and (c) evaluation of the post-disaster economic and social costs of the expected risk in both
cases. The concept of risk therefore considers flooding as a hazard that requires application of adequate investment and
measures for flooding to be prevented and for mitigating its impact. Hazards associated with flooding can be addressed
saving time, cost, and energy while preserving life and properties that are at risk under probable flooding events.

26.      Benefits of dam safety investments are usually quantified based on the expected value of AAD avoided. These are
estimated through the integration of a series of single event damages for a sequence of flood events with gradually
infrequent return periods. Maps of flooded areas need to be drawn for each flood risk area with an assigned value of the
likelihood of occurrence, that is, (a) areas where the flooding likelihood is low (once in 1,000 years, 0.1 percent chance);
(b) areas where the probability is medium (once in 100 years, 1 percent chance); and (c) areas where the chance is high
(every 10 years, 10 percent). With three flood scenarios, the curves showing average value of damages52 under different
chance of occurrence need to be valued. The avoided AAD benefit is then obtained by deducting the area under the loss
probability curve for the ‘with project’ scenario from the area under the curve for the ‘without project’ scenario.

27.      In Nigeria, there is little or no data for drawing flood maps after dam break hazards with different probability of
occurrence, including the location and value of the exposed elements. However, based on the consultancy report ‘Dam
Break Flood Hazard and Impact Assessment to Support Data Storage Program for More Sustainable Development in
Nigeria’53 and on the impact assessment reports of the 2012 and the 2022/23 flood events, an estimation of avoided AAD
was done for this EFA, with a representative dam safety investment case. The Fukushima University study identified two-
dimensional modeling dams breach under the TRIMING Project: the Tiga Dam breach flooding modeling and Zobe and
Goronyo Dam breach flooding. Based on these models, and the existing information about dams/reservoirs bathymetry,
digital elevation model, land use cover, population, and other data for the dam areas, Fukushima University developed
the flood maps for the three dams.

28.     The case of the Tiga Dam overflow in September 2022 was used by the Fukushima University study, after relevant
data collection about the discharge through the dam and the exposed areas, for testing the model and downstream
flooding. The results of the modeling were considered for the hydrological scenarios of the flood discharge with the
exceedance probability at 10.0 percent, 1.0 percent, and 0.1 percent. The flooding and depth maps for the mentioned
events were processed with the Geographic Information System (GIS) data on affected (a) population and (b) type of

52 Data about the population, infrastructure, industrial facilities, and agricultural fields are required for flood risk and exposure of the population

and other elements (land use and land cover and soil maps) in vulnerable areas. Exposure data include information on the location and estimated
value of the exposed elements. Exposure data are vital for quantifying the potential losses and damages.
53 Final report prepared by Dr. Maksym Gusyev, and Dr. Kenji Nanba, Institute of Environmental Radioactivity, Fukushima University, and by Dr.

Mark Zheleznyak, Nichiu Svit LLC. The consultancy aimed to increase knowledge on the flood hazard and exposure due to the break of large dams
for improving flood risk preparedness and contingency planning in Nigeria.

                                                                                                                                       Page 81 of 86
          The World Bank
          Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



agricultural fields. The resulting maps in Argis format provided mapping of the risk exposure only for these two elements.54
The Tiga Dam overflow maps at the three exceedance probability flooding levels were compared with the real flooding
zones downstream of the Tiga Dam, which were identified from the satellite images.

29.     As a good match between the 1 percent flood map case and the satellite images was confirmed, the modeled
exposure for population and agriculture fields was validated as a good indicator for valuing the damage of the dam
overflow with 10.0 percent, 1.0 percent, and 0.1 percent likelihoods. The maps with flooding depth drawn for the three
hazard events with the GIS data on population and agricultural fields and the maps in Argis format were then used to
present the mapping of the risk exposure for the mentioned elements. Results are shown in Table 5.4.

                Table 5.4. Results of Spatial Analysis: Population and Agricultural Fields Flood Exposure for Tiga Dam
            Concept                   Total                                         Category of Flood Hazarda
      Population in flood zone (thousands)                      Low               Moderate             High                      Very High
10 percent flood                     138.2                     66.3                41.5               26.7                         3.7
1% flood                             189.7                     84.7                48.9               48.3                         7.8
0.1% flood                           224.2                     85.1                72.1               52.8                        14.2
        Exposed agricultural areas (km2)                       Low                Moderate                  High                 Very High
10% flood                            688.3                   227.6                 263.6                  161.3                   35.8
 1% flood                             845.0            254.5                285.5                245.8                  59.2
 0.1% flood                           945.3            256.7                300.1                298.1                  90.4
Source: Dam Break Flood Hazard and Impact Assessment to Support Data Storage Program for More Sustainable Development in
Nigeria.
Note: a. Hazard categories depend on depth of flooding: Low < 0.5 m (Caution, it is possible to walk through the water); Moderate
0.5–1.2 m (Danger, the ground floor of buildings and houses is flooded); High 1.2–2.5 m (Extreme danger, ground floor flooded up to
the roof); Very High > 2.5 m.

30.     The affected population of the Tiga Dam overflow modeled events was taken as the main indicator for estimating
the avoided AAD with the typical dam safety investments under the SPIN Project. Assuming an average of six people per
house, about 23,033,31,616 and 37,367 households would be affected with the exceedance probability of 10.0 percent,
1.0 percent, and 0.1 percent, respectively. Taking an average reconstruction cost of US$3,648 per house (the
abovementioned average reconstruction cost for the 2012 and 2022 events) and adding other needs costs (41 percent of
total needs for covering health, education, productive assets, and infrastructure damages), the average needs per affected
household becomes US$6,183. Hence, the expected value of the damages from 10.0 percent, 1.0 percent, and 0.1 percent
flood events probability for the typical dam case ‘without project’ would be US$142.4 million, US$195.5 million, and
US$231 million, respectively, as shown in Column D of Table 5.5. The estimated AAD for the ‘without project’ scenario was
estimated at US$35.18 million, as explained in Table 5.5.




54 Risk assessment is an accurate way for assessment of floods affecting population and damages to agriculture but needs more data about

settlements, infrastructure, agricultural areas, and land use elements’ location, which was not intended to be done within the Fukushima University
study.

                                                                                                                                Page 82 of 86
          The World Bank
          Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



                                     Table 5.5. AAD Computation for the ‘Without Project’ Scenario
                   Return       Probability    Probability       Damages         Interval Avge Interval Dge. Expected
                  Interval                       Interval        $ Million        Dge ($ Mill) Calcul. ($ Mill)A nual Damages
                     (A)            (B)            (C )             (D)               (E)            (F)              (G)
                    2 YR            0.5                            15.8
                                                    0.3                                 31.6              9.49               9.49
                    5 YR            0.2                            47.5
                                                    0.1                                 94.9              9.49               18.99
                   10 YR            0.1                               142.4
                                                   0.08                             155.7                 12.45              31.44
                   50 YR            0.02                          169.0
                                                   0.01                             182.2                 1.82               33.27
                  100 YR            0.01                              195.5
                                              0.009                         213.3        1.92            35.18
                 1000 YR       0.001                             231.0
               Column C: Interval probability computed as difference of probabilities (i.e. 0.5 - 0.2 = 0.3)
               Column D: Estimated damages from overflow modeling at 10%, 1% and 0.1% exceedance probability
               Column E:Average damages for the interval, i.e. (2yr damages + 5yr damages)/2
               Column F: Probability within interval (Col C) * Interval Average Damages (Col E)
               Column G: Cumulative of Col F (Note: last item is the Average Annual Damages)

31.      The benefits of dam safety investments comprise the flood damage averted in the future because of the project
interventions to reduce the frequency of flooding and mitigate the impact of flooding on properties and economic
activities, or a combination of both. The proposed typical investment for improving safety of a representative dam
(including planning, management, rehabilitation, and operation of EWS preventing and reducing downstream risks) was
assumed at US$20 million. This investment would result in a reduction of at least 15 percent on the expected value of AAD
in the face of an approaching catastrophe as proper action to protect life and property damage is taken.55 The benefit
‘with the project’ was estimated at US$5.28 million per year. With the abovementioned assumptions, the ERR of a typical
dam safety intervention was estimated at 21.9 percent, and the economic NPV at NGN 11,851 million (US$25.7 million).
Table 5.6 shows the dam safety EFA.

                                       Table 5.6. Dam Safety, Flood Protection and EWS (Tiga Dam)
 ECONOMIC BUDGET
 (In Naira Million) /a                                                                  With Project
                                                                             1               2                    3           4 to 15
  Main Benefits
    Average Annual Damages (AAD) Avoided                                            -            730.1           1,460.2       2,190.3
  Maintenance of Dam Safety
    Management and O&M of Dam & EWS                                                 -             37.2                74.4       111.6
  Investm ents in Dam Safety
    Dam Operations and Enhancing Dam Safety                                3,073.3              3,073.3       3,073.3                -
    OUTFLOWS                                                               3,073.3              3,110.5       3,147.7            111.6
  Cash Flow                                                               -3,073.3             -2,380.4      -1,687.5          2,078.7
 _________________________________
 IRR = 21.9%, NPV = 11,851
 \a The estimated AAD w ithout dam safety investm ents w ould be equivalent to US$35.18 million.
     With project investing US$20 million the AAD could be reduced by 15% (US$5.28 million) as the value of avoided AAD.




55 The study conducted under the TRIMING Project revealed that cascade operation of reservoirs under 2022 flood condition would have reduced

the peak in Benue River basin by 30 percent.

                                                                                                                                     Page 83 of 86
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



V.     Overall SPIN Economic and Financial Analysis

32.     Table 5.7 shows the SPIN Project’s overall EFA including all project costs and the expected benefits from (a)
increased irrigated production and (b) avoided AAD. The net value of production per year from the supported schemes
would grow from US$131.6 million to US$332.4 million and the NPV after all production and project costs (cash flow)
would be tripled at project maturity from US$72.7 million to US$221 million. Labor occupied would be increased by more
than 4.4 times from 4.6 million person-days to 20.3 million per year, and its productivity would increase by 65 percent
from US$15.8 of net revenue generated per day to US$26.1. The estimated ERR would be 16.7 percent and the economic
NPV US$488.4 million (NGN 225.2 billion).




                                                                                                        Page 84 of 86
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



                                               Table 5.7. Overall EFA Summary
ECONOMIC BUDGET (AGGREGATED)             Without
(In Naira Million)                       Project                                    With Project
                                         1 to 20     1       2        3         4        5         6   7        8     9 to 20
Main Production
   Maize                                               642    642    642     303     303    415    613  1,194   1,435   1,435
   Rice Paddy                                       19,614 19,614 19,614   8,769   8,769 14,623 30,951 47,260 59,307 59,307
   Milled Rice                                           -      -      -   1,376   4,335  9,255 10,890 11,870 11,870 11,870
   Broken Rice & Husk                                    -      -      -     516   1,626  3,471  4,084  4,451   4,451   4,451
   Tomato                                           21,278 21,278 21,278 10,543 10,543 14,297 20,663 32,257 36,649 36,649
   Tomato in 25 kg Crates                                -      -      -     700   2,945  7,490 13,050 15,570 16,830 16,830
   Onions at Farm                                    5,546  5,546  5,546   2,747   2,747  5,045  7,294  9,681 11,495 11,495
   Onion Off Season                                      -      -      -     169     660  1,626  2,424  2,899   2,899   2,899
   Sw eet Potatoes                                   1,230  1,230  1,230     630     630    750  1,580  1,796   2,025   2,025
   Crop Residues                                     1,089  1,089  1,089     496     496    785  1,561  2,272   2,776   2,776
   Livestock Products                               12,500 12,500 12,500 12,500 12,500 12,500 12,500 14,939 17,613 20,500
   Small Machinery Service Providers                     -      -      -      48     189    430    635    692     692     692
   Average Annual Damages (AAD) Avoided                  -      -      -     730   2,920  5,841  8,031  8,761   8,761   8,761
Sub-total Main Production                           61,899 61,899 61,899 39,528 48,664 76,528 114,273 153,643 176,803 179,690
On-Farm Use or Local Processing
   Rice Paddy                                            -      -      -   1,229   3,871  8,264  9,723 10,598 10,598 10,598
   Tomato                                                -      -      -     490   2,047  5,172  8,946 10,559 11,365 11,365
   Onions at Farm                                        -      -      -     115     450  1,109  1,652  1,976   1,976   1,976
   Livestock Products                                1,250  1,250  1,250     852     852  1,220  1,250  1,628   2,052   2,500
Sub-Total On-Farm Use                                1,250  1,250  1,250   2,686   7,220 15,764 21,571 24,761 25,992 26,440
Net Value Of Production                             60,649 60,649 60,649 36,842 41,444 60,764 92,702 128,881 150,811 153,250
Production Cost
   Investm ent
      Rice Processing Equipment                          -      -     87     166     249      -      -      -       -       -
      Onions Warehouse (60 m2 - 20 tons capacity)        -      -    217     414     611      -      -      -       -       -
      Tomato Packing and Cold Storage Facilities         -      -    244     698   1,257  1,257      -      -       -       -
      Harvesting and Threshing Machines                  -      -    138     247     386     87      -      -       -       -
      Monoculture Equipment                              -      -     45      98     164    105      -      -       -       -
      Other Inputs                                       -      -    295     628   1,004    373      -      -       -       -
   Sub-total Investm ent Costs                           -      -  1,028   2,252   3,670  1,822      -      -       -       -
   Operating
         Management and O&M of Dam & EWS                 -      -      -      37     149    297    409    446     446     446
         Inputs (Seeds, Agrochemicals, etc.)       22,026 22,026 22,026 13,507 14,726 21,331 29,451 36,261 39,952 41,306
         Irrigation Fees                               395    395    395     181     181    289    465    610     686     686
         Family Labor                                4,396  4,396  4,396   2,492   2,823  4,441  6,339  7,665   8,294   8,409
   Sub-total Operating Costs                        26,817 26,817 26,817 16,219 17,879 26,355 36,664 44,983 49,377 50,848
Sub-Total Production Cost                           26,817 26,817 27,845 18,471 21,549 28,177 36,664 44,983 49,377 50,848
SPIN Project Costs
   Management and O&M of the I&D Systems               320    516    516     516     516    516    516    516     516     516
   Dam Safety Investments and EWS                        -      -  2,981   8,943 11,925   8,943  2,981      -       -       -
   KRIS Investment                                       -  2,672  1,493 10,058    4,243  9,823 23,653 21,767   4,951       -
   BIS Investment                                        -  2,175 11,844   8,702   4,593  6,647 15,954  8,762   1,752       -
   HVIS Investment                                       -  2,249  1,593   2,437   6,092 11,341  6,795 10,872   5,483       -
   RAP Payments (KRIS, BIS and HVIS)                     -    174    286     553     341    671  1,243  1,126     307       -
   Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building     -    671  2,683   3,354   2,683  1,342  1,342  6,708   6,708       -
   Project Management                                    -    894  1,252   1,252   1,252  1,252  1,252  1,252   5,366       -
Sub-Total Other Costs                                  320  9,352 22,649 35,816 31,645 40,535 53,736 51,004 25,083        516
   OUTFLOWS                                         27,137 36,169 50,494 54,287 53,195 68,712 90,400 95,987 74,459 51,364
Cash Flow                                           33,512 24,480 10,155 -17,445 -11,750 -7,949  2,302 32,895 76,352 101,886
_________________________________
Economic IRR = 16.7%, NPV = 225,156
Financial IRR = 15.7%, NPV = 202,632



                                                                                                              Page 85 of 86
          The World Bank
          Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



33.       The project’s net GHG emission56 over its economic lifetime (20 years including implementation and capitalization
periods) was estimated to be 1,167,470 tCO2eq, translating to average annual emissions reduction of 58,374 tCO2eq,
falling from 221,738 tCO2eq (without project) to 163,364 tCO2eq (with project). Reduction in emissions would result from
changes in land use/farmland expansion, higher irrigation water use efficiency, and increase in rice yields per ha with the
only increase in emission emanating from more urea use. Overall, there would be a net reduction of emissions by about
25 percent relative to a business-as-usual scenario. When valuing this expected reduction of emissions with the low and
high shadow price of carbon (SPC),57 the ERR of the project base case scenario would increase from 16.7 percent (NPV
US$488.4 million) to 17.1 percent (NPV US$510 million) using the low SPC, and to 17.6 percent (NPV US$531.6 million)
using the high SPC.

VI.      Sensitivity Analysis

34.     The ERR and NPV were re-estimated under the following adverse scenarios representing some of the major risks
affecting the project results: (a) agricultural prices being reduced from expected levels by 10 percent and 20 percent; (b)
investment cost escalation by 20 and 40 percent; (c) post-harvest value addition for rice, tomato, and onions are not
implemented; and (d) general agricultural prices drop by 10 percent together with a general investment cost increase by
20 percent. As shown in Table 5.8, the results are strong enough to overcome adverse situations.

                                                        Table 5.8. Sensitivity Analysis
                                                                                  Economic
                                                                                                      NPV (US$,
                                             Risk Event                         Internal Rate
                                                                                                      millions)
                                                                                of Return (%)
                         Base case scenario                                         16.7               488.4
                         Output prices down 10%                                     14.9               383.5
                         Output prices down 20%                                     12.9               278.4
                         Investment cost up 20%                                     13.8               397.4
                         Investment cost up 40%                                     11.5               306.3
                         No post-harvest value addition                             15.6               421.6
                         Price down 10% (1) and cost up 20% (3)                     10.2               187.6




56 Ex-ante GHG accounting carried out using EX-ACT quantifying the net carbon balance as tons of CO
                                                                                               2 equivalent (tCO2eq).
57 The recommended SPC for 2023 used for this analysis was US$51/tCO eq and US$102/tCO eq for the low and high alternative, respectively. 2024
                                                                    2                 2
Guidance Note on Shadow Price of Carbon in Economic Analysis. World Bank.

                                                                                                                            Page 86 of 86
