Public Disclosure Authorized
                                         The World Bank
                                         SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)

                                f




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                     Project Information Document (PID)


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                    Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 05-Jan-2024 | Report No: PIDA36275




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Aug 14, 2023                                                                                       Page 1 of 10
          The World Bank
          SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)



   BASIC INFORMATION

 OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA
  A. Basic Project Data

   Country                                      Project ID            Project Name                 Parent Project ID (if any)
   St Maarten                                   P179067               SINT MAARTEN:
                                                                      WASTEWATER
                                                                      MANAGEMENT PROJECT
   Region                      Estimated Appraisal Date               Estimated Board Date         Practice Area (Lead)
   LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN 15-Jan-2024                            29-Feb-2024                  Water

   Financing Instrument                         Borrower(s)           Implementing Agency
   Investment Project Financing                 Government of Sint    National Recovery
                                                Maarten               Program Bureau

   Proposed Development Objective(s)

   The objectives of the Project are to: (i) increase access to safely managed sanitation services; and (ii) improve
   sustainability and resilience of wastewater management.

   Components
   Wastewater infrastructure investment
   Technical assistance for sustainable and resilient wastewater management
   Project management



   PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

  SUMMARY                   -NewFin1




   Total Project Cost                                                                                                     25.00
   Total Financing                                                                                                        25.00
                            of which IBRD/IDA                                                                              0.00
   Financing Gap                                                                                                           0.00


  DETAILS     -NewFinEnh1




   Non-World Bank Group Financing

      Counterpart Funding                                                                                                 15.00
         National Government                                                                                              15.00


Jan 5, 2024                                                                                                            Page 2 of 10
          The World Bank
          SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)



      Trust Funds                                                                                                                                          10.00
         Sint Maarten: Hurricane Irma Recon., Rec., & Res. Prg TF                                                                                          10.00

   Environmental and Social Risk Classification
   Substantial

   Decision
   The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

   B. Introduction and Context
   Country Context

   1.     Sint Maarten's economy is largely based on tourism. Restaurants, hotels, and other tourism-related sectors
   account for about 45 percent of the country’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP), and tourism accounted for 73 percent of
   foreign exchange income, with tourism creating employment for approximately one-third of the employed population1.
   Sint Maarten primarily caters to cruise tourists, with the island’s only deep-water port located in Philipsburg. About 80
   percent of the visitors to the island are short-stay cruise tourists.

  2.      Sint Maarten is vulnerable to natural disasters and adverse climatic events due to its location within the
  hurricane belt. For the past decades, the country has been exposed to high winds and numerous hurricanes, including
  notably intense storms: Donna in 1960 (Category 3 of the Saffir-Simpson scale), Hugo in 1989, Lenny in 1999, Luis in 1995
  (Category 4), Gonzalo in 2014 (Category 1) and Irma in 2017 (Category 5). Due to the small size of the country, a single
  storm has the potential to impact the entire population directly. High winds, rainfall, and flooding are the principal risk
  factors while the country is also vulnerable to earthquakes. Low laying urban areas are prone to flashfloods because of
  heavy rainfalls, with topographic characteristics and little consideration for stormwater drainage as contributor factors.
  In addition, coastal areas are exposed to flood risk from sea level rise and storm surge.

 3.      The Sint Maarten Recovery, Reconstruction, and Resilience Trust Fund (SXM Trust Fund) was established in
 2018. Sint Maarten made substantial efforts to address the most urgent needs following Hurricane Irma. Nevertheless,
 recovery needs were massive, and the country had limited capacity to manage large-scale reconstruction and resilience
 building. In April 2018, to support rapid and sustainable recovery from Hurricane Irma, the Government of the Netherlands
 established the SXM Trust Fund for up to EUR470 million, which is managed by the World Bank. The Government of Sint
 Maarten (GoSM) established the National Recovery Program Bureau (NRPB), which serves as the Project Implementation
 Unit (PIU) for the preparation and implementation of the activities within the trust fund since July 2018.

   Sectoral and Institutional Context

   4.    While 96 percent of the households in Sint Maarten have access to piped water supply, sewerage network
   coverage is low. Prior to the Hurricane Irma and COVID-19 pandemic, Sint Maarten experienced rapid economic
   development along with population growth for a four decades. However, this growth was not followed by sufficient


              1 National Recovery and Resilience Plan, Government of Sint Maarten, June 2018. Labor Force Survey 2017: tourism-based economy includes

              wholesale and retail industries, hotels, restaurants, and catering.


Jan 5, 2024                                                                                                                                             Page 3 of 10
          The World Bank
          SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)


   investment in wastewater infrastructure. As a result, existing public sewerage network coverage is severely limited, and
   covers only a few districts and neighborhoods of Sint Maarten, leaving significant areas and percentage of the population
   uncovered. Although GoSM has made several wastewater investments over the time, it is estimated that less than 11
   percent of the properties in the country (approx. 2,000 properties) are connected to the sewerage network.

   5.      89 percent of households rely on mostly septic tanks or direct discharges to gutters which lead to water bodies.
   The population that is not connected to the sewerage network relies on septic tanks prone to overflow or direct
   discharges into the closest water bodies. Removal of the sludge from septic tanks relies on householders’ initiative and
   is paid to private companies that provide such services. The fees for sludge removal pay for the transport and disposal of
   the sludge still represent a hindrance for many people, resulting in irregular removal of sludge from the septic tanks in
   most places. As a result, those tanks are prone to overflow, causing the discharge of untreated effluent directly into open
   gutters that flow into lower areas, ponds and lagoons such as the Great Salt Pond and eventually released into the sea.
   In this context, expanding the sewage network to connect more properties has been recognized as a priority for
   protecting the health of the population and mitigating pollution of the island’s surface and coastal waters.

   6.      Sint Maarten’s wastewater treatment infrastructure requires an upgrade to satisfy existing treatment
   requirements and deal with future loads. The country’s single municipal biological WWTP is located on A. T. Illidge Road
   and it is designed to service the eastern part of the island, including the Greater Philipsburg area, Cul de Sac, Upper
   Prince’s Quarter and the Lower Prince’s Quarter areas. The WWTP has the nominal capacity to treat 4750 m 3 of
   sewerage/day (up to 60,000 population equivalents) and is currently operating at approx. 50 percent of its design
   hydraulic load. An unknown part of these flows originates from the intrusion of stormwater, and incidentally from cruise
   ships docking at Sint Maarten. Additionally, it receives about 450 m3/d of household septic sludge delivered by trucks to
   the plant. Treated wastewater is discharged into the Great Salt Pond which is connected to the Fresh Pond via a floodgate,
   a small water body further connected to the sea via a blocked canal that is occasionally used for water discharge during
   large rainfall events.

   7.     Climate-change exacerbated extreme weather events are contributing to the direct or indirect discharge of
   untreated wastewater, leading to land, surface water and sea pollution. After storms and hurricanes, septic systems
   tend to overflow and sludge collection and transport to the country’s wastewater treatment plant can eventually
   interrupt for a considerable period, leading to land, surface water, and coastal water pollution. Even without extreme
   weather events, in the most densely developed areas of Sint Maarten, significant amounts of septic systems are
   saturated, leading to groundwater pollution and sewage runover to public roads and private properties. Clean surface,
   coastal and bathing waters, and rich biodiversity constitute the island’s major assets, which are essential for the
   development of a tourism-based economy. However, this richness is acutely threatened by the pollution created by these
   discharges of untreated wastewater. Research analysis has confirmed the unsatisfactory state of the surface/coastal
   waters, with medium to elevated levels of phosphorus and nitrogen and presence of fecal coliform bacteria, indicating
   sewerage pollution of coastal waters.

   8.      There are multiple reasons for inadequate sanitation in Sint Maarten. The unsatisfactory status of wastewater
   management in Sint Maarten results from several socio-economic, technical, and institutional issues, including (i) budget
   deficits which leave no room for capital expenditures, or budget allocation prioritized for other projects; (ii) lack of a
   wastewater financing model and no tariff or billing system for the provision of public wastewater services(currently there
   are no tariffs or connection fees being charged to the customers connected to the sewer system) ; (iii) absence of a
   formally adopted sewerage development master plan; (v) limited capacity - insufficient data, fragmented knowledge and


Jan 5, 2024                                                                                                        Page 4 of 10
              The World Bank
              SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)


   lack of clearly defined roles and responsibilities among the main stakeholders active in the water sector; and (vi) limited
   public awareness regarding wastewater pollution, in part due to the absence of comprehensive and continuous water
   quality monitoring of surface waters (ponds, lagoons, and channels) and along Sint Maarten’s beaches.

   9.     The SXM Trust Fund will support the Government of Sint Maarten efforts for increasing access to safely managed
   sanitation services and improving the sustainability and resilience of such services, through an Investment Project
   Financing (IPF) operation of US$25 million including grant of US$10 million from Sint Maarten: Hurricane Irma
   Reconstruction, Recovery and Resilience Trust Fund, and Government contribution of US$15 million. The project will
   support the upgrade and expansion of wastewater system and improvement of wastewater management services in the
   country. The infrastructure work will upgrade existing WWTP and extend the sewerage connections to enable connection
   of approximately 10,500 new customers. The project will also support the creation of a framework for sustainable
   provision of efficient, and resilient wastewater services, through the strengthening the capacities of the line Ministry for
   Public Housing, Spatial Planning, Environment, and Infrastructure (VROMI) for efficient management of wastewater
   services, improvement of legal and regulatory framework, and the development of wastewater management strategies.

   C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
  Development Objective(s) (From PAD)

   10.    The objectives of the Project are to: (i) increase access to safely managed sanitation services; and (ii) improve
   sustainability and resilience of wastewater management

   Key Results

   11.        The progress toward the PDOs achievement will be assessed through the following indicators:

         a.    People provided (out of which female) with access to safely managed sanitation services
         b.    Volume of BOD removed by wastewater treatment before discharge
         c.    Institutional and financial model for wastewater management has been adopted and is effective
         d.    Wastewater system operator has prepared water safety crisis and management program for extreme weather
               events (risks and measures)

   D. Project Description

   12.        The Project will include three components:
              (i)    Wastewater infrastructure investment,
              (ii)   Technical assistance for sustainable and resilient sanitation management, and
              (iii)  Project management.


   Component 1: Wastewater infrastructure investment (US$20 million)

   13.   The component will finance all stages of infrastructure development, including identification, design,
   supervision, and construction of new or upgrade/rehabilitation of existing wastewater collection, treatment, and
   disposal infrastructure. The component would include the preparation of Feasibility Studies, Environmental Impact



Jan 5, 2024                                                                                                         Page 5 of 10
          The World Bank
          SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)


   Assessments, and other project documentation necessary to secure required permits, detailed designs, bidding
   documents, supervision and contracting of construction works.
   Component 1 will include two sub-components:

   Sub-component 1.1: Wastewater collection This first sub-component aims at improving the coverage and resilience of
   wastewater collection. This will be done through:

   (i)     Expansion of the existing sewerage network, including transport pipelines, collection pipelines, pumping stations,
   house sewerage connection and other structures, to enable the connection for residents and commercial enterprises. The
   priority project area will be Greater Cul de Sac, and if more funds become available later, the sewerage network could be
   expanded to other priority areas that may include Greater Philipsburg and Lower Prince`s Quarter.

   (ii)    Rehabilitation of critical parts of the existing sewage system to improve its climate resilience and operational
   efficiency

   Sub-component 1.2: Upgrade of existing A. T. Illidge Road WWTP. This sub-component will include the necessary
   rehabilitation and upgrade of the existing A. T. Illidge Road WWTP. The rehabilitation and expansion work will include
   upgrades of both wastewater treatment and sludge treatment lines, necessary upgrade of equipment needed for
   measurement and analysis of wastewater, improved energy efficiency, upgrade of SCADA, etc.

   Component 2: Technical assistance for sustainable and resilient wastewater management (US$3 million)

   14.   Component aims at creating the framework for the provision of sustainable and resilient wastewater services in
   Sint Maarten, and will include the following activities:
   a)    Capacity strengthening of the line Ministry (VROMI) for planning, regulation, and supervision of wastewater services
   through training, knowledge transfers, and IT support, including preparation of a roadmap for improving VROMI capacity.

   b)     Strengthening of the policy, legal, and regulatory framework for sustainable and resilient wastewater service
   provision (building on existing plans and ordinances) . This would include: the development and adoption of a financially
   viable wastewater management model, and development and adoption of cost recovery principle, support for contracting
   the private sector for operation of the wastewater system, and establishment of an enabling policy framework that would
   enhance the service provider’s operational, financial, and institutional capacity to cope with climate- and non-climate
   related disasters and shocks.

   c)     Support to GoSM in preparing and processing a long-term contract with a private operator for the operation of the
   country’s public wastewater management system. This contract is expected to go beyond project closing date and
   represents a long-term institutional solution for wastewater management.

   d)     Development of a national sanitation strategy for Sint Maarten and mid/long-term implementation plans for phased
   expansion of a wastewater management system. This comprehensive sanitation strategy would include plans for safe
   management of sanitation for the entire population of Sint Maarten, especially those in the neighborhoods that will take
   time to be connected or will not be connected to the formal sewerage network.

   e)      Management of fecal sludge from septic tanks, including– the review and development of locally appropriate
   standards for safe containment, collection, and treatment of fecal sludge; licensing, and monitoring and optimization of
   fecal sludge emptying service providers.

Jan 5, 2024                                                                                                      Page 6 of 10
          The World Bank
          SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)


   f)     Development of a focused technical analysis on understanding the effects of wastewater pollution on coastal water
   quality, which would feed in to design of a seawater quality monitoring system and the identification of additional measures
   for reduction of surface and seawater pollution.

   g)     Development of a system for monitoring seawater quality in coastal areas/beaches and the surface water quality of
   inland ponds. The objective of this activity is to develop a conceptual design and baseline for surface and seawater quality
   monitoring, with a particular focus on bathing waters quality monitoring, which would provide adequate information on
   the status of Sint Maarten’s coastal waters, and existing inner ponds (primarily Fresh Pond and Great Salt Pond).


   15.    This component will allow the creation of adaptative capacity and resilience at the institutional level towards
   climate change in the wastewater management sector, setting the foundations for a quick response and recovery from
   climate-related hazards in the sector. It establishes adaptive strategies, including national wastewater plans focused on
   climate adaptation. Strengthening institutional capacity involves knowledge creation, skill development, and
   implementing a surface water quality monitoring system. This enhances responsiveness, improves decision-making, and
   allocates resources effectively to address climate-related challenges.

   Component 3: Project management (US$2 million)

   16.     Under this Component, the Project will support the project management and coordination capacity of the NRPB
   as a Project Implementation Unit (PIU), including support to the PIU on: (i) project operating cost, monitoring and
   evaluation activities; (ii) environmental and social risk mitigation measures; (iii) training of PIU and Gov staff; (iv) annual
   audits for the project and providers; and (v) establishment of citizen engagement measures and grievance redress
   mechanisms for the project activities.

    17.    Project beneficiaries Approximately 10,500 people in priority areas will directly gain new sewerage access and
    consequently safe sanitation services. Furthermore, the broader population of Sint Maarten, through improved policy and
    regulatory environment, will enjoy better septic tank management, improved water quality in coastal and inland water
    bodies, and increased environmental safety. Notably, the tourism-based economy, a crucial sector, will gain cleaner
  .coastal waters essential for sustainable hospitality industry development.
  .
  Legal Operational Policies
                                                                          Triggered?

   Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                           No

   Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60                                    No


  Summary of Assessment of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
  .
    18.     The Environmental and Social risk classification is Substantial. The project is expected to contribute to reduced
    pollution and promote health and wellbeing of communities and tourists, however, it is also associated with potential E&S
    risks and impacts during the construction and operation stages. The environmental risk rating is Substantial. The key
    potential environmental risks and impacts are: (i) pollution from the management and disposal of dewatered sludge and

Jan 5, 2024                                                                                                           Page 7 of 10
            The World Bank
            SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)


      other construction waste; (ii) increased energy consumption of the upgraded wastewater system; (iii) occupational health
      and safety (OHS) risks; (iv) risks related to climate change and natural disasters; (v) noise, dust and release of odors; and
      (vi) traffic risks to road users during sewer network activities. The social risk rating is Moderate. The risks are likely to be:
      (i) potential temporary interruptions to the normal operation of businesses along planned civil works route that could
      cause loss or reduction of income; (ii) cost implications for new residences and commercial businesses to connect to the
      expanded sewer network and the introduction of tariffs, that can create resistance among stakeholders if adequate
      engagement is not undertaken; (iii) noise, dust and altered traffic patterns as a result of the civil works and, finally, (iv)
      OHS risks consistent with civil works.

      19.     The NRPB has developed draft E&S instruments to manage the above E&S risks and impacts. These are: (i) a
      Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP); (ii) Labor Management Procedures (LMP); (iii) Table of Contents (ToC) for an
      Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) for the sewer network; (iv) Terms of Reference (ToR) for an
      Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA) and ESMP for the WWTP; and (v) a draft Environmental and Social
      Commitment Plan (ESCP) which will be finalized during project negotiations. The draft documents have been submitted
      for World Bank review and once cleared, they will be disclosed prior to appraisal for the purposes of consultations. The
      initial consultations will take place during project preparation and will continue, as necessary, during project
      implementation. The instruments will be finalized incorporating feedback from stakeholders and the technical designs
      once available. To manage the implementation of the project, the NRPB has a dedicated team of six qualified full time E&S
      specialists. The team has experience in implementing several projects administered by the World Bank. At this stage, it is
      expected that the current E&S team will be sufficient to manage the E&S aspects throughout the project life cycle.
      However, the human resources needs and E&S expertise required for this project will continue to be assessed during
      project implementation.

      E. Implementation

      Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

      20.    The project implementation will be carried out by the NRPB which acts as a Project Implementation Unit (PIU).
      The PIU would work closely with VROMI to execute the Project Components and ensure that the policies and procedures
      set out in the operations manual are adhered to. It would have overall responsibility for ensuring compliance with fiduciary
      agreements and procurement guidelines, social and environmental standards, and monitoring, reporting, and evaluation
      of processes and results. It would coordinate technical designs of the projects with relevant ministries and agencies and
      conduct consultative and reporting functions.

      21.    VROMI, as one of the key stakeholders and implementing partners on behalf of GoSM, will be responsible for
      making policy decisions related to planning and strategic development of wastewater management. VROMI will also
      ensure sustainable financing of wastewater management, commitment to O&M, and providing technical input during
      project design and implementation. NRPB will work closely with VROMI to ensure that the technical input and policy advice
      from VROMI is properly incorporated into project implementation.

      22.   The PIU is responsible for producing semi-annual reports to monitor progress under the Project. The PIU will be
      responsible for tracking the advancement of the Program against the indictors detailed in the results framework.
  .




Jan 5, 2024                                                                                                                Page 8 of 10
          The World Bank
          SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)



   CONTACT POINT

   World Bank

   Stjepan Gabric
   Senior Water Resources Management Specialist

   Farah Altagracia Dorval
   Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

   Borrower/Client/Recipient
   Government of Sint Maarten




   Implementing Agencies

   National Recovery Program Bureau
   Claret Connor
   Director
   c.connor@nrpbsxm.org


   FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT


   The World Bank
   1818 H Street, NW
   Washington, D.C. 20433
   Telephone: (202) 473-1000
   Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects



   APPROVAL


                                            Stjepan Gabric
   Task Team Leader(s):
                                            Farah Altagracia Dorval

   Approved By

   Practice Manager/Manager:

   Country Director:                        Ogo-Oluwa Oluwatoyin Jagha   11-Jan-2024

Aug 14, 2023                                                                           Page 9 of 10
          The World Bank
          SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)




Aug 14, 2023                                                      Page 10 of 10
