Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                The World Bank
                                                Balochistan Water Security and Productivity Improvement Project (P179227)




                                         @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                              Project Information Document (PID)


            _For Official Use Only_
                                                            Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 07-Nov-2025 | Report No: PIDIA00704




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                      Nov 07, 2025                                                                                         Page 1 of 12
                                    The World Bank
                                    Balochistan Water Security and Productivity Improvement Project (P179227)


                             @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
                             BASIC INFORMATION


                             A. Basic Project Data

                             Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                      Operation ID                 Operation Name
                                                                                                                     Balochistan Water Security
                                                            MID EAST,NORTH
                             Pakistan                                                   P179227                      and Productivity
                                                            AFRICA,AFG,PAK
                                                                                                                     Improvement Project
                             Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Approval Date      Practice Area (Lead)
                             Investment Project
                                                            08-Jul-2024                 24-Jun-2025                  Water
                             Financing (IPF)
                             Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                                                            Public Health Engineering
                             Ministry of Economic
                                                            Department, Balochistan
                             Affairs
                                                            Irrigation Department




_For Official Use Only_
                            Proposed Development Objective(s)
                             The proposed Project Development Objective is to increase access to water for productive use, improve protection
                             from floods, and improve water supply service delivery in selected areas of Balochistan.

                            Components
                             Component A: Flood protection, agricultural water, and watershed management
                             Component B: Improvement of Quetta water supply and sanitation
                             Citizen Engagement

                             @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
                             PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                             Maximizing Finance for Development

                             Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                  No
                             Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?            No

                             SUMMARY
                               Total Operation Cost                                                                                         103.30

                               Total Financing                                                                                              103.30
                                           of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                 94.00
                               Financing Gap                                                                                                   0.00


                          Nov 07, 2025                                                                                                      Page 2 of 12
                                    The World Bank
                                    Balochistan Water Security and Productivity Improvement Project (P179227)



                             DETAILS
                               World Bank Group Financing
                                 International Development Association (IDA)                                                                   100.00
                                    IDA Credit                                                                                                 100.00
                               Non-World Bank Group Financing
                                 Counterpart Funding                                                                                             3.30
                                    Borrower/Recipient                                                                                           3.30




                             @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
                           Environmental And Social Risk Classification
                           Substantial




_For Official Use Only_
                             Decision
                             The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate




                            B. Introduction and Context

                            Country Context

                           1.       Poverty reduction has slowed amid recent shocks, while growth has remained volatile and slow. Pakistan made
                           significant progress towards reducing poverty between 2001 and 2018 with the expansion of off-farm economic
                           opportunities and increased inflow of remittances. However, rapid poverty reduction has not fully translated into
                           improved socio-economic conditions, as human capital outcomes have remained poor, with high levels of stunting at 40
                           percent and learning poverty at 78 percent. Critical constraints, including persistent fiscal and current account deficit,
                           protectionist trade policies, unproductive agriculture, a difficult business environment, a heavy state presence in the
                           economy, and a financially unsustainable energy sector, have remained unaddressed, leading to slow and volatile growth.
                           Progress with poverty reduction has recently slowed amid macroeconomic instability, the COVID-19 pandemic, and the
                           catastrophic 2022 floods. The estimated lower-middle income poverty rate is 40.1 percent (US$3.65/day 2017 PPP) for
                           the year 2023-24, virtually the same as the poverty rate in 2018, but with 7 million more Pakistanis living below the poverty
                           line.
                           1.       Pakistan experienced heavy monsoon rains in 2022 leading to catastrophic and unprecedented flooding with
                           enormous human and economic impacts. Roughly 33 million people were impacted, and many permanently displaced.
                           More than 13,000 kilometers (km) of roads were destroyed, 2.2 million houses damaged, around 3.8 million hectares (ha)
                           of crops were flooded, and an estimated 1.2 million livestock were killed. Limited access to input and output markets and
                           temporary disruptions to supply chains subsequently drove up food prices and added to existing price pressures resulting


                          Nov 07, 2025                                                                                                         Page 3 of 12
                                    The World Bank
                                    Balochistan Water Security and Productivity Improvement Project (P179227)


                           from reduced agricultural yields and the global rise of food prices. The government’s Post-Disaster Needs Assessment
                           estimated that the need for rehabilitation and reconstruction is at US$16.3 billion.
                           2.       While there has been recent progress towards macroeconomic stabilization, risks remain high and faster growth
                           will require substantial reform. Real gross domestic product (GDP) growth contracted by 0.2 percent y-o-y in fiscal year
                           (FY) 23, after growing by 6.2 percent in FY22 and 5.8 percent in FY21. Accumulated economic imbalances, including high
                           fiscal deficits and increasing debt, depleted Pakistan’s buffers in which led to high vulnerability to catastrophic floods,
                           increasing world commodity prices, and tight global financing conditions. Repeated delays in implementing the previous
                           International Monetary Fund (IMF) Extended Fund Facility (EFF) program and the associated decline in external financing
                           inflows saw foreign reserves fall to critically low levels, amid high inflation and sharp depreciation. Following the expiry of
                           the incomplete EFF program, a nine-month Stand-By Arrangement (SBA) was approved by the IMF, with the IMF Board
                           approving the final review in April 2024. Under the SBA, exchange rate flexibility was restored, import controls were eased
                           with some recovery in foreign exchange reserves, and new measures were introduced to contain the budgeted FY24
                           deficit. Nonetheless, risks remain high. Short-term stability depends on, continued fiscal restraint, and new external
                           financing inflows. A new IMF program is currently being negotiated to support continued sound economic management,
                           new official inflows, and structural reforms. Robust economic recovery over the medium term will require steadfastly
                           implementing a much broader fiscal, energy and economic reform agenda.

                               Sectoral and Institutional Context




_For Official Use Only_
                           1.      Water is critical to Balochistan’s economy and public health, and improved water management is essential to
                           enhancing resilience to a changing climate. Agriculture, livestock, and industries that depend on water account for at
                           least 52 percent of the provincial GDP, and agriculture remains the primary source of employment for 67 percent of the
                           province’s 21.7 million population. Further, Balochistan faces several water-borne diseases due to inadequate access to
                           safe drinking water. These diseases represent about 80 percent of the disease burden in the province. The Balochistan
                           province is the poorest in Pakistan, with a multidimensional poverty rate of 71 percent. It is also the most water-insecure
                           province and is highly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. Improving water security1 and productivity in the
                           province is, therefore, imperative if the province is to build its resilience to climate change.
                           2.      Balochistan is experiencing a water crisis because of decades of underinvestment in water infrastructure and
                           services and weak sector institutions. Although water availability per capita in Balochistan is slightly higher than the
                           national average, water withdrawal as a percentage of the available resource (29 percent) is the lowest in the country.
                           Further, seasonal variability in water availability is far higher than the national average, and per capita water storage
                           represents only 20 percent of the national average. The low investment in water storage makes it difficult for Balochistan
                           to cope with the high seasonal variability of water resources. Recent economic growth in the province has been driven
                           mainly by the expansion of unsustainable tube-well irrigation for agriculture, especially horticulture and orchards.
                           Excessive groundwater use has led to considerable stress on groundwater resources in rural and urban areas.
                           3.      Balochistan’s high vulnerability to climate change is a risk multiplier, compounding its human and economic
                           development challenges. Climate change has increased the frequency and intensity of floods, droughts, and heat waves,
                           impacting people, ecosystems, and infrastructure. Floods and droughts disproportionately affect people with low
                           incomes. The long dry spells take a heavy toll on the livelihoods of the local populations as irrigation and potable water
                           resources dry up. Water availability drastically reduces during extended droughts, and climate change will worsen this
                           situation. The rural poor are the most vulnerable to water scarcity in Balochistan. Crop farming, fruit farming, and livestock


                           1
                             Water security refers to the availability and access to a sufficient quantity and quality of water for various purposes, including human health,
                           livelihoods, ecosystems, and economic activities and managing and mitigating water-related risks to people, environments, and economies.

                          Nov 07, 2025                                                                                                                                  Page 4 of 12
                                    The World Bank
                                    Balochistan Water Security and Productivity Improvement Project (P179227)


                           rearing are critical occupations in rural Balochistan and represent key sectors of the economy. Still, they face the major
                           challenge of access to reliable water sources.

                           4.      The groundwater in Balochistan’s aquifers provides a buffer against drought for crop production, livestock, and
                           human needs. However, inefficient water management practices and excessive groundwater use have created severe
                           economic, social, and environmental challenges for the province. Improving rural livelihoods and stimulating economic
                           growth require vastly improved management of the scarce water resources of the province. Given the limited water
                           storage capacity, managing the ever-increasing seasonal and inter-annual variability in rainfall will continue to threaten
                           water security and service provision. Furthermore, reliance on inadequate infrastructure for spate irrigation exacerbates
                           vulnerability to extreme floods. Over the past decade, the reduction in vegetation cover by approximately 15 percent has
                           decreased rainwater retention, increased the risk of flash floods, and reduced groundwater recharge.2
                           5.        Quetta, the provincial capital and main urban center of Balochistan, is already facing a water crisis, and the
                           demographic, hydroclimatic, and water management trends suggest it will worsen in a business-as-usual scenario.
                           Between 2010 and 2021, the average depth to the water table in Quetta increased by about 90 meters due to groundwater
                           over-pumping in Quetta Valley. Further, studies have indicated extensive groundwater withdrawals in Quetta Valley drive
                           land subsidence. The Quetta District’s domestic water demand is estimated at 63 million gallons per day (MGD), but only
                           24.5 MGD to 34.8 MGD are delivered by public agencies responsible for water supply and sanitation.3 Groundwater
                           irrigated orchards in the Quetta Valley are a significant driver of depletion, affecting Quetta’s water supply. The potential




_For Official Use Only_
                           for managed aquifer recharge in the Quetta Valley is high, but detailed planning and assessment are necessary to ensure
                           its viability as an adaptation option. Water quality is also an issue, and 65 percent of drinking water, is deemed unsafe for
                           human consumption. Sanitation and wastewater management have been largely neglected, contributing to the fecal
                           contamination of drinking water. In sum, water insecurity in Quetta is not only an issue of infrastructure gaps but also
                           driven by weak water management institutions struggling to cope with water variability and service delivery.
                           6.       The Balochistan Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) Policy of 2006 represented a paradigm shift
                           in water management in Balochistan, but the government has yet to translate this policy into action. Instead, the legacy
                           of siloed and uncoordinated institutions persists, and the capacity of individual departments and agencies to manage
                           water resources, deliver services, and mitigate climate risks remain weak. The Balochistan Irrigation Department (ID)
                           oversees water resources management with an almost exclusive focus on irrigation development and flood protection
                           infrastructure. The project management capacity of the ID has improved over the years with the implementation of large-
                           scale irrigation projects financed by the World Bank, the Asian Development Bank (ADB), and the European Union (EU).
                           However, the ID still lacks a service delivery approach, and progress in legal and institutional reform has been slow. An
                           updated IWRM policy has been drafted and is currently under review, and work on a new provincial water resources act
                           is in advanced stages.
                           7.      A water supply network of 1,650 km remains underutilized due to poor upstream water supply planning. There
                           are 35 service reservoirs within the city, but most remain empty because proposed upstream investments to augment
                           Quetta’s water availability with surface water never materialized. These gaps explain why access to piped water in Quetta
                           in 2020 was 40 percent, but only 3 percent of those with connections received water for more than 6 hours daily. The
                           situation is even worse in slums, where no other agencies, including QWASA, provide services. According to UNICEF, 85
                           percent of households in slums have no public water provision. There is one functioning sewage treatment plant in Quetta,
                           but sewerage network coverage is limited, and the open-channel drainage network is rudimentary and poorly maintained.



                           2 Low vegetation cover disrupts the natural water cycle and soil stability, leading to decreased water availability and increased susceptibility to floods.
                           3 Feasibility study (2023) – Quetta Water Supply Improvement.



                          Nov 07, 2025                                                                                                                                     Page 5 of 12
                                    The World Bank
                                    Balochistan Water Security and Productivity Improvement Project (P179227)


                           QWASA also has significant inefficiencies in infrastructure operations and maintenance (O&M), high energy use, and high
                           water loss.4 Quetta will remain water insecure unless these gaps are addressed.
                           8.      The water crisis in Balochistan presents significant challenges for women and girls who bear the brunt of water
                           scarcity in their daily lives. The responsibilities of water collection fall disproportionately on them, which can limit their
                           access to education and economic opportunities. The lack of infrastructure that caters to the needs of women exacerbates
                           these challenges, leading to health issues and limiting their participation in agriculture and water management. The low
                           representation of women in the water sector hinders their professional advancement. These issues can be addressed by
                           improving water infrastructure with a gender-sensitive lens, implementing policies that promote workplace gender
                           equality, and fostering an environment that encourages women's participation in decision-making processes.
                           9.       A water secure future for Balochistan requires a two-pronged approach. On the one hand, where water is reliably
                           available through rainfall runoff and seasonal riverine flooding, it needs to be harnessed and managed better to (i) expand
                           productive use in a sustainable way, (ii) increase water productivity where agricultural land is already in productive use,
                           and (iii) mitigate hydro-climatic risks (both floods and droughts) that are becoming more pronounced due to climate
                           change impacts. The total cultivated area in Balochistan is 3.19 million ha, while an additional 3.86 million ha is
                           characterized as ‘cultivable wasteland’ due to lack of access to water that prevents it from being farmed. For the expansion
                           of cultivated areas, the Kachhi plains hold great potential. Here, seasonal flooding is consistent, but extreme flooding is
                           increasing, and the water management and land-use systems are currently not sufficiently resilient. Thus, the Kachhi plains




_For Official Use Only_
                           simultaneously present both an urgent need for flood protection investment and a profound opportunity to expand the
                           productive use of harvested flood water through alternative storage solutions, such as storage ponds. This area also has
                           great potential for strengthening the resilience of poor farming communities to climate change.
                           10.      Conversely, most parts of Balochistan primarily depend on groundwater (which is under stress) to meet the
                           growing population's agricultural and domestic water requirements. In regions where dense and expanding urban
                           settlements compete with water-intensive farms and orchards, modernizing urban water supply and sanitation service
                           delivery and increasing efficiency is crucial. The solution also includes augmenting the existing water supply with
                           alternative surface water resources to reduce the stress on groundwater resources. These interventions are needed
                           urgently in the rapidly urbanizing Quetta Valley. It is estimated that reducing water leakages in the QWASA supply network
                           could save about 7 million m3/year, and adopting improved irrigation water management practices can save another 23
                           million m3/year of groundwater. For such water savings to materialize, investment is needed to strengthen QWASA’s
                           infrastructure and institutional performance, and the Government of Balochistan (GoB) will need to adopt an IWRM
                           approach to improve water resources management in the Quetta Valley.
                           11.      The GoB has requested World Bank support in addressing these pressing water security issues related to
                           irrigation, climate change vulnerability (flood and drought management), and water supply and sanitation in priority areas
                           in the province. The Balochistan Water Security and Productivity Improvement Project (BWSPIP) will support priority
                           investments in Kachhi plains and Quetta valley while supporting Balochistan in developing a credible long-term program
                           to improve water security. The project will strengthen relevant institutions to adopt IWRM and better position them to
                           implement the Balochistan Integrated Water Resources Policy 2024 and the new Balochistan Water Act, which is expected
                           to be presented for the Provincial Assembly’s considerations this year.


                            Relationship to CPF




                           4 The losses were estimated at 40 percent in a study performed in 2004.



                          Nov 07, 2025                                                                                                          Page 6 of 12
                                    The World Bank
                                    Balochistan Water Security and Productivity Improvement Project (P179227)


                           12.     The project is consistent with the World Bank Group’s (WBG) Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) FY15–19 for
                           Pakistan discussed by the WBG Board of Executive Directors on May 1, 2014 (Report No. 84645-PK). The CPS was
                           extended to FY20 by the corresponding Performance and Learning Review dated May 18, 2017 (Report No. 113574). The
                           new Country Partnership Framework (CPF) preparation was deferred to FY21 due to the COVID-19 crisis and paused due
                           to the recent unprecedented and catastrophic monsoon floods. A new CPF is expected to be presented to the Board of
                           Executive Directors in early FY25. The focus areas and objectives of the CPS remain relevant and are reflected in the
                           ongoing engagement in the country. This project contributes to CPS Outcome 2.2: Increased Productivity in Farms in
                           Selected Irrigations Schemes; Outcome 3.2: “Reduced Vulnerability for Groups at Risk;” and Outcome 3.3: “Increased
                           Resilience to Disasters in Targeted Regions.”

                            C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

                            Development Objective(s) (From PAD)
                            13.     The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase access to water for productive use, improve
                            protection from floods, and improve water supply service delivery in selected areas of Balochistan.

                              Key Results




_For Official Use Only_
                            14.     The following indicators will be used to assess PDO level indicators:

                                    PDO Level Indicators
                                •    People with improved access to water for productive use (of which women).
                                •    People with enhanced resilience to climate risks (of which women).
                                •    People provided with water supply service (of which (%) is safely managed, of which women, of which people
                                     living in kachi abadis).

                             D. Project Description
                           Component A: Flood protection, agricultural water, and watershed management
                           Total Costs US$63 million, of which IDA US$60 million

                           15.     This component will finance priority water infrastructure, watershed management, and on-farm water
                           management in the Kacchi plains, as well as related project management support and technical assistance to improve
                           access to water for production and enhance resilience to climate risks in the Kachhi plains. Activities are organized into
                           four sub-components.
                           16.      Sub-component A1: Water infrastructure. This sub-component will finance priority flood protection and irrigation
                           infrastructure to protect people and properties from floods and ensure year-round water availability for agriculture and
                           limited domestic uses by harnessing excess flood water. Moreover, the infrastructure will be resilient to withstand floods,
                           droughts, and high winds. The activities under this sub-component will include (i) construction of seven flood dispersal
                           structures to harness flood waters for productive use while protecting communities from the destructive impacts of floods,
                           (ii) embankment protection works, and (iii) water conveyance infrastructure, including canals, gauges, regulation, and
                           measurement systems.
                           17.     Sub-component A2: Watershed management. This sub-component will finance a combination of community-led
                           watershed management and conservation interventions covering an area of approximately 60,000 ha to reduce soil
                           erosion, recharge groundwater, increase carbon stock, and increase feed and fodder supply for livestock. Interventions

                          Nov 07, 2025                                                                                                       Page 7 of 12
                                    The World Bank
                                    Balochistan Water Security and Productivity Improvement Project (P179227)


                           will be identified through a participatory watershed planning process. They will include (i) afforestation, (ii) erosion check
                           and control structures, (iii) land leveling, (iv) water detention structures and ponds, (iv) other water and soil conservation
                           practices and, (v) capacity building for watershed management committees.
                           18.      Sub-component A3: Improvements of on-farm water productivity. The sub-component will finance (i) small-scale
                           on-farm infrastructure, such as the construction or rehabilitation of small water channels, rainwater harvesting structures,
                           land levelling, and access roads, and (ii) training and technical assistance on climate-smart agricultural practices to improve
                           on-farm water productivity, (iii) capacity building of water user associations (WUAs) to operate and maintain the
                           infrastructure especially the ponds. The project will ensure women’s representation and leadership in the WUAs by
                           establishing female-only WUAs with training in leadership and negotiation, as well as in technical skills such as financial
                           management and O&M. Separate training will also be provided to women on agricultural productivity, climate-smart
                           agriculture, horticulture, livestock, and kitchen gardening to improve their resilience to climatic shocks.
                           19.     Sub-component A4: Project management support and technical assistance. This sub-component will finance the
                           project management, monitoring and evaluation and studies for component A. The component will also finance
                           expenditures associated with the component implementation, including incremental costs associated with the Project
                           Implementation Unit (PIU) in the Irrigation Department, Project Supervision and Implementation Assistance (PSIA)
                           consultants, M&E consultants, and implementation of Management Plans and Strategic Studies including the
                           Environmental Management Plan (EMP), the Social Mitigation Plan and the Gender Action Plan (GAP). Study tours will also
                           be included with piloting new technologies and others that may be identified during project implementation and feasibility




_For Official Use Only_
                           studies for other river basins (that do not include international waterways as defined in OP7.50).

                           Component B: Improvement of Quetta water supply and sanitation
                           Total Costs US$40.3 million, of which IDA US$40 million

                           20.    This component will finance priority bulk water augmentation and wastewater infrastructure for Quetta City and
                           improvements in QWASA, operational efficiency, and service delivery capacity. Activities are organized in three sub-
                           components.
                           21.      Subcomponent B1: Bulk water supply and wastewater infrastructure investments. This sub-component will
                           finance (i) preparation of a water security plan for Quetta Valley and the investments plan, (ii) feasibility studies for
                           rehabilitation of bulk water conveyance systems, (iii) rehabilitation of selected non-functional groundwater pumping
                           stations, (iv) a sustainable groundwater management program, including the construction of infiltration ponds and
                           watershed management, and (v) feasibility studies and urgent upgrades for priority sanitation systems.
                           22.      Subcomponent B2: Improving QWASA’s operational efficiency and service delivery capacity. This subcomponent
                           will finance Technical assistance for improving overall institutional capacity of QWASA will include (i) preparation
                           performance agreement between GoB and QWASA that sets out specific operational, commercial, financial, and service
                           performance targets for QWASA and GoB, (ii) development of QWASA Utility Strategy including a Human Resources
                           Management plan, (iii) development and implementation of a capacity development plan, (iv) the development and
                           implementation of a Gender Action Plan. Activities to support service delivery will include (ii) the establishment of a
                           dedicated wastewater management unit to manage existing and planned wastewater investments, (iii) the establishment
                           of a kachi abadi unit to expand QWASA services to the poorest settlements, (iv) construction of public water points with
                           a focus on kachi abadis. Activities to improve operational efficiency will include (i) installation of a Supervisory Control and
                           Data Acquisition (SCADA) system, (ii) hydraulic network modeling of the QWASA’s water distribution networks, (iii)
                           optimization, prioritization, repair, and rehabilitation of the network, (iv) development of a WASH Management
                           Information System (MIS) for QWASA.



                          Nov 07, 2025                                                                                                            Page 8 of 12
                                    The World Bank
                                    Balochistan Water Security and Productivity Improvement Project (P179227)


                           23.     Subcomponent B3: Support for project management and studies. This subcomponent will support the QWASA
                           PIU in improving core project management competencies—procurement, financial management, monitoring and
                           evaluation, E&S safeguards, PSIA and M&E consultants for Component B, including setting up a project-level MIS and
                           incremental operating costs for the PIU.

                           Component C: Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)
                            Total Costs US$0 million of which IDA US$0 million

                           24.      This component will support preparedness for and rapid response to climate and natural disasters, emergency,
                           and/or catastrophic events, as needed. The provisional zero cost for this component will allow for rapid reallocation of
                           credit proceeds from other components under streamlined procurement and disbursement procedures in case of an
                           eligible emergency.

                             @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate
                             Legal Operational Policies                                                           Triggered?
                             Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                          No
                             Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                    No




_For Official Use Only_
                           Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts

                           25.     Environmental: The project activities are envisaged to have Substantial environmental risks due to moderate to
                           large scale civil works both in Component A and B, multiple locations of project activities, unstable security situation in
                           the province and weak institutional capacities. Accordingly, all environmental and social standards (ESSs), except ESS7 &
                           ESS9, are assessed as relevant at appraisal. Overall, the project is expected to generate substantial positive environmental
                           benefits under both Component A and Component B. Component A will introduce new technologies that will promote
                           water use efficiency and improve the management of groundwater while delivering benefits to poor smallholder farmers.
                           Likewise, watershed management activities will improve the ecological status of the Project intervention areas in the
                           Kachhi plains while limiting the destruction caused by floods. The project will increase the vegetation cover simultaneously
                           contributing to both climate change mitigation and adaptation. Component B activities will contribute to reducing the
                           amount of untreated effluent currently being disposed of in the environment or directly used in agriculture, thus leading
                           to improved health related outcomes. The agricultural activities supported in the area are unlikely to lead to
                           environmental impacts because of the very low usage of chemicals.

                           26.      However, the medium to large scale construction activities for the proposed interventions may cause adverse
                           environmental risks and impacts if not managed timely and properly. The likely environmental risks and impacts include:
                           generation of spoil from excavation activities, dust generation caused by excavation and running of project vehicles on
                           unpaved roads/tracks, air emissions released by construction machinery and vehicles, soil and ground/surface water
                           contamination caused by release of contaminants at the worksites and discharge of domestic sewage and other
                           wastewaters from temporary facilities, solid waste generation, clearing of natural vegetation and trees, CHS risks
                           associated with movement of heavy machinery, dump trucks, and deep excavations; OHS risks associated with the
                           construction works, unsafe and unhealthy working conditions, security of workers and equipment, concerns related to
                           river water quantity and quality. In the case of flood water detention, water harvesting, and ground water recharge
                           activities under Component A, there is likely reduction of flood surface water flows during the rainy season for lower
                           riparian areas. Other likely impacts for Component B activities include, temporary disruption on supply and quantity of

                          Nov 07, 2025                                                                                                        Page 9 of 12
                                    The World Bank
                                    Balochistan Water Security and Productivity Improvement Project (P179227)


                           water to the communities and related health and safety risks during implementation. Most of these environmental risks
                           are, however, temporary, site specific and largely reversible in nature and can be managed and mitigated through
                           appropriate screening and mitigation measures. As the project activities will be carried out in the built or already
                           transformed environment; the adverse impacts on biodiversity and forests are not likely.

                           27.      Social: The project in Balochistan is set to deliver significant social benefits, including flood protection, enhanced
                           water quality and supply, improved sanitation, and support for farming livelihoods. However, it faces potential adverse
                           impacts from substantial civil works, such as land and labor issues, occupational health and safety concerns, and
                           community health and safety risks. In particular, the rehabilitation of water and sewage systems under Component B in
                           densely populated areas of Quetta could lead to temporary displacement of people and businesses, road closures, and
                           increase risk of gender-based violence, sexual harassment, and other abuses. Further risks include inequities in water
                           distribution, particularly affecting women and marginalized groups in slums, as well as inter and intra-tribal conflicts that
                           could undermine fairness. Security concerns for project staff and the exclusion of women from water management
                           activities add additional layers of complexity. The project employs a series of environmental and social (E&S) tools,
                           grievance redress mechanisms (GRMs), and regular monitoring to mitigate these risks, ensuring ongoing stakeholder
                           engagement and compliance. Overall, the social risks of the project are considered substantial, requiring vigilant
                           management and capacity building among WUAs to protect vulnerable groups during the implementation phase, as
                           confirmed by risk assessments for both project components. Based on the above, overall, social risk is rated Substantial.




_For Official Use Only_
                           28.      For Component A, an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) was conducted, leading to the creation
                           of an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP). For Component B, the Government of Balochistan and the
                           Balochistan Irrigation Department implemented a comprehensive Environmental and Social (E&S) assessment using a
                           framework approach. This resulted in an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) compliant with ESS1
                           standards. The ESMF establishes guidelines for assessing and managing environmental risks, introduces a screening
                           process for subprojects, and provides templates for site-specific ESMPs along with recommended mitigation strategies. It
                           also addresses labor and community health and safety issues, suggesting enhancements in institutional E&S management
                           by utilizing and augmenting the existing Balochistan Integrated Water Resources Management and Development Project
                           structures with more staff and training.

                           29.     An Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) and a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) have also been
                           developed, focusing on the safety of existing dams per ESS4 requirements. The ESCP includes necessary actions and
                           assessments, such as reviewing existing documents and operational maintenance procedures or initiating new studies to
                           ensure safety and integrate findings into subproject designs.

                           30.      Component B faces risks of economic and physical displacement and the eviction of informal settlers during the
                           upgrade of water and sewage systems in Quetta's densely populated and slum areas. An Investigative Study on
                           Encroachment and Anti-Encroachment Drives in Quetta City was conducted as part of the Resettlement Framework to
                           evaluate these efforts and plan for potential resettlements. The study highlighted encroachments along water supply
                           routes that may need clearing. Local authorities and the Metropolitan Corporation Quetta manage anti-encroachment
                           drives, keeping detailed records of affected locations and people. Additionally, a Resettlement Framework compliant with
                           ESS5 has been established, with Resettlement Plans to be prepared during the implementation of Component B to address
                           site-specific impacts, utilizing negotiated agreements, expropriation, and compensation strategies, including protocols for
                           voluntary land donations. Component A is not anticipated to cause involuntary resettlement, and therefore does not
                           require a Resettlement Plan.


                          Nov 07, 2025                                                                                                          Page 10 of 12
                                    The World Bank
                                    Balochistan Water Security and Productivity Improvement Project (P179227)


                           31.    Gender. The project addresses three main gender gaps. First, the project will improve women’s voice and
                           representation in community-level water management institutions by addressing deficits in their skills. This will be
                           achieved through systematic engagement of women and women’s groups to form watershed management plans and new
                           WUAs. Second, the project will improve women’s resilience to climate change by addressing their limited skills and access
                           to productive land. This will be achieved by establishing kitchen gardens and providing training on climate-resilient
                           production of high-value fruits and vegetables targeted at women only. Finally, the project will improve women's
                           representation in management/leadership within QWASA.
                           32.      Social Inclusion. With respect to social inclusion, the project will pay particular attention to the most underserved
                           population of Quetta who live in kachi abadis. The project activities under component B will specifically target these
                           populations by delivering safely managed water sources. This will be achieved through the construction of standposts and
                           toilets in these communities. The project will also ensure that the special needs of people with disabilities are accounted
                           for in the design of the access to the standposts and toilets.
                           33.     Citizen engagement. The project will adopt various complementary citizen engagement approaches for
                           components A and B. Under component A, WUAs and watershed management committees will serve as an important
                           platform for two-way dialogues and participatory feedback processes as part of regular monitoring. Under component B,
                           the project will support the development and implementation of a robust customer and stakeholders' engagement
                           strategy using both traditional and digital communication platforms to maximize the participation of Quetta residents.
                           Key communication tools such as customer services centers, media platforms, and community outreach meetings will be




_For Official Use Only_
                           enhanced to respond to inquiries and engage on water and sanitation services issues. A Stakeholder Engagement Plan
                           (SEP) has been prepared to guide citizen engagement and will be updated during project implementation.

                           34.      Paris alignment. The project is aligned with the Paris Agreement on both mitigation and adaptation. As activities
                           are on the universally aligned list, the project does not put Pakistan’s low-GHG emissions development path at risk. Several
                           risk mitigation activities have been taken to reduce the impacts of flood, drought, and heatwaves to ensure these climate
                           risks do not pose a significant risk to the project’s activities and PDO.

                            E. Implementation
                            Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

                           35.               The Irrigation Department will implement component A through their existing PIU, while the QWASA
                           will implement component A through a new Project Implementation Unit (PIU) to be created and staffed with QWASA
                           staff and relevant specialists. For both PIUs, project management functions will include staffing, procurement, contract
                           management, monitoring and evaluation, environment, social safeguard, project supervision, and financial management.
                           The PIUs will benefit from capacity strengthening during project preparation and implementation. The PIUs will have the
                           overall responsibility for project monitoring and evaluation in their respective domains and locations. A Project Steering
                           Committee (PSC) will be responsible for providing orientation and guidance and will coordinate the PIUs. It will oversee
                           the overall project implementation and outcomes. It will include members from all relevant departments including the
                           PHE, Agriculture, Irrigation, Forestry, Environment and P&D departments.

                             @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
                             CONTACT POINT

                             World Bank



                          Nov 07, 2025                                                                                                         Page 11 of 12
                                    The World Bank
                                    Balochistan Water Security and Productivity Improvement Project (P179227)


                               Basharat Ahmed Saeed
                               Senior Water Specialist

                             Borrower/Client/Recipient
                              Ministry of Economic Affairs

                             Implementing Agencies
                              Public Health Engineering Department

                              Balochistan Irrigation Department

                             FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

                             The World Bank
                             1818 H Street, NW
                             Washington, D.C. 20433
                             Telephone: (202) 473-1000




_For Official Use Only_
                             Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                             @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
                             APPROVAL


                             Task Team Leader(s):                     Basharat Ahmed Saeed

                             Approved By

                             Practice Manager/Manager:                Josses Mugabi                             20-Mar-2024

                             Country Director:                        Najy Benhassine                           26-Jun-2024




                          Nov 07, 2025                                                                                        Page 12 of 12
