Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Guinea Water and Sanitation Project (P179017)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                 Project Information Document (PID)

                                                Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 21-Feb-2025 | Report No: PIDA0302




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     Guinea Water and Sanitation Project (P179017)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                       Operation ID                 Operation Name
                               WESTERN AND CENTRAL                                       Guinea Water and
Guinea                                                      P179017
                               AFRICA                                                    Sanitation Project
Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Approval Date      Practice Area (Lead)
Investment Project
                               29-Jan-2025                  31-Mar-2025                  Water
Financing (IPF)
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency          GEF Focal Area
                               Ministere de l'Energie, de
Ministy of Economy and
                               l'Eau et des Hydrocarbures   Climate Change
Finance (MEF)
                               (MEHH)

Proposed Development Objective(s)
The project development objective is to increase access to safely managed water services in Greater Conakry and to
strengthen the operational and organizational performance of water and sanitation institutions in Guinea.

Components
COMPONENT 1: Increasing and improving water services in Greater Conakry
Component 2. Support to Water and Sanitation Institutional and Policy Reforms
Component 3. Enhancing Water Resources Management in Selected Areas
Component 4. Capacity Strengthening and Project Implementation Support

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             No

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                          499.09

  Total Financing                                                                                               499.09
              of which IBRD/IDA                                                                               200.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                                   0.00


                                                                                                                   Page 1
        The World Bank
        Guinea Water and Sanitation Project (P179017)



 DETAILS
    World Bank Group Financing
       International Development Association (IDA)                                                              200.00
         IDA Credit                                                                                             200.00
    Non-World Bank Group Financing
       Trust Funds                                                                                               10.09
         Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                                       10.09
       Counterpart Funding                                                                                       15.00
         Borrower/Recipient                                                                                      15.00
       Other Sources                                                                                            274.00
         EC: European Investment Bank                                                                           274.00




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
Environmental And Social Risk Classification
High


 Decision
 The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate




 Other Decision (as needed)

 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context

1. Guinea is a resource-rich, lower middle-income country (LMIC) with a population of 14.2. million people (2024)1,
   located on the west coast of Africa. Guinea is uniquely endowed with natural resources, including exceptional mineral
   deposits, abundant water resources, favorable conditions for agriculture, as well as extensive forest systems and
   biodiversity. Despite its riches, Guinea has a relatively low GDP per capita of USD 1,564 in 2023. After averaging 4.5
   percent between 2000 and 2022, Guinea's economic growth reached 6.7 percent in 2023 pushed by strong mining


1 Guinea’s population grows at about 2.4 percent per year (UN, World Population Prospects – 2022 Revision)



                                                                                                                     Page 2
        The World Bank
        Guinea Water and Sanitation Project (P179017)


    and agriculture performance. Aided by stable transport costs and prudent fiscal and monetary policy, inflation
    decelerated from 10.5 percent in 2022 to 7.8 percent in 2023.

2. The human development needs in Guinea are substantial. Despite relatively robust GDP growth, weak mining
   linkages to non-mining sectors, headwinds from Dutch disease dynamics, and external shocks have limited job
   creation and poverty reduction—Guinea’s international poverty rate, measured at a $3.65 threshold for LMICs,
   increased from 46.6 percent in 2018 to an estimated 51.4 percent in 2023.2 Poverty remains a strongly rural
   phenomenon, with 63% of the rural population living in poverty, compared to 22 percent in urban areas. Guinea is
   currently ranked 182nd out of 192 countries in the Human Development Index (HDI) with an average life expectancy
   of 59 years, a stunting rate of 26 percent among children under 5, and an adult literacy rate of 45 percent. 3 Urban
   youth and women are among the most vulnerable groups in Guinea, particularly in agricultural areas and in the
   poorest quintiles. Guinea was ranked 182 out of 191 countries on the Gender Inequality Index in 2021, placing it in
   the bottom 5 percent worldwide.4 Gender gaps start early, with girls more likely not to attend school, and more likely
   also to drop out due to early marriage or pregnancy.

 Sectoral and Institutional Context

3. Guinea is known as West Africa’s “water tower” but water resources are not adequately monitored. It is endowed
   with 1,165 rivers spread over 23 sub-basins, 14 of which are shared with neighboring countries, including the Niger,
   Senegal and Gambia rivers. Groundwater resources are also substantial, estimated at 13,000 billion m3. Although
   Guinea's water resources are only partially tapped, their sustainable management is impaired by weak institutional
   capacity to monitor water use and insufficient data on surface and groundwater resources. The lack of investment in
   drinking water supply has led in recent years to the proliferation of private boreholes – which are not well monitored
   – and this has in turn raised concerns about the quality and quantity of aquifers. More research is needed in this area.

4. Expected impacts of climate change include: (i) an overall increase in average temperatures of 2.20C by 2050; (ii)
   more volatility and uncertainty in average annual rainfall by 2050, together with a change in the frequency and
   seasonal distribution of precipitation; and (iii) a rising sea level. Such trends carry the risk of significant impacts on
   agriculture, forestry, water resources and coastal zones, among others. The region is considered moderately sensitive
   to both increasing droughts and flooding, but the frequency and severity of fires are expected to increase.

5. Human activities in the Kankoure basin, part of the Samou sub-basin that supplies Greater Conakry’s water, are
   impacting water resources. Conakry’s water supply during the dry season depends almost exclusively on the Baneah
   dam reservoir5 (264 million m3 storage) on the Samou River, and on the small Kalé (9 million m3) and Grandes Chutes
   (2 million m3) reservoirs downstream. Increased anthropogenic pressure, deforestation, and slash-and-burn
   agriculture, especially on slopes, contribute to soil degradation and vulnerability to heavy rainfall, which further
   increases sediment transport. Industrial activities, especially bauxite mining is also a cause of land degradation and
   high-water turbidity, as it takes place in the upper layers of the terrain over a large area and runoff control measures

2 October 2024 World Bank Macro Poverty Outlook (MPO)
3 In 2020, the Human Capital Index (HCI) was estimated at 0.4, indicating that a person born in Guinea may only be 40 percent as productive in

adulthood compared to if they had enjoyed full education, health, and employment. Human Capital Index Score for Guinea,
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/HD.HCI.OVRL?locations=GN
4 The Index was developed by the United Nations Development Programme, as cited in Unlocking Women’s and Girls’ Potential - The Status of

Women and Girls Relative to Men and Boys in Guinea: Guinea Gender Assessment, May
2023. https://documentsinternal.worldbank.org/search/34056858
5 Baneah is mainly used for storage and electricity production at present.



                                                                                                                                                 Page 3
        The World Bank
        Guinea Water and Sanitation Project (P179017)


    are not implemented adequately. As a result, the precipitation that falls on these lands, when drained by the Samou
    River, is very heavily loaded with suspended solids.6 Furthermore, increased erosion leads to reduced groundwater
    recharge, which in turn reduces the “base flow” of the Samou river and, consequently, the filling of the main reservoir
    outside of wet periods.

6. Aware of these issues, the Government of Guinea (GoG) has announced its intention to create the Gangan National
   Park (GNP) as part of the expansion of its Protected Areas Network to increase national ecosystem services. The
   future GNP will integrate a significant part of the Samou sub-basin upstream of Baneah and Grandes Chutes dams to
   maintain and restore ecosystem services including those related to water quality and quantity, in collaboration with
   local communities. Moreover, the Government developed the Politique Nationale de l’Eau (National Water Policy) in
   2018, which aims to implement integrated water resources management (IWRM). The 1994 Water Law is currently
   being revised under the IDA funded Natural Resources, Mining and Environment Project (P168613).

7. The water sector is under the authority of the Ministry of Energy, Water Resources and Hydrocarbons (MEHH). The
   National Directorate of Water Resources (Direction Nationale de l’Hydraulique or DNH), within MEHH, is responsible
   for planning, managing and monitoring water resources. However, DNH lacks enough technical staff and has
   inadequate financial resources to carry out reliable monitoring of surface and groundwater resources. The Société
   des Eaux de Guinée (SEG), the state-owned utility, was established in 2001 and is mandated to provide potable water
   services in urban areas under the overall authority of MEHH. After a period of private provision of water services
   through an affermage (lease) contract between 1989 and 2001, the public sector regained control when SEG was
   created in 2001. Since then, the state has been responsible for financing investments and servicing sector debt and
   SEG is responsible for covering its operating costs, with no subsidies from the Government. Annex 3 includes more
   information on the utility’s performance. Another agency, Service National d’Aménagement des Points d’Eau (SNAPE),
   is responsible for rural water services under the Ministry of Territorial Development (MATD).

8. Access to water and sanitation services in Guinea is limited and utility services are unreliable. While access to basic
   drinking water is estimated at 71% in 2022 (92% in urban areas, 59% in rural areas), piped water service is only
   available to 23% of the population nationwide (47% in urban areas, 8.1% in rural areas). The last investments in new
   water production date to 2013 and water supply has not kept up with the growing population. Urbanization (estimated
   at 2.8 percent per year in the project area)7 has resulted in the establishment of many new settlements in Greater
   Conakry, some of which lack formal water services.8 Faced with insufficient water supplies, SEG is forced to schedule
   regular water disruptions for existing customers. Consequently, residents resort to expensive, poor quality and carbon
   intensive options, such as informal water trucks (which run on fuel) and drilling private wells (with gas powered
   pumps). Low-income families, women and girls bear the brunt of the lack of good services in terms of cost and time
   spent fetching water.9

9. Water tariffs have not been adjusted since 2013 and as a result SEG does not have sufficient revenue to cover its
   operating costs. Moreover, 60% of water consumption comes from large administrative customers, but they do not

6 SEG’s water intake at the Grandes Chutes site has reached more than 100 Nephelometric Turbidity Units (NTU), a measure of turbidity, during the

rainy season since bauxites operations started in the area. The NTU ranges from 0 (pure water) to over a thousand (for highly polluted water) and a
value of over 100 indicates moderate to high levels of pollution.
7 World Bank data estimates the overall urbanization rate in Guinea at 3.5%: https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.URB.GROW?locations=GN
8 Between the last two censuses of 1996 and 2014, the population has thus increased by nearly 50% in Conakry, i.e. an average annual growth rate

of 2.4%. In peripheral municipalities, the growth rate is even higher; around 5%.
9
  World Bank assessments showed that it is not unusual for households to spend up to 20% of their household budget on purchasing water from
trucks. However, international guidelines (UNDP) recommend that, in terms of affordability, households should not spend more than 3% of their
household budget.

                                                                                                                                              Page 4
        The World Bank
        Guinea Water and Sanitation Project (P179017)


    pay their bills consistently, which impacts SEG’s operating ratio. In response to these challenges, the pipeline IDA Fiscal
    Sustainability and Efficiency Reforms Development Policy Financing (DPF) (P501272), will include prior actions for
    water that will compel an increase in tariffs and the adoption of a new water tariff methodology.10 In addition, the
    Guinea Water and Sanitation Project (PEAG) will support the authorities to implement the new methodology and
    engage in social dialogue to ensure the new tariff policy is well received by users. PEAG will also finance new water
    production and distribution infrastructure, as well as non-revenue water and network rehabilitation to help address
    inefficiencies in the current distribution system.

10. Commercial operations are also weak and are too dependent on paper and in-person services. Through the previous
    project, PUEG (P157782), SEG received a new customer management system in 2023 and a digital master plan for the
    utility was developed but more funding and technical support is needed to mainstream digitalization as a lever for
    transforming the utility. SEG has established a utility turnaround plan, funded by the French Development Agency,
    AFD, in 2022, which is referred to as « NEMA » (Notre Eau Maîtrisée et Accessible). PEAG will support the
    implementation of the digital, human resources other corporate strengthening pillars under NEMA with the
    expectation that SEG will become a more modern organization that operates in a more customer-oriented and
    efficient way.

11. The energy and water regulator has so far focused on energy and has not fulfilled its mandate for water. The
    regulator, the Autorité de la Regulation des secteurs de l’Energie et de l’Eau (AREE), is tasked with developing tariffs
    for Cabinet’s approval. It has only been operational since 2018 and to date does not have sufficient capacity and
    influence to monitor and report on SEG’s performance. AREE has already benefited from technical assistance (TA) and
    support from the IDA-funded Electricity Access Scale-Up Project (P164225), but this support did not cover AREE’s
    water remit. PEAG will build on the previous TA to focus on building AREE’s capacity for water regulation, with a focus
    on incentivizing SEG’s performance and nurturing dialogue with the Government and other actors.

12. Urban sanitation service delivery and governance arrangements need to be revised. Access to basic sanitation
    service is estimated at 31% nationwide (47% in urban areas, 21.7% in rural areas). Urban areas, including most of
    Conakry, lack sewerage and rely on onsite sanitation solutions, comprised of household latrines and septic tanks
    periodically emptied by private entrepreneurs. However, it is common practice for fecal sludge to be disposed
    untreated in the environment. The organizational framework is weak, exacerbated by duplications and the dispersion
    of responsibilities across four ministries11 and various municipalities. The National Directorate of Land Use Planning
    and Urban Development (DATU), which falls under MUHAT, is tasked with designing sanitation policy and regulating
    sanitation services nationwide – including wastewater and rainwater discharge – but it has a small budget, is severely
    understaffed and is poorly equipped for developing and operating existing infrastructure. Significant reforms are
    needed to ensure fit-for-purpose institutions that can develop infrastructure and deliver quality sanitation services to
    the people.

 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

 Development Objective(s) (From PAD)


10 The DPF is a standalone US$100 million operation that supports key reforms to expand fiscal space and increase resource use efficiency in

Guinea. It offers the opportunity to reengage with the transition government on key policy challenges following a hiatus in policy engagement due
to the coup in September 2021.
11 The four ministries include: the Ministry of Environment, the Ministry of Urban Planning Housing, and Land Use Planning (MUHAT), the Ministry

of Territorial Administration and the Ministry of Public Works.

                                                                                                                                               Page 5
        The World Bank
        Guinea Water and Sanitation Project (P179017)


 13. The project development objective is to increase access to safely managed water services in Greater Conakry and
     to strengthen the operational and organizational performance of water and sanitation institutions in Guinea

  Key Results

14. The expected total number of beneficiaries is 2,612,467, of which 572,200 people will be provided for the first time
    with access to piped water through household connections and standpipes, 2,040,267 people (who are currently
    connected to the network) will benefit from an improvement in the quality of water supply services, in terms of better
    pressure and more hours of service thanks to the significant increase in water production capacity resulting from the
    project activities. In addition, all existing users of piped water systems will benefit from improved water quality.
    Finally, the project will have a positive impact on the private sector entities directly involved in construction activities
    and contracted for service delivery. It will help improve the management of SEG utility through the urban sector
    reform and the utility turnaround plan and it will boost SEG’s turnover thanks to increased cash flow from higher
    tariffs, new customers and increased bill collection. The project will also strengthen IWRM through improving
    knowledge, planning and the institutional framework, thereby raising the targeted project area’s resilience to climate
    change. A new sanitation company will be established under the project, and institutional support will be provided
    to facilitate its functions.

  D. Project Description

15. The Guinea Water and Sanitation Project (PEAG) is a successor to the previous Guinea Urban Water Project (PUEG,
    P157782) that was implemented between 2017 and April 2024. PEAG is part of an Integrated Greater Conakry Water
    Supply Program (Greater Conakry Water Program in short) in which the Government of Guinea (GOG) plans to
    implement the investments recommended in Phase 1 of the Greater Conakry Water Supply Master Plan12 developed
    in 2019 under the IDA funded PUEG. This $30 million IDA project catalyzed various financing partners through several
    years of funding foundational studies (Master Plans, sector strategies etc), continuous dialogue with the Government
    and brokering the partnerships between the Government and financing partners. Through PUEG, the World Bank also
    leveraged its ongoing and pipeline operations in energy, environment and macroeconomics to prepare for sector
    reforms and innovate on previous models of water resources management. The aggregate effect of this upstream
    preparation, over the course of several years, is reflected in Figure 1.

16. Financing for water investments under the Greater Conakry Water Project i.e. Phase 1 of the Greater Conakry Water
    Master Plan 2040 includes: IDA’s USD 200 million; counterpart funding from GOG, which has committed USD 15
    million for water distribution; the European Investment Bank (EIB) and the European Union (EU) (€245 million or USD
    274 million) and the Global Environment Fund (GEF)’s USD 10.092 million, for a total of USD 499.092 million which
    will be implemented under PEAG as a single project. Exim Bank India has provided financing to GoG of USD 170 million
    for a raw water intake at Grandes Chutes as a raw water pipeline to Yessoulou but this operation is parallel financing
    and will be implemented as a separate project.




12 Schéma Directeur d’Alimentation en Eau Potable du Grand Conakry or the Greater Conakry Water Masterplan



                                                                                                                           Page 6
       The World Bank
       Guinea Water and Sanitation Project (P179017)


Figure 1. $30 million IDA Project Leveraging and Mobilizing Partners for Greater Impact




    Component 1. Increasing and improving water services in Greater Conakry ($437 million, of which EIB-EU $255
    million, IDA $167 million and GoG $15 million)

17. PEAG aims to help reduce the water production deficit that has been affecting the Greater Conakry region for years.
    Most of the IDA funds (86%) will be allocated to financing new water production, storage and distribution
    infrastructure, including household connections, as well as rehabilitation of the existing network. A key output of the
    project will be the construction of a new water treatment plant, Yessolou IV, which will be the first investment in new
    water production since 2009, when the Yessoulou III plant was commissioned. Yessoulou IV will significantly reduce
    Greater Conakry’s water production deficit, allowing 572,200 people to gain new access to water and 2,040,267
    people to benefit from improve water services such as more hours of supply. In addition, PEAG will finance the
    construction of two reservoirs (500 m3 in Kouria and 7,500 m3 in Kagbelen); laying 117.5 km of distribution networks
    in the peri-urban municipalities of Maneah, Kouria and Kagbelen; the connection of 9,370 households to the network
    and the construction of 24 standposts. EIB-EU will finance complementary investments, including: i) a new treated
    water transmission pipeline (55 kilometers) from Yessolou; ii) five reservoirs serving the new distribution pipeline; iii)
    299 kilometers of distribution pipelines to Kaloum (downtown Conakry) and iv) 37,500 household connections. GOG
    will finance distribution works and household connections in two sectors of SEG’s network covering 30 kilometers.

18. In addition to these activities, a pilot will be implemented to introduce prepaid meters in parts of SEG’s coverage
    zone. There will also be a sub-component on non-revenue water that will address physical and commercial losses in
    SEG’s coverage zone. The NRW component will consist of leak detection and repair; renewal of leaky pipes; continued
    sectorization of the distribution network; meter installation and other activities. It will be implemented through a

                                                                                                                         Page 7
       The World Bank
       Guinea Water and Sanitation Project (P179017)


    performance-based contract with a private operator. Lastly, to ensure adequate resettlement of persons affected by
    the project, IDA will cover resettlement costs for the civil works it will finance, as well as for the EIB-EU and
    Government works.

    Component 2. Support to Water Sector Performance, and Institutional and Policy Reforms ($21 million – IDA only)

19. In addition to water investments, PEAG focuses on improving the service delivery capacity of front-line water and
    sanitation institutions. On the water side, this involves support to SEG to implement a utility turnaround plan that
    focuses on digitalization; corporate functions such as human resources and asset management and other functions.
    In addition, the Government is currently undertaking tariff reforms in the context of development policy financing
    (also known as budget support) funded by the World Bank. PEAG will support the authorities to implement the tariff
    reforms, adopt and utilize a financial model for urban water, and strengthen the regulator, Agence de Regulation de
    l’Electricité et de l’Eau (AREE) in its role monitoring the performance of water services. Social campaigns and
    communication will be included as part of the support to tariff reforms. The goal is to boost SEG’s capacity to recover
    operating costs from tariff revenues, and to ensure a stable base for operations and maintenance of built
    infrastructure under the project.

20. On the sanitation side, the World Bank has decided to focus on strengthening the governance arrangements and
    boosting the capacity of national authorities to plan infrastructure. PEAG will provide technical assistance to the
    authorities to develop the specific roadmap for the new utility, develop the needed legal decrees, and equip and train
    the new personnel of the office. In parallel, PEAG will support the professionalization of fecal sludge service providers.
    These providers include masons, septic tank emptiers and truck operators that are typically have few means to operate
    safely or to invest in new operations. Support will be provided to MUHAT under this component for better regulation,
    through a licensing and training program and a grant program to help these entrepreneurs dispose of fecal sludge in
    the available wastewater facilities.

21. The project will also fund a sub-component on water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) in schools. This activity will
    construct and/ or rehabilitate latrine blocs in secondary schools in Greater Conakry, to ensure that the benefits from
    improved water supply also benefit sanitation. Lack of sanitation facilities is often an impediment to proper learning
    and can deter adolescent girls from enrolling or attending school. The project will also support hygiene awareness for
    students and the development of grants for the operations and maintenance of the latrines over time.

    Component 3. Enhancing water resources management in selected areas ($11.262 million, of which $9.262 million
    GEF and $2 million IDA)

22. The project will benefit from a USD 10.092 million grant from the Global Environment Fund (GEF) which will fund
    nature-based solutions in the Samou sub-basin. This area is upstream of the raw water intake for Greater Conakry
    water supply and the NBS activities aim to improve the quality of water arriving for treatment at the new water
    treatment plant, Yessoulou IV. Selected forested and agricultural areas of the Samou sub-basin upstream of Baneah
    dam will undergo soil stabilization measures towards controlling erosion processes. Measures may include: hill terrace
    improvement for croplands; landslide mitigation through revegetating denuded slopes; and reclamation of degraded
    forest lands and grasslands. To implement these activities more sustainably, GOG plans to integrate parts of the Samou
    sub-basin to the adjacent Gangan National Park (GNP). The activity will be implemented by the National Parks Office
    (Office Guinéen des Parcs Nationaux et Réserves de Faune (OGPNRF).




                                                                                                                         Page 8
       The World Bank
       Guinea Water and Sanitation Project (P179017)


23. While Guinea is known as the water tower of West Africa, there is a need to manage these resources to ensure their
    sustainability. At the same time, given the limited knowledge of groundwater resources, there is also a need for
    enhanced monitoring especially given the widespread, unregulated use of private boreholes in Greater Conakry. PEAG
    will support the establishment of a local committee in the Samou sub-basin to develop a knowledge base for water
    resources according to integrated water resources management (IWRM) principles.

    Component 4. Project Implementation Support ($29,830,000 – of which $19 million EIB-EU, $10 million IDA and
    $830,000 GEF)
24. The MEHH will have overall responsibility for the project and will host a project coordination unit (PCU) that will
    support the Government in the monitoring of the project activities. IDA will cover the operating costs of the PCU and
    of the Steering Committee, which will provide overall guidance for the project. A project management firm (assistant
    à la maîtrise d’ouvrage or AMO in French) will be funded by EIB to provide daily support to the PCU and to support a
    separate SEG unit that will manage the civil works component. The PCU and AMO will implement both the IDA and
    EIB projects in an integrated way. In addition, technical assistance will be mobilized to support the implementing
    agencies in charge of the project execution under the supervision of the PCU anchored at the MEHH.
    Component 5. Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC), $0
25. This zero-funded component will allow the Government to quickly mobilize funds in an emergency requiring
    immediate recovery and reconstruction response. In the event of an eligible crisis or emergency, this component
    enables the Government to reallocate IDA project funds to disaster response and recovery purposes under
    streamlined procedures.

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate
 Legal Operational Policies                                                             Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                            No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                      No


Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts


26. The planned activities may generate environmental and social risks and impacts. The main environmental and social
    risks are related to the construction of water infrastructure including the treatment plant, distribution pipelines, and
    reservoirs. On the environmental side, the risks associated with construction and rehabilitation of infrastructures
    during the implementation and operation phase are mainly linked to nuisances such as dust, noise, poor management
    of construction waste, water and soil pollution. There are also risks of disruption to biodiversity habitat and associated
    ecosystem services which require appropriate measures for their management. On the social side, the project may
    cause temporary or permanent disruption to income sources and livelihoods. The presence of external workers would
    make local people more vulnerable to sexual exploitation and abuse/ sexual harassment risks. There is also a risk
    regarding occupational health and safety, as there are weak capacities among contractors and the oversight entities,
    which has led to concerns on the previous water project.

 E. Implementation


                                                                                                                         Page 9
       The World Bank
       Guinea Water and Sanitation Project (P179017)



 Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

27. Given the number of financing partners (IDA, EIB-EU, GEF and the Government), the implementation arrangements,
    the following arrangements are proposed, as summarized in Figure 2.

    Figure. 2 Proposed organigramme of the implementation arrangements




28. Project Steering Committee (PSC): The PSC will be chaired by the Minister of Energy, Hydraulics and Hydrocarbons
    (MEHH) or his representative, and will be responsible for the overall oversight and strategic direction of the proposed
    project. The PSC will be formed by representatives of key stakeholders to the project, including the Ministry of
    Economy and Finance, MUHAT and its department, DATU; SEG and other relevant entities. The PCU will serve as the
    Secretariat for the PSC and will ensure that activities are coherent with the sector strategy and guarantee cross-
    sectoral coordination for sub-components within other line ministries.

29. Project Coordination Unit (PCU): The PCU will be responsible for project management and coordination,
    procurement, fiduciary and safeguards activities, monitoring and evaluation, communication activities and preparing
    progress and completion reports in accordance with WB rules and procedures. It will handle payments and
    disbursements, prepare the Annual Budgeting and Work Plan; ensure that annual financial audits are submitted on
    time and will also file and archive all project documents for auditing purposes. The PCU will also report on project
    implementation support technical agencies in their activities under the project.

30. SEG Executing Unit: SEG will be responsible for ensuring the technical integrity of Component 1 as a technical partner
    to the PCU. SEG will establish an internal executing unit (SEG-EU), which will include civil engineers, procurement


                                                                                                                      Page 10
        The World Bank
        Guinea Water and Sanitation Project (P179017)


    specialists and environmental and social specialists to work with the PCU specialists. The SEG-EU will be responsible
    for preparing the engineering studies; preparing the technical specifications for the bidding documents for the works;
    supervising the implementation of works; approving technical documents related to civil works; commissioning of
    water civil works once completed; and contributing to monitoring and evaluation. This unit will not have any fiduciary
    responsibilities13, but its procurement staff will undertake technical reviews of all procurement documents related to
    Component 1. The roles and responsibilities of SEG and the PCU will be defined in a collaboration agreement to be
    signed by the PCU and SEG and approved by the MEHH.

31. The sanitation sub-component will be implemented by DATU, which will serve as the technical lead agency for this
    activity, with the PCU providing implementation support on behalf of MUHAT. A task team will be established within
    the National Directorate of Land Use Planning and Urban Development (DATU) to implement the sanitation sub-
    component, in close collaboration with the PCU. This unit will be responsible for all aspects of institutional reform of
    the urban sanitation sector, including preparatory studies for the creation of the National Sanitation Office. A qualified
    firm or consultant will be engaged to work directly with the DATU team on sanitation sector reform issues, including
    the legal and regulatory framework, training and capacity building, procurement, and organizational support. A
    collaboration agreement will be developed between DATU and the PCU.

32. The PCU will provide overall implementation support for the GEF and IDA funded component on NBS and WRM.
    This includes for procurement, financial management, environmental and social, M&E and other cross-cutting
    functions. The Guinean Office of National Parks and Forest Reserves (OGPNRF), a department within the Ministry of
    Environment and Sustainable Development (MEDD) responsible for managing biodiversity and the country’s protected
    parks, will lead the technical work on NBS activities under Component 3, in collaboration with DNH. DNH, within
    MEHH, will play a supportive role on NBS and will be the technical lead on groundwater activities under Component
    3. To clarify roles, responsibilities and cost sharing, a collaboration protocol will be signed between OGPNRF, DNH and
    the PCU. OGPNRF is leading implementation of a component on managing protected areas under the IDA funded
    Guinea Natural Resources, Mining and Environmental Management Project (P168613).14 Therefore, PEAG will
    leverage these efforts to ensure smooth implementation of the NBS component.


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Dambudzo Josephine Muzenda
   Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

   Karamoko Sanogo
   Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist



13 An initial assessment done by the World Bank specialists concluded that SEG did not have the capacity to manage these functions at this stage.
14 Through this project, OGPNRF is receiving technical support on the management of protected areas. The TA includes managerial training,

developing information systems for the protected areas, provision of logistical support (equipment, a new office building) and others. A specific
component (USD 19 million or 30 percent of the project financing) will provide the necessary tools and management systems that can help
OGPNRF to scale-up to expand its coverage over other protected areas, including the Gangan National Park.

                                                                                                                                               Page 11
     The World Bank
     Guinea Water and Sanitation Project (P179017)


Borrower/Client/Recipient
 Ministy of Economy and Finance (MEF)
 Ibrahima Sory Camara
 Director of Public Investments
 dnip@mefp.gov.gn

Implementing Agencies
 Ministere de l'Energie, de l'Eau et des Hydrocarbures (MEHH)
 Aissata Kaba Bah
 Conseillere Principale
 aissata.kaba@outlook.com

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                    Dambudzo Josephine Muzenda, Karamoko Sanogo

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:               Fatouma Toure Ibrahima Wane       13-Dec-2024

Country Director:                       Marie-Chantal Uwanyiligira        21-Feb-2025




                                                                                        Page 12
