Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Additional Financing Grant Kosovo FOSTERING AND LEVERAGING OPPORTUNITIES FOR WATER SECURITY
                                       PROGRAM (PROJECT 1) (P179781)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Additional Financing Appraisal Environmental and
                                                           Social Review Summary


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                     Appraisal Stage


   Public Disclosure
                                                              (AF ESRS Appraisal Stage)

                                                     Date Prepared/Updated: 11/27/2023 | Report No: ESRSAFA650




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Dec 11, 2023                                                                               Page 1 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Additional Financing Grant Kosovo FOSTERING AND LEVERAGING OPPORTUNITIES FOR WATER
                               SECURITY PROGRAM (PROJECT 1) (P179781)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION

                     A. Basic Project Data

                     Country                           Region                       Borrower(s)                        Implementing Agency(ies)

                     Kosovo                            EUROPE AND CENTRAL
                                                       ASIA

                     Project ID                        Project Name

                     P179781                           Additional Financing Grant Kosovo Fostering And Leveraging Opportunities For Water
                                                       Security Program (project 1)

                     Parent Project ID (if any)        Parent Project Name

                     P169150                           Fostering and Leveraging Opportunities for Water Security Program (Project 1)

                     Practice Area (Lead)              Financing Instrument         Estimated Appraisal Date           Estimated Board Date

                     Water                             Investment Project           12/20/2023                         2/22/2024
                                                       Financing




Public Disclosure
                     Estimated Decision Review         Total Project Cost
                     Date

                     12/18/2023                        5,325,000


                     Proposed Development Objective
                     The proposed project development objective is to: (i) strengthen national capacity for managing water security, and
                     (ii) improve water security in Morava e Binces basin.

                     B. Is the project being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?

                     No

                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities

                     The AF is SDC-RETF Grant of US$5.33 million, to be added to the Parent Project which has US$27.40 million IDA Credit
                     approved on June 9, 2020, with the closing date on November 30, 2025. The AF will enable bridging the financing gap
                     under Components 1 and 2 to cover the envisaged soft-type activities, as well as to incorporate additional activities
                     under Subcomponent 1.3, in response to client’s demand, and establish a more sound foundation for future
                     investments, including FLOWS2. The AF will finance all formerly-approved soft/technical assistance (TA)-type

                    Dec 11, 2023                                                                                                        Page 2 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Additional Financing Grant Kosovo FOSTERING AND LEVERAGING OPPORTUNITIES FOR WATER
                              SECURITY PROGRAM (PROJECT 1) (P179781)


                     activities and few goods/equipment contracts under Component 1, Foundational measures for water security. In
                     particular, the AF funds will be used to finance investments in water supply infrastructure and services, including
                     investments in rehabilitation and upgrade of critical water supply system (Subcomponent 2.2) in addition to
                     improving the operation and safety of its existing large-scale water infrastructure assets, through dam safety
                     programs and small rehabilitation works (Subcomponent 1.3). The PDO, the results framework and Project closing
                     date will remain unchanged. Safeguards management remains as the Parent Project. The Project has prepared
                     Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) instruments which govern the aforementioned scale-up
                     activities worth US$3.5 million, including the floating PV demonstrations. For these activities, after the PMT and
                     design consultants develop the site-specific designs/Bills of Quantities (BoQs), the PMT will prepare Site-specific
                     ESIA/ESMP, or possibly a Checklist-type ESMP in case of small works that do not have an E&S footprint.

                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     Kosovo is a landlocked country bordering Serbia, North Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania. Large part of the
                     country is covered by vast plains while Albanian Alps and Shar mountains rise in the south-west and south-east.
                     Kosovo is divided into seven districts, which are further subdivided into 38 municipalities. The country has limited
                     water resources and is divided into four main river basins. The parent “Fostering And Leveraging Opportunities For
                     Water Security Program P169150, has three components: Component 1- Foundational measures for water security -
                     the scope is country-wide, Component 2 -Addressing water crisis with catalytic investments- will be implemented
                     largely in Morava e Binces basin and Component 3 - Project management.




Public Disclosure
                     Morava e Binces basin is located in the east of the country bordering Serbia and is a trans-boundary basin shared by
                     Kosovo, Serbia, North Macedonia and Bulgaria. It is the smallest of the four basins and carries significant
                     environmental characteristics and agricultural potential. The basin is characterized with hills, forests and pastureland
                     with some areas available for agriculture. Morava e Binces is the driest basin and suffers from significant flood and
                     drought risks causing profound damages to people and country's economy.


                     Kosovo is a water scarce country, by Regional comparison, and has the lowest level of water resources development
                     and storage. The country is very vulnerable to climate shocks. Climate change model predict that the Region will get
                     drier and warmer faster than the world average. One of the obvious impacts of climate change in Kosovo is likely the
                     shortage of water due to lesser snowfall and earlier meltdown of snowcaps (a major water storage) in Kosovo.
                     Morava e Benices basin is suffering from hydrological drought, ecosystem degradation, and reduction of ecosystem
                     services, increased and new forms of pollution and water-related diseases.
                     The eastern part of the country has been badly hit by severe drought resulting in water crisis. Within the Morava e
                     Binces basin, already the area with lowest rainfall, and among the highest water stress and least storage of Kosovo’s
                     basins, this drought has had major consequences. Water quality has further deteriorated, making it unusable for any
                     economic activity including irrigation, and importantly, major towns and villages have had to introduce strict rationing
                     and parts of the service area de facto ran out of drinking water. This year, the ongoing drought has led to more than
                     six months of restricted water use among residents and businesses.




                    Dec 11, 2023                                                                                                      Page 3 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Additional Financing Grant Kosovo FOSTERING AND LEVERAGING OPPORTUNITIES FOR WATER
                              SECURITY PROGRAM (PROJECT 1) (P179781)



                     Together with ongoing deforestation and land degradation, watershed protection is important for better
                     environmental function and ensuring adequate water quality and quantity throughout the year.


                     Kosovo is the poorest country in the region with several vulnerable groups at risk of social exclusion and poverty. Lack
                     of income opportunities and limited social protection schemes make women, young people, children, the elderly,
                     minority groups, disable and internally displaced peoples particularly vulnerable to poverty. Poverty rate in Gjilan
                     region where the project would be implemented is 37.9% and this would be third poorest region in Kosovo based on
                     the poverty headcount. Gjilan region includes Vitia which is beyond Morava e Binces region. In Kosovo, poorer
                     households tend to live in rural areas although urban areas are also afflicted with deep poverty, especially the Roma,
                     Ashkali and Egyptians (RAE) community.


                     Approximately, 130,000 households are engaged in agriculture, utilizing around 80 percent of cultivable land in the
                     country. Agriculture sector as the income earner for significant population is dependent on natural resources
                     including water but productivity levels are significantly below optimum due to water shortages, quality issues and
                     dilapidated infrastructure.


                     Around 12 percent of Kosovo is protected areas supporting between 2,800 to 3,000 vascular species of flora and wide
                     variety of fauna. Uncontrolled deforestation, habitat degradation due to human intervention, illegal hunting and
                     global climate change are some of the factors adversely effecting biodiversity. Majority of the project activities will
                     take place in build-up areas without effecting biodiversity, environmentally sensitive areas or any other places of



Public Disclosure
                     natural or cultural interest.
                     The parent project is flexibly designed to adapt to priorities emerging from the basin planning process, and overall
                     support water security, climate change adaptation and preparing investments for future programmatic and larger
                     scale investments. Possible investments will be result of river basin planning and these could be investments and
                     technical assistance to improve water information systems from data production, analysis and dissemination;
                     equipment and training for institutionalizing dam safety surveillance measures; works and technical assistance that
                     will improve water use efficiency measures that will enhance water demand management capacity of Kosovo’s
                     irrigation sector; priority irrigation investment, to be prioritized under the irrigation master plan, currently under
                     development; investments to expand, rehabilitate and modernize municipal water supply systems, including
                     measures to improve performance and efficiency of water use such as goods and consulting services for non-revenue-
                     water diagnostic and drought management planning in urban water supply systems in the region.


                     The beneficiary and affected population lives in urban areas such as cities of Gilan and Kamenica as well as rural
                     villages around. The rehabilitation investments would have negligible impacts. The risks from land acquisition are
                     minor. It is not expected that there will be physical displacement. There are likely to be temporary impact on
                     structures and fences at the time of laying underground pipes. Potential risks would be related with the contractors
                     who could engage workers without proper contracts.
                     Additional Financing Grant funding will support the implementation of most of the soft-type activities under
                     Component 1, as the Borrower wanted to utilize focus the IDA credit mostly on hard infrastructure and equipment
                     under Components 1 and 2.

                    Dec 11, 2023                                                                                                     Page 4 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Additional Financing Grant Kosovo FOSTERING AND LEVERAGING OPPORTUNITIES FOR WATER
                              SECURITY PROGRAM (PROJECT 1) (P179781)




                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Ministry of Environment, Spatial Planning and Infrastructure (MESPI) is the lead agency responsible for the
                     implementation of the project. MESPI has had implemented, directly or in support to other Ministries, several World
                     Bank funded projects in the past and is therefore familiar with the Bank's Safeguards Policies and the ESF.
                     This AF is in the form of a Recipient-Eexecuted Ttrust Fund (RETF), to be administered by IDA therefore these activities
                     will be managed by the existing arrangements under the parent project FLOW. The Project Management Team (PMT)
                     has dedicated staff, Project cordinator, procurement, fnance, M&E, citizen engagement expert, as well full time
                     environmental and social specialists. A PMT with participation of the other implementing agencies, it will oversee day
                     to day implementation and administration of the parent project and activities under AF.

                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                        Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                 Substantial
                     The AF will supplement the activities of the parent project, and is expected to finance most of the soft-type activities
                     under Component 1, as the Borrower wanted to utilize the IDA credit mostly on hard infrastructure and equipment
                     under Components 1 and 2. It is envisaged that AF will finance all formerly-approved soft/technical assistance (TA)-
                     type activities and few goods/equipment contracts under Component 1, and foundational measures for water



Public Disclosure
                     security. As part of the AF funds will be used to finance investments in water supply infrastructure and services,
                     including investments in rehabilitation and upgrade of critical water supply system (Subcomponent 2.2) in addition to
                     improving the operation and safety of its existing large-scale water infrastructure assets, through dam safety
                     programs and small rehabilitation works (Subcomponent 1.3) the environmental risks of the project will remain
                     substantial as per the parent project. The potential adverse environmental impacts will be same as envisaged in the
                     parent project, of medium to large scale but those would be predictable and reversible. Typical construction related
                     environmental impacts expected from the activities under AF are excessive noise and dust levels, localized air and
                     water contamination, impacts on human health due to hazardous waste management and inadequate OHS aspects,
                     impacts on community safety. Management of construction waste, adequate management of labor camps and
                     maintenance of machinery and yards, appropriate closure and restoration of work sites are some other key and
                     potential E&S issues during construction. The Project activities will be located within the Morava e Binces basin, and
                     some activities will be carried out in the Drini e Bardhe, Iber and the Lepenc River Basins. Morave e Binces and Iber
                     are tributaries of the Great Morava Basin, and the Drini e Bardhe is part of the international Drini basin. As the Project
                     activities will focus on rehabilitation/improvements and capacity enhancement of the ongoing water supply system
                     the impacts on quantity and quality of water in the international waterways are assessed as negligible, and is not
                     expected to adversely change the quantity or quality of water flows to other riparians, and will not be adversely
                     affected by the other riparians' possible water use. As the Project will not adversely change the quantity or quality of
                     water flows to other riparians, and will not be adversely affected by the other riparians' possible water use the
                     exception to the notification of reparians was prepared and send to RVP for approval.
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating                                                                                         Moderate


                    Dec 11, 2023                                                                                                       Page 5 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Additional Financing Grant Kosovo FOSTERING AND LEVERAGING OPPORTUNITIES FOR WATER
                              SECURITY PROGRAM (PROJECT 1) (P179781)


                     The impacts of the project will be positive in longer term. The project will improve reliability, security and quality of
                     water supply in rather dry region and rural areas that have extensive agriculture activities. Some activities will directly
                     support the livelihoods from farming. The social risks of the project will remain Moderate as per the parent project.
                     The physical works are yet to start on site. The designs and ESMPs are under preparation. The potential social risk is
                     same as the parent project. Minor impact is anticipated on private and public assets such as fences and structures at
                     the time of laying of underground pipes under component 2 and other small scale construction of irrigation, erosion
                     control and flood management infrastructure . This risk shall be managed by preparation of ARAPs and disclosing to
                     the affected community. The affected assets shall be restored through the civil contracts and shall be part of the Bill
                     of quantities. The labor engaged will be local and shall require to sign code of conduct and will be managed through
                     ESMP. The communities will require to be informed timely regarding the schedule of physical works to minimize the
                     disturbance causes during physical works. The project has GRM in Hidro Morava Regional Utility Company responsible
                     that is primarily responsible in the area where water supply infrastructure and services. There is also central GRM and
                     this is on Ministry site and Project site. The implementing agency carry out stakeholder engagement with separate
                     strategies to engage the vulnerable groups and take necessary measures so they will benefit from the project. The SEP
                     prepared for the parent project shall apply to proposed additional financing activities.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESSs) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards
                      ESS1 Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and                                               Relevant
                      Impacts



Public Disclosure
                      The AF will supplement the activities of the parent project and is expected to finance most of the soft-type activities
                      under Component 1, and 2, but possible will also be used as an addition funds to support the foundational measures
                      for water security. For parent project, MESPI has prepared ESMF for all proposed investments. TOR for the
                      preparation of technical studies includes requirements to address E&S aspects in line with the ESF. The specific E&S
                      instruments are expected to be prepared for all the activities, in compliance with WB ESSs and national requirements.
                      Typical construction related environmental impacts noted for the project in the ESMF are: excessive noise and dust
                      levels, localized air and water contamination, impacts on human health due to hazardous waste management
                      (inadequate disposal of asbestos containing material), if any and inadequate OHS aspects, and impacts on community
                      safety. Management of construction waste, adequate management of labor and maintenance of machinery and yards,
                      appropriate closure and restoration of work sites are included in the impact mitigation chapter of the ESMF. There are
                      chances of generation of hazardous waste under the project from asbestos containing material (mainly pipes) from
                      water supply systems. The project is planning to avoid disturbance of the asbestos material by laying the new parallel
                      pipe system.
                      The environmental and social assessment framework has been completed for parent project, ESMF is prepared to
                      guide the preparation of the site specific instruments, the resettlement policy framework (RPF) has been prepared and
                      will guide addressing land acquisition and its impacts during the construction phase according to the relevant standard
                      the ESS5. The Labor Management Procedure (LMP) has been prepared to address labor risks related to works to be
                      financed by the project. The risk of exclusion of the vulnerable from the benefits or their disproportionally being
                      affected will be addressed through identification of their concerns under the SEP and addressing them by proactively
                      adjusting project interventions to address their needs.


                    Dec 11, 2023                                                                                                        Page 6 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Additional Financing Grant Kosovo FOSTERING AND LEVERAGING OPPORTUNITIES FOR WATER
                              SECURITY PROGRAM (PROJECT 1) (P179781)




                      ESS2 Labor and Working Conditions                                                                                  Relevant
                      The Labor management Procedure (LMP) prepared for the parent project shall apply to AF activities. The labor
                      management procedures (LMP) laid guidelines for the selected Contractor to prepare the Contractor’s labor
                      management plans to cover both labor and working conditions such as the labor management issues like terms and
                      conditions of employment, nondiscrimination and equal opportunity (these requirements are incorporated in labor
                      laws) as well as occupational health and safety measures for project workers. : Civil works contracts will incorporate
                      social and environmental mitigation measures (ESMP); the Environmental Health and Safety Guidelines; other
                      referenced plans e.g. relevant provisions of LMP, Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) etc. as well as specific language
                      referencing the prioritization of the hiring of unskilled local labor.

                      ESS3 Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                                   Relevant
                      The parent project and AF is unlikely to use significant volumes of energy, water and other raw materials for the
                      construction activities. The ESMF provides guidance on establishing procedures for resource efficiency, cleaner
                      production processes and pollution prevention and management. In particular, air and water quality standards set either
                      under European Directives or WBG EHSGs, whichever are more stringent, will be followed. Detailed design studies will
                      also carry out water balance studies to establish the net impact of project on the available water sources in the area,
                      particularly during dry seasons. There are little chances of generation of hazardous waste under the project except that
                      some asbestos containing material (mainly pipes) are extracted from the old irrigation and water supply systems. The
                      ESMF provides guidance on the safe disposal of ACM.




Public Disclosure
                      ESS4 Community Health and Safety                                                                                   Relevant
                      The community health and safety risks will be mostly during construction activities. This risk shall be managed through
                      SEP prepared for the Parent project and site specific ESMPs. Physical works are yet to start.

                      ESS5 Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                       Relevant
                      RPF has been prepared under the parent project and will apply. No Land acquisition or physical displacement is expected
                      under this project. Only minor impacts are expected on Public and private assets due to the small scale infrastructure
                      activities. ARAPs shall be prepared and affected assets shall be restored through the contracts. However, for the designs
                      being prepared for Dams and other investments for future financing may involve Land acquisition.

                      ESS6 Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                         Relevant
                      Resources
                      The parent project investments and AF include significant proportions marked for the upper watershed/catchment
                      protection in Morava e Bences basin. Activities also include biodiversity monitoring, plantation of fruit trees,
                      afforestation, all of these resulting in net positive impacts on biodiversity in the project area. Since the project is not
                      located in environmentally sensitive area, nor does it impact any natural habitat, adverse impacts on biodiversity will
                      only be very localized and restricted to construction phase of the project and largely in an already modified habitat.
                      Site-specific ESMPs will include assessment of the flora and fauna in line with the recommendations provided in the
                      ESMF. Contractors will be required to follow the recommendations given in the ESMF for biodiversity conservation in


                    Dec 11, 2023                                                                                                        Page 7 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Additional Financing Grant Kosovo FOSTERING AND LEVERAGING OPPORTUNITIES FOR WATER
                              SECURITY PROGRAM (PROJECT 1) (P179781)


                      the immediate vicinity of the project site and avoid occupying larger areas for carrying out construction activities. Site
                      specific impacts and mitigation will be discussed in the ESMPs or ESMP Checklist or ESIA (depending of the type of the
                      project activities). Training will also be organized for contractors.

                      ESS7 Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                   Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities
                      Not relevant

                      ESS8 Cultural Heritage                                                                                            Relevant
                      Potential risks and impacts on tangible cultural heritage are likely for the parent project and less likely AF For the
                      parent project due to the fact that project involves excavation, demolition, movement of earth, flooding and other
                      changes at several construction sites within the project area. In case any cultural heritage is encountered during the
                      project life cycle (including construction), the client will identify relevant stakeholders as per ESS 10 for meaningful
                      consultation to assess the potential risks and impacts and explore avoidance and mitigation options. Chance find
                      procedures will be part of all contracts involving any works under the project. All sub-project specific ESIAs, ESMPs and
                      ESMP-Check lists will include chance find procedures.

                      ESS9 Financial Intermediaries                                                                       Not Currently Relevant
                      Not relevant




Public Disclosure
                      ESS10 Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                            Relevant
                      The stakeholder engagement framework is prepared for the parent project and carried out identification and analysis of
                      stakeholders, both PAP and Other Interested Parties (OIP), and propose how to engage them throughout project life
                      and propose appropriate grievance redress mechanisms (GRM). Special attention is given to disadvantaged and
                      vulnerable groups who are identified as part of the Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA) process but who also
                      include those who live in very small and remote settlements and minorities, ethnic Serbian and ethnic Roma, and
                      poorest segment of population who can be found in all project affected settlements. Inclusion of such vulnerable
                      groups is mainstreamed in every dimension of the stakeholder engagement. Other interested parties in the project will
                      be Regional water supply company, beneficiary local governments, business communities and various regional and
                      national associations. The Stakeholder Engagement Framework (SEF) developed and disclosed for the parent project
                      shall apply to AF activities.


                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply
                      OP 7.50 Projects on International Waterways                                                                          Yes


                      OP 7.60 Projects in Disputed Areas                                                                                    No




                    Dec 11, 2023                                                                                                      Page 8 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Additional Financing Grant Kosovo FOSTERING AND LEVERAGING OPPORTUNITIES FOR WATER
                              SECURITY PROGRAM (PROJECT 1) (P179781)


                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                     Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                      In Part
                     Preparation of the Environmental Impact Assessment report as required by Kosovo EIA Law to obtain the
                     environmental permit for the implementation of the infrastructure works.

                     Use of Common Approach                                                                                             No
                     NA

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities
                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required during implementation?
                     Based on the screening and the assigned risk category as per the ESMF, it is expected that the ESIAs/EIAs or site-
                     specific ESMPs will be prepared as per the national requirements and in compliance with WB ESF. RFP prepared will
                     guide preparation of the Resettlement Action Plans, for the resettlement/ land acquisition proportionate to the scale
                     of impact.

                     III. CONTACT POINTS

                     World Bank



Public Disclosure
                     Task Team Leader: Ahmed Shawky Mohamed Abdelghany             Title:             Senior Water Resources
                                                                                                      Management Specialist

                     Email:             ashawky@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                      Trandelina Baraku, Ahmed Shawky Mohamed Abdelghany

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:             Shpresa Kastrati

                     ADM Social Specialist:                    Bekim Imeri

                     Practice Manager (ENV/SOC)                Sanjay Srivastava Cleared on 05-Dec-2023 at 07:49:44 EST

                    Dec 11, 2023                                                                                                   Page 9 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Additional Financing Grant Kosovo FOSTERING AND LEVERAGING OPPORTUNITIES FOR WATER
                              SECURITY PROGRAM (PROJECT 1) (P179781)




Public Disclosure




                    Dec 11, 2023                                                                               Page 10 of 10
