Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Guinea Water and Sanitation Project (P179017)




Public Disclosure Authorized

                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                             Concept Stage


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                       (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                         Date Prepared/Updated: 04/28/2023 | Report No: ESRSC03518




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Apr 28, 2023                                                                          Page 1 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               Guinea Water and Sanitation Project (P179017)



                     BASIC INFORMATION

                     A. Basic Project Data

                     Country                       Region                           Project ID                     Parent Project ID (if any)

                     Guinea                        WESTERN AND CENTRAL              P179017
                                                   AFRICA

                     Project Name                  Guinea Water and Sanitation Project

                     Practice Area (Lead)          Financing Instrument             Estimated Appraisal Date       Estimated Board Date

                     Water                         Investment Project               11/13/2023                     2/28/2024
                                                   Financing

                     Borrower(s)                   Implementing Agency(ies)

                     Ministère de l'Energie, de    Ministry of Energy, Water
                     l'Hydraulique et des          and Hydraulics
                     Hydrocarbures (MEHH)




Public Disclosure
                     Proposed Development Objective
                     The development objective is to increase access to improved water services in Greater Conakry and to support the
                     implementation of water and sanitation policy and institutional reforms.


                     Financing (in USD Million)                                                                                          Amount

                      Total Project Cost                                                                                                     200.00



                     B. Is the project being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project [including overview of Country, Sectoral & Institutional Contexts and
                     Relationship to CPF]
                     Guinea is a water rich country, endowed with 1,165 rivers spread over 23 watersheds, 14 of which are shared with its
                     neighbouring countries, including the Niger, Senegal and Gambia rivers (respectively the first, second and fourth
                     largest rivers in West Africa). Guinea is a member of the associated regional river basin authorities, including NBA (9
                     countries), OMVS (4 countries) and OMVG (3 countries). These activities are still at a nascent stage and need
                     substantial support to scale them up. There is also a need to improve Guinea’s participation in transboundary
                     platforms, to enable the country to benefit fully from its position as an upstream riparian and mobilize its surface

                    Apr 28, 2023                                                                                                        Page 2 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               Guinea Water and Sanitation Project (P179017)



                     water resources for multiple uses. There are also significant groundwater resources but they have not been well
                     managed, with some gaps in knowledge about the state of the resource, and weak institutional capacity to monitor
                     and exploit groundwater in a sustainable manner. While some groundwater modeling studies have been undertaken,
                     there is little understanding of the proliferation of boreholes in major urban areas and the potential impact on water
                     resources.

                     Guinea has a population of 13.1 million and is experiencing a strong demographic growth of more than 2.84%.
                     Although two thirds of the population of Guinea is still rural , the country is undergoing a strong urbanisation process.
                     Only 64% of the national population has access to improved water supply and 30% to safely managed sanitation.
                     Water services are provided by the national water utility, SEG, but it has been undermined by weak financial and
                     operational capacity for several years. In the face of rapid population growth (3.5% a year in Greater Conakry), there
                     is currently a water production deficit of 180,000 m3/day, equivalent to 120% of current production. While there is
                     existing water production infrastructure such as dams, reservoirs and boreholes, these assets suffer from poor
                     operational functionality and are in need of repair. The distribution network is also dilapidated with an estimated 60%
                     of non—revenue water (physical and commercial losses) in SEG’s network. A Water Masterplan for Greater Conakry
                     was developed in 2019 and a similar study is currently underway for secondary towns and cities. With an estimated
                     1.345 billion € needed for water infrastructure until 2040 for Greater Conakry alone, the investment needs are
                     significant and mobilizing funding and financing is an urgent task.

                     Sanitation has been a long-neglected part of the country’s overall development. Sanitation, covering sewerage,
                     onsite, rainwater evacuation and solid waste, is managed under the Ministry of Housing, Urbanism and Territorial




Public Disclosure
                     Development (MINHUT) with local communes responsible for services, but formal network services are available to
                     only a small part of the capital city, with the rest of the country making do with rudimentary sanitation facilities and
                     informal services such as for pit emptying. As a recent study on sanitation in Guinea noted, the institutional
                     arrangements are inadequate given the growing population, significant backlog in investments and the poor quality of
                     services – with knock-on impacts on human health and the environment. A Master Plan has been developed and
                     several recommendations submitted to the government for addressing this serious crisis.
                     To address these challenges, the Guinea Water and Sanitation Project (PEAG) will focus on investments to increase
                     water production, water supply and water services; distribution and non-revenue water reduction interventions;
                     construction of latrines with handwashing units in schools and the construction of reservoirs. SEG; establish . To
                     ensure the sustainability of investments, the project will emphasize institutional reforms, particularly as regards the
                     urban water utility, SEG, and the sanitation sector whose institutional and regulatory arrangements require massive
                     improvements. In addition, the project will support the GoG to implement tariff reforms, updates to sector
                     regulations and policies, and other measures needed to strengthen the capacity of sector institutions to achieve
                     universal access to water and sanitation services.

                     The project will be implemented using the IPF with PBC instrument to ensure adequate incentives for achieving
                     investments and reforms.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1. Detailed project location(s) and salient physical characteristics relevant to the E&S assessment [geographic,
                     environmental, social]


                    Apr 28, 2023                                                                                                      Page 3 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               Guinea Water and Sanitation Project (P179017)



                     The proposed project (PEAG) aims to close the water deficit facing the Greater Conakry area. Since 2001, the city of
                     Conakry has been facing a recurrent shortage of drinking water supply due to increasing demand from a growing
                     population and insufficient investments in water production.

                     Communes around Conakry have also been growing and some do not have any water services, forcing residents to
                     resort to drilling private boreholes and purchasing costly water from tanker trucks. Most of the production facilities
                     are located at the Yessoulou complex, near the commune of Maneah, and consist of three treatment plants
                     (Yessoulou 1, 2 and 3) that were constructed in 1964, 1994 and 2009 respectively. These plants, which receive raw
                     water from the Grandes Chutes dam, together produce 83% of the water supplied to Conakry. However, due to a
                     growing population in the Greater Conakry area and lack of investment to increase water supply, the overall access
                     rate of urban populations to drinking water through the SEG networks is around 31% with intermittent service.

                     The current drinking water supply in the city of Conakry is 85% dependent on surface water resources taken from the
                     Samou River at the level of the Grandes Chutes dam (with Baneah and Kale dams upstream). The project will invest
                     $153 million in this infrastructure but attention should also be paid to the need of strong knowledge production and
                     capacity-building efforts on water resources management (groundwater and surface water for multiple use) as
                     described under component 3.

                     The Grandes Chutes Dam is located in a rich biodiversity area which includes the Grandes Chutes classified Forest
                     situated in the southern Fouta Djalon immediately north of the town of Mambiya, beside the Conakry–Kindia road.
                     The habitat is wooded savanna and grassland and, along the northern boundary of the reserve, a tributary of the River




Public Disclosure
                     Badi is lined by gallery forest. The terrain is hilly, with some steep slopes and sheer rock-faces. It was classified by
                     Birdlife International as an Important Bird Areas (IBA) in 2001, and listed as a Key Biodiversity Area on IBAT web site
                     which reports the presence of the bird Picathartes gymnocephalus (VU) in the area, More recently the Grandes
                     Chutes classified forest was identified as a Tropical Important Plant Area (TIPA) by a consortium of entities comprising
                     RBG Kew, the National Herbarium and Guinee Ecologie.

                     Another key aspect is the challenge of providing more water to the population of the Greater Conakry, that will lead
                     to generating more wastewater, while the sanitation infrastructure and systems are limited. These, among others,
                     could be conditions or limitations for environmental and social sustainability of the proposed operation linked to the
                     small and big water cycles issues.

                     The human capital needs in Guinea are substantial but current efforts are not enough to meet the needs of the most
                     vulnerable people, particularly for women. Marginalized groups such as the urban youth and women are some of the
                     most vulnerable groups in Guinea. Guinea ranks near the bottom of the list of countries on the gender equality index
                     (118 on 146 countries in 2022). Women require targeted engagement to ensure their priorities and voices are heard,
                     and community-level mechanisms to monitor and mitigate local tensions and conflicts.

                     Guinea has adopted several legal instruments and has ratified the majority of international legal instruments that
                     integrate dimensions related to gender and Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH). However,
                     gender inequality is still pronounced in Guinea across a range of socioeconomic, health, and education outcomes. All
                     of these outcomes are aggravated by water-related challenges and will have to be closely analyzed and considered in
                     the preparation and implementation of the proposed project E&S instruments and activities.
                     D. 2. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity
                    Apr 28, 2023                                                                                                      Page 4 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               Guinea Water and Sanitation Project (P179017)



                     The Ministry of Energy, Hydraulics and Hydrocarbons (MEHH) and the Ministry of Urban Planning and habitat and
                     territorial Development (MINUHAT), will be involved in the implementation of the project with two implementing
                     agencies: Société des Eaux de Guinée (SEG) and Direction Nationale de l’Aménagement du Territoire et de
                     l’Urbanisme (DATU).

                     The two ministries and the implementing agencies have limited internal resources and only limited experience in
                     environmental and social risk management. During the implementation of the on-going water project (PUEG), both
                     the environment and social specialist of the PIU resigned, and it took several months to replace the two experts.
                     During that period, the project did not have any safeguard specialist. Also, problems were encountered with the
                     preparation and implementation of the safeguard’s instruments of the project. At the national level, projects
                     implemented based on the ESF are limited and are mainly in the moderate environment and social risk category.
                     Based on the lessons learned from the ongoing project (PUEG), the new project (PEAG) might not be implemented by
                     a project implementation unit. Instead, SEG and DATU will create dedicated project teams from their own staff and/or
                     consultants, to implement the planned activities. There will be a project coordination unit with a restricted role of
                     managing activities that are cross-cutting in nature or require implementation by non-traditional partners.

                     There are a few options for ESF modalities both for the preparation stage and implementation of PEAG. With respect
                     to environmental and social risk management, it is being discussed that an international environmental and social
                     firm will be hired to prepare ESF instruments, undertake ESIAs and RAPs and support the Borrower’s teams
                     throughout the project cycle. The Borrower has agreed in principle during the preparation mission for an international
                     firm to be hired. However, the arrangements for implementing the ESF once the PEAG is effective are still under




Public Disclosure
                     discussion between the Bank Team and the Borrower. One approach is for international recruitment of an
                     experienced firm that will be required to form a joint venture (JV) with a local environmental and social firm in order
                     to build capacities of local staff at the various agencies, under the overall supervision of MEHH and MINUHAT. For this
                     purpose, the two ministries will ensure that the joint venture’s project teams include local environmental and social
                     personnel, who will be trained by the international firm on preparing, implementing and monitoring environmental
                     and social requirements throughout the project cycle.

                     At this initial preparation stage, the Borrower recognizes the need for specialized skills and is open to the idea of an
                     international/ local JV but is at the same time keen to see maximum development of local competencies on
                     environmental and social risk management. There is interest in a proposal to cap the duration of the JV (e.g. it could
                     stay in place until mid-term review of PEAG), and a decision could be taken at the point about whether to continue
                     with the JV or hand all the ESF implementation and oversight to local entities.

                     In addition to the environment and social specialists, SEG will ensure the presence of staff to be trained on
                     occupational health and safety, and gender, including SEA/SH, and stakeholder engagement aspects. During project
                     preparation, the Task Team will assess whether SEG has staff with the appropriate skill set, especially on highly
                     specialized areas like SEA/SH, and will discuss with SEG and the Borrower on how to address any competency gaps.
                     With respect to the project coordination unit, the international environment and social firm, will be responsible to
                     ensure the presence of safeguards specialists to fulfill the required responsibilities. During project preparation, the
                     safeguard institutional and organizational framework will be finalized including the exact number an

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS


                    Apr 28, 2023                                                                                                       Page 5 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               Guinea Water and Sanitation Project (P179017)



                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                                  High


                     Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                               High
                     The project design is aimed at implementing activities that have environmental benefits by improving access to water
                     supply in Greater Conakry. The project will support the improvement of dam safety through the upgrade of existing
                     equipment on the Grandes Chutes Dam (with a storage capacity of 2 million m3) and Baneah (with a storage capacity
                     of 254 million m3), and the construction of a 200,000 cubic meter treatment plant, storage reservoirs, transmission,
                     and distribution networks. These investments can however generate risks that emanate from construction related
                     activities and during operation and maintenance. Potential environmental risks and adverse impacts associated with
                     project activities are likely to be substantial and affect a wide geographic area. They are mainly linked to water, soil,
                     waste, disruptions of natural habitats, occupational health, and safety (OHS), and community health and safety due to
                     increase circulation, noise and air pollution. These may include: (i) alteration of air quality by dust flights during
                     development, foundation, earthworks, rehabilitation of existing water facilities; (ii) degradation of the sound climate
                     due to excavation work, noise and vibration from moving of construction vehicles and machinery; (iii) contamination
                     of surface water by residues of hydrocarbons, lubricants, oils and suspended solids; (iv) risk of accidents and incidents
                     (including injury and drowning) due to the supply of construction materials to the sites, the transport of equipment
                     and the transportation of personnel during construction works; (v) odor nuisance due to poorly designed, misused or
                     badly maintained latrines ; (vi) wastewater and fecal sludge generation (from sanitation facilities); (vi) risk of water
                     eutrophication effects due to the proliferation of aquatic plants (vii) risks and impacts associated with the failure or
                     malfunction of the existing dams that will be enforced by the project; (viii) risk associated with the lost of biodiversity.
                     An important impact associated with the operation of the project is the generation of additional wastewater volumes



Public Disclosure
                     that will be discharged. During project preparation, further discussions will be undertaken with the client and other
                     donors regarding existing, planned and additional wastewater facilities to cater for the increase in wastewater
                     including the safeguards due diligences associated with the implementation of new wastewater infrastructure.
                     Considering the nature and scale of the project’s activities and the limited capacity and experience with ESF of the
                     Implementing agency, the project’s environmental risks and impacts are classified as high at this stage.
                     Social Risk Rating                                                                                               Substantial
                     The project social risk classification is rated substantial at this stage of project preparation. The social risks associated
                     with project implementation could lead to impacts on local urban and peri-urban communities around Conakry where
                     Component 1 of the project will focus on water production, treatment and storage, and main extension services.
                     Based on initial studies done under the previous project (PUEG), the improvement of dam safety through the upgrade
                     of existing equipment on the Grandes Chutes Dam (with a storage capacity of 2 million m3) and Baneah (with a
                     storage capacity of 254 million m3) shall not cause physical resettlement. There is a potential for some of the local
                     livelihoods (e.g. riverine agriculture) to be affected by new O&M and safety rules to be set (in general these are buffer
                     zone areas around the dams), this will be determined throughout preparation. Given this potential impact, it is
                     important for local communities to be involved in the institutional arrangements and decision-making mechanisms to
                     be put in place at the two dams. The construction of the infrastructure downstream (pipelines, reservoirs, treatment
                     plant) could lead to some permanent or temporary acquisition of land as well as economic and physical resettlement
                     as households are being connected, mostly in the immediate vicinity of the water treatment station. The most likely
                     physical and economic resettlement are small buildings, kiosks, trees or annex elements such as walls, fences, etc.
                     There was a Resettlement Project Framework developed under the PUEG, which will be updated to comply with the
                     ESF and aligned to the new activities. There was also a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) established for the PUEG, that

                    Apr 28, 2023                                                                                                         Page 6 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               Guinea Water and Sanitation Project (P179017)



                     will serve as a basis for the future project – not only in terms of developing the instrument but also in terms of
                     institutional procedures and actors present (e.g. the Commission Interministérielle de l’Indemnisation des PAP; the
                     comités de gestion des plaintes – or COGEP). However, this project will develop a new RAP for all of its activities and
                     ensure it is aligned with the ESF. There is a risk of social exclusion and discrimination of, and against, women and
                     other vulnerable groups during the project pre-construction and construction phases. This risk is related mainly to
                     land acquisition process and access to project labor and employment opportunities. There is also the possibility of
                     Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH), Violence Against Children (VAC) and the risk of child
                     labor, particularly during the construction phase, as the activities include workers working near the local population.
                     Finally, there is a risk that occupational health and safety is not being respected, as based on the experience of the
                     PUEG, implementing companies have low environmental and social capacity and the mission de contrôle often does
                     not provide the required oversight. This will need to be mitigated by the implementation of construction
                     environmental and social management plans to be developed by the construction companies to be hired.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESSs) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1. General Assessment

                     ESS1 Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     Overview of the relevance of the Standard for the Project:
                     The Project aims to address safe access to drinking water by financing the extension and rehabilitation of water
                     infrastructure including water reservoirs, treatment plants as well as transmission and distribution networks in order



Public Disclosure
                     to increase access to water in greater Conakry. The activities to be financed by the project are expected to improve
                     the quality of life of populations living in Conakry and support social and human development. However, the planned
                     activities present important environmental and social risks associated with large infrastructures, including provision
                     of equipment to two dams to improve safety at Baneah (a 30 m high embankment dam) and Grandes Chutes (a 6.35
                     m high concrete dam), construction of 200,000 cubic meter treatment plant, around 80 km of transmission and
                     distribution pipelines, as well as two storage reservoirs.

                     The risks associated with project activities, such as construction and rehabilitation of infrastructure, during the
                     construction and operation phase are mainly linked to occupational health and safety (OHS), community health and
                     safety, water, soil, and air pollution, risk of wastewater pollution associated with insufficient wastewater facilities to
                     cater for the increased wastewater production as a result of additional water consumption, risks of spreading
                     sexually transmitted diseases such as STIs/HIV/AIDS as well as COVID-19 contamination. Furthermore, there are
                     potential risks of social conflicts in the event of non-local employment, health vulnerability due to poor hygiene,
                     insecurity and risk of incidents in the event of dam or pipe burst, Sexual Exploitation and Abuse / Sexual Harassment
                     (SEA/SH) that may arise from power relationships (hierarchy, positioning, economic benefits, etc.) in the context of
                     the proximity of female and male workers as well as workers and neighboring communities and potential child labor
                     risks on worksite.

                     At this stage the location and details of project activities under component 1 are known and specific environmental
                     and social impacts assessments for the Yessoulou treatment plant, reservoirs and networks will be developed during
                     project preparation. However, the location of some project activities are not yet known. Therefore, the Borrower will
                     update, disclose, and implement the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) of the existing

                    Apr 28, 2023                                                                                                        Page 7 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               Guinea Water and Sanitation Project (P179017)



                     project to align with the ESF and to guide the preparation of Environmental and Social Impact
                     Assessments/Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESIAs/ESMPs), when the exact scope and locations of the
                     other project activities are known.

                     The ESMF that will be developed by Appraisal and will allow for the E&S screening of the sub-projects that will be the
                     subject of these ESIAs, which will be prepared, reviewed, and approved by the Bank prior to the start of the activities.
                     The site specific ESIAs will propose mitigation measures and include reference to management plans such as dam
                     safety management/disaster preparedness plans and waste management plans. These ESIAs will also cover activities
                     relating to capacity building with trainings that will involve all project stakeholders. Each ESIA will include an
                     Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) with clearly defined mitigation measures for construction and
                     operational phases, roles and responsibilities, general and sector-specific, Environmental Health and Safety
                     Guidelines in relation to occupational and community health and safety, measures for monitoring, time plans,
                     environmental and social requirements to be included in bidding documents, costs and implementation producers for
                     each mitigation measures recommended. The ESIAs will also include an assessment of risks related to Sexual
                     Exploitation and Abuse/Harassment (SEA/SH), and proposed mitigation measures. There will be a standalone SEA/SH
                     plan prepared following project effectiveness. The ESMF will also include a chapter on the Contingent Emergency
                     Response Component (CERC) environmental and social issues in case this component is triggered during project
                     implementation.

                     Construction Contractors will be contractually required to implement and comply with the project’s ESMP, including
                     preparing contractors Environmental and Social Management Plans (C-ESMP) that include all necessary specific




Public Disclosure
                     management plans and procedures provided in the ESMP.

                     In addition to the ESIAs that will be developed and approved, the Client will also prepare the following instruments
                     prior to Appraisal: SEP, ESMF, LMP, RPF. A summary of the specific measures will be included in the Environmental
                     and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), prepared by the Borrower, in collaboration with the Bank. The ESCP will be
                     disclosed prior to project appraisal.

                     According to the information received to date, the project might include associated facilities such as the existing
                     water treatment plants and other infrastructures to be funded by other donors including the raw water intake and
                     the transmission lines. This issue will be further investigated during project preparation and the required safeguards
                     due diligence will be identified and developed as part of the project safeguards instruments.
                     Areas where “Use of Borrower Framework” is being considered:
                     The project will not rely on the Borrower’s environmental and social Framework but will comply with relevant
                     national legal and regulatory requirements.


                     ESS10 Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure
                     Stakeholder engagement is a fundamental aspect of the project. The project will have to involve and engage local
                     populations, dedicated institutions, administrative and local authorities, civil society, in order to be able to succeed in
                     securing water resources, implement the E&S instruments and finalize the various construction activities.




                    Apr 28, 2023                                                                                                        Page 8 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               Guinea Water and Sanitation Project (P179017)



                     The key stakeholders of the project include government employees employed by the Ministry of Energy, Water and
                     Hydrocarbons (MEHH) and the Ministry of Urban Planning and habitat and territorial Development (MINUHAT) as
                     well as all the other ministries involved in the implementation of water infrastructure (like Environment, Health etc.),
                     SEG, DATU, Guinea Agency for environment Evaluation (AGEE), NGOs, Civil Society Organizations (CSOs), consumers,
                     potential contractors, the media and project beneficiaries, including all Project Affected Persons (PAPs). During
                     project preparation, MEHH and MINUHAT will prepare, consult, and disclose a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) to
                     map out the various project stakeholders and develop a strategy on how to engage with them, share project
                     information, mitigate potential social conflicts and/or misconceptions about project impacts and benefits, and solicit
                     feedback on the project. Stakeholder engagement opportunities and actions must cover all the project components
                     and dimensions. The SEP will outline (i) who the potential key stakeholders are; (ii) how they are to be engaged; (iii)
                     how often the engagement will occur throughout the project, and how disclosure will take place throughout the
                     project; (d) how feedback/complaints/concerns will be received, recorded and monitored over the project; (iv) who
                     will be charged/responsible with this engagement and (v) timeline and cost. The SEP will be prepared in consultation
                     with national stakeholders and will be proportional to the nature and scale of the project and its associated risks and
                     impacts.

                     A draft SEP will be disclosed prior to project appraisal and will be updated as and when necessary, throughout project
                     implementation. The Borrower will engage in meaningful consultations with all stakeholders throughout the project
                     life cycle, paying particular attention to the inclusion of vulnerable and disadvantaged groups (including the elderly,
                     persons with disabilities, female-headed households, youth and orphans). Thus, specific consultations adapted to the
                     needs of vulnerable groups will be held in order to highlight and address their needs throughout the project cycle.




Public Disclosure
                     The Borrower will maintain and disclose a documented record of any stakeholder engagement, including a
                     description of the stakeholders consulted, a summary of the feedback received and a brief explanation of how the
                     feedback was taken (or not) into consideration.

                     The Borrower will also develop a Grievance Mechanism (GM) for the project that is known by and made accessible to
                     all stakeholders and allow them to voice their concerns and request information about the project. The GM will build
                     on the existing GM infrastructure that has been put in place as part of the PUEG project. The GM will also be SEA/SH
                     sensitive. These provisions will be contained in the SEP and the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP).


                     B.2. Specific Risks and Impacts

                     A brief description of the potential environmental and social risks and impacts relevant to the Project.
                     ESS2 Labor and Working Conditions
                     The standard is relevant as the project will hire staff to implement the project, consultants, unskilled workers from
                     neighboring communities as well and skilled engineers that will be brought in by the contractor(s) to perform various
                     project activities. The project could include the following categories of workers: direct workers, contract workers,
                     community workers and primary supply workers. Direct workers will be officials from the different implementing
                     agencies or technical consultants of the project.

                     Most of the workforce is expected to be hired locally except for a few skilled workers. A Labor Management
                     Procedure (LMP) that specifies the terms and conditions of employment, nondiscrimination and equal opportunities,


                    Apr 28, 2023                                                                                                     Page 9 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               Guinea Water and Sanitation Project (P179017)



                     workers' organizations, measures against child and forced labor, grievance redress mechanism for labor disputes,
                     occupational health, and safety measures for the workers (direct and contract), and provisions to prevent and
                     manage SEA/SH will be prepared prior to the start of works.

                     The LMP will consider national regulations and international good practice guides to maintain the principle of
                     equality and inclusion of all vulnerable groups, including women and persons with disabilities. The project will require
                     contractors/operators (both local and international) to develop their own labor management plans acceptable to the
                     project and the World Bank. The provisions would apply to all workers on the project, including direct workers,
                     contracted workers and primary suppliers (full time, part-time or day workers). It will also be the responsibility of the
                     Contractor to ensure that all workers are fully aware of the terms of employment, remuneration, grievances and
                     other relevant factors, as per the ESS2 and relevant national laws. No person under the age of 18 will be recruited or
                     engaged in project activities.

                     In addition to ensuring health and safety of workers during the construction and operational phases of the project, a
                     Health, Safety and Environmental (HSE) plan will be developed as part of the ESMP that will be consistent with World
                     Bank Group’s Environmental, Health and Safety (EHS) Guidelines. The HSE plan will include procedures for incident
                     investigation and reporting of any non-compliances, emergency preparedness and response procedures and
                     continuous training and awareness to workers as required.


                     ESS3 Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management




Public Disclosure
                     Raw Materials: The required construction material will potentially include stones, sand, and concrete. These
                     materials are expected to be obtained from sources localized to project areas, such as quarries in the implementation
                     zones, or in clear agreement with owners. ESIAs will recommend appropriate measures for improving the efficient
                     use of raw materials.
                     Soil erosion and runoff: Excavation works may entail vegetation and soil loss which could result in erosion and runoff,
                     that could adversely impact surface waters. The scope of vegetation loss will be assessed as part of each ESIA.
                     Mitigation measures would also be expected to be proposed in the ESMP to avoid, reduce or mitigate runoff from
                     project sites during construction activities.

                     Air pollution: During the construction phase, air emissions will include exhaust from heavy vehicles and machinery,
                     and fugitive dust generated by construction activities. Those most likely to be affected are workers and people living
                     within the proximity of the work sites. The implementation of mitigation measures such as dust suppression and
                     vehicle maintenance, regulation of car speed will be applied to minimize the impact of air emissions during
                     construction, and transportation of material.

                     Noise: During the construction phase, noise is likely be generated from the use of construction machinery and vehicle
                     movements. that is expected to present short-term nuisance to the public and to owners adjacent to some of the
                     project sites. The ESIAs will identify and assess impacts to nearest sensitive receptors and propose mitigation
                     measures to minimize and manage the noise levels such by applying standard restrictions to hours of site work. The
                     Project will ensure that work is conducted in a way that noise levels will not be excessive or cause long-term
                     nuisances.



                    Apr 28, 2023                                                                                                     Page 10 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               Guinea Water and Sanitation Project (P179017)



                     Management of hazardous and non-hazardous wastes: The ESIAs will identify all sources of hazardous and
                     nonhazardous waste and propose mitigation measures proportional to the level of risk. The ESIAs will also identify
                     the presence and locations of licensed facilities for the transport, treatment and disposal of solid and hazardous
                     wastes in the vicinity of project sites. The Contractor will be responsible of developing and implementing a waste
                     management plan during project implementation.

                     Water use efficiency and conservation: Water withdrawals and consumption during construction and exploitation of
                     infrastructure need to be rationalized. Also, water quality should be protected against pollution and degradation. To
                     ensure efficient water use, rationalization measures will need to be determined and implemented throughout the
                     project. The Client will ensure that resource efficiency and pollution prevention and management measures will be
                     incorporated in the ESMF and ESIAs to be prepared.


                     ESS4 Community Health and Safety
                     The proposed project will finance construction and rehabilitation of water infrastructures, which could negatively
                     affect the health, safety and security of community members, including the risk of sexual exploitation, abuse, and
                     harassment of the neighboring communities, sensitive rights of vulnerable groups and inappropriate worker-
                     community interactions.

                     While most of the workers for the civil works are likely to be from the local communities, experience has shown that
                     influx of workers into a project area can lead to adverse social impacts (SEA/SH, sexually transmitted and




Public Disclosure
                     communicable diseases). The ESMF will also make use of the general and sector-specific EHSGs for the identified
                     subprojects, in relation to the community health and safety. The ESMF will also determine the appropriate mitigation
                     measures, including training and a code of conduct for workers, to support implementation and close monitoring.
                     The ESIA/ESMP will assess and include mitigation measures for sexual harassment, HIV and COVID-19 prevention
                     measures, and propose clear incident response procedures.

                     The increase in water production and distribution would lead to an increase in wastewater production including fecal
                     sludge. These additional wastewater volumes could have negative impacts on community health, if not properly
                     managed. During project preparation, an assessment of existing wastewater infrastructures to handle the additional
                     generated wastewater will be conducted. The required measures and implementation modalities will be identified
                     and agreed on with the client.


                     The safety assessment was conducted by independent experts for the dams of Grandes Chutes and Baneah and a
                     written report was provided with findings and recommendations for remedial work and safety related measures
                     necessary for the upgrade of these dams to an acceptable standard of safety. The project will ensure that this report
                     is consistent with the dam safety reports as required by the Annex 1, C of the ESS4.

                     For the existing water treatment plants and to ensure community health and safety, environmental and social audits
                     of existing treatment plants performance will be conducted, and correction measures, if necessary, will be identified
                     and implemented during the rehabilitation and exploitation phases.



                    Apr 28, 2023                                                                                                  Page 11 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               Guinea Water and Sanitation Project (P179017)



                     ESS5 Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement
                     The project will be constructing water infrastructure such as treatment plants, pipelines, and reservoirs from dams.
                     The project will be implemented within the greater Conakry area in a mix of urban and peri-urban areas. The
                     interventions on the Grandes Chute and Baneah Dams (new equipment and safety works) will be in rural areas
                     located outside city of Conakry. For the dams, even if resettlement is not expected based on initial studies conducted
                     under the PUEG project, site visits and E&S screenings will be needed to identify any potential impacts on land use
                     and livelihoods of people, as there is a potential risk that buffer zones (which are sometimes installed for safety
                     purposes) could impact local livelihoods.

                     The Yessoulou IV treatment station, storage reservoirs, transfer pipelines and connections for the surrounding
                     communities to be built for the densely populated communes of Kagbelen, Kouria and Maneah, will possibly involve
                     involuntary resettlement, loss of income and livelihoods, destruction of crops, buildings and land acquisition. The
                     most likely impact, based on the experience of the PUEG is economic displacement of small businesses located on
                     land that is considered public domain.

                     For the activities where the precise area is known, a RAP will be developed, whereas for the areas where this is not
                     the case, the Borrower will update, disclose, and implement the RPF of the existing PUEG project to align with the ESF
                     and to guide the preparation of RAPs when needed. It is important to underline the fact that while the existing RAP
                     will serve as a basis for institutional procedures, this project will develop a new RAP compliant with the ESF and
                     specific to its activities and impacts (locations, nature of impacts, land acquisition, physical displacements, etc.).




Public Disclosure
                     Attention should be paid to the social impacts of the associated facilities be they under component 1 (Water supply
                     in Greater Conakry) or component 2 (Sanitation and hygiene), this is based on the previous project experience, where
                     the resettlement proved very onerous and complicated. The resettlement impacts should also be considered for any
                     additional funding received for this project, which will be determined throughout project preparation.


                     ESS6 Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources
                     The project will target primarily urban and semi urban areas for the transmission line; the likelihood of significant
                     direct negative impacts to these areas of high biodiversity sensitivity is negligible. However the Grandes Chutes dam
                     area was assessed as an Important Bird Area (IBA), thus as a Key Biodiversity Area (KBA) due to the presence of the
                     Vulnerable bird Picathartes gymnocephalus , The potential for the impacts of the project on these areas cannot be
                     ruled out at this stage, particularly that increased traffic during construction and the presence of workers can have
                     an impact on biodiversity. The ESMF will provide guidance on subproject-level biodiversity screening, assessment,
                     identification of mitigation and management measures to ensure that project activities do not alter or cause
                     destruction or degradation of any critical or sensitive natural habitats, especially forests and wetlands. If deemed
                     necessary, site-specific ESIAs/ESMPs will address biodiversity impacts and will include assessment of risks on critical
                     habitats and propose mitigation measures to the impacts on critical Habitats and protected areas.


                     ESS7 Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional Local Communities
                     This standard is not considered relevant as there are no Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically
                     Underserved Traditional Local Communities currently identified in the potential project areas. Should the presence of

                    Apr 28, 2023                                                                                                    Page 12 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               Guinea Water and Sanitation Project (P179017)



                     indigenous communities be confirmed through further screening during implementation, the necessary assessments,
                     consultations and instruments will be undertaken per the requirements of this standard.


                     ESS8 Cultural Heritage
                     It is not anticipated that the project will have significant impacts on cultural heritage but as the project will finance
                     activities involving excavations during the construction phases of some project related infrastructure, the
                     environmental and social assessment process will identify cultural heritage in project areas. The first mitigation
                     measure will be to avoid known cultural heritage. The ESMF will include a “chance finds” procedures, to be
                     subsequently included in contractors’ documents, which will require contractors to stop construction/rehabilitation
                     in the event that any cultural heritage is encountered during civil work.


                     ESS9 Financial Intermediaries
                     This project is not a FI


                     C. Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                     OP 7.50 Projects on International Waterways                                                                             No




Public Disclosure
                     OP 7.60 Projects in Disputed Areas                                                                                      No



                     III. WORLD BANK ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL DUE DILIGENCE

                     A. Is a common approach being considered?                                                                               No
                     Financing Partners
                     There is a potential that other partners will finance additional components of the project but this is not yet confirmed,
                     so for right now there will not be a common approach


                     B. Proposed Measures, Actions and Timing (Borrower’s commitments)
                     Actions to be completed prior to Bank Board Approval:
                     - Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)
                     - Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)
                     - Updated Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
                     - Labor Management Procedures (LMP), including GRM for labor-related issues
                     - Updated Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
                     - Site specific ESIA and resettlement plans for Yessoulou
                     - E&S due diligence for the existing dams
                     Possible issues to be addressed in the Borrower Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP):

                    Apr 28, 2023                                                                                                       Page 13 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               Guinea Water and Sanitation Project (P179017)



                     The ESCP will include all environmental and social commitments, as well as milestones, to be carried out during the
                     project including the means and the frequency of reporting on the implementation of measures and actions required
                     to achieve compliance with World Bank’s ESF. The ESCPs will include commitments to prepare and disclose all
                     relevant E&S instruments and dam safety plans as well as the CERC requirements. ESF capacity-building will be
                     prioritized.


                     C. Timing
                     Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage ESRS                                           16-Nov-2023

                     IV. CONTACT POINTS

                     World Bank
                     Contact:             Dambudzo Josephine Muzenda           Title:           Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                Specialist

                     Telephone No:        +1-202-473-1954                      Email:           dmuzenda@worldbank.org

                     Contact:             Karamoko Sanogo                      Title:           Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

                     Telephone No:                                             Email:           ksanogo@worldbank.org




Public Disclosure
                     Borrower/Client/Recipient
                     Borrower:              Ministère de l'Energie, de l'Hydraulique et des Hydrocarbures (MEHH)

                     Implementing Agency(ies)
                     Implementing Agency: Ministry of Energy, Water and Hydraulics



                     V. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     VI. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                  Dambudzo Josephine Muzenda, Karamoko Sanogo

                     Practice Manager (ENR/Social)         Pia Peeters Recommended on 27-Apr-2023 at 05:34:39 EDT

                     Safeguards Advisor ESSA               Melissa C. Landesz (SAESSA) Cleared on 28-Apr-2023 at 19:37:37 EDT


                    Apr 28, 2023                                                                                                 Page 14 of 14
