Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                     Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                     Date Prepared/Updated: 08/30/2023 | Report No: ESRSA02957




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Jan 03, 2024                                                                      Page 1 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION

                     A. Basic Project Data

                     Country                  Region                         Project ID                       Parent Project ID (if any)

                     St Maarten               LATIN AMERICA AND              P179067
                                              CARIBBEAN

                     Project Name             Sint Maarten: Wastewater Management Project

                     Practice Area (Lead)     Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date         Estimated Board Date

                     Water                    Investment Project             12/25/2023                       2/15/2024
                                              Financing

                     Borrower(s)              Implementing Agency(ies)       Estimated Decision Review        Total Project Cost
                                                                             Date

                     Government of Sint       National Recovery              8/24/2023                        25,000,000
                     Maarten                  Program Bureau




Public Disclosure
                     Proposed Development Objective
                     The objectives of the Project are to: (i) increase access to safely managed sanitation services; and (ii) improve
                     sustainability and resilience of wastewater management.

                     B. Is the project being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?

                     No

                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities

                      GoSM has made several wastewater investments over time, including the construction of a municipal wastewater
                     treatment plant (WWTP) and the development of sewerage infrastructure in various residential and commercial
                     districts. However, less than 11 percent of the properties in the country, corresponding to approx. 2,000 properties
                     are connected to the sewerage network, while 89 percent of households rely on mostly unsafe septic tanks or direct
                     discharges into water bodies. Removal of the sludge from septic tanks does not take place in a general or a structural
                     manner. As a result, those tanks are prone to overflow, causing untreated discharge flow into Little Bay or the
                     Simpson Bay Lagoon and are eventually released into the sea. Given the low connection rate to the public sewer
                     system on the island, and insufficient level of wastewater treatment, expanding the sewage network and upgrade of
                     the WWTP has been recognized as a priority necessary to protect the health of the population and mitigate pollution
                     of the island’s ponds and coastal/beach areas.



                    Jan 03, 2024                                                                                                           Page 2 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)



                     The proposed project would include three components as detailed below:

                     Component 1: Wastewater infrastructure investment (US$20 million)
                     This component will finance all stages of infrastructure development, including identification, design, supervision, and
                     construction of new or upgrade/rehabilitation of existing wastewater collection, treatment, and disposal
                     infrastructure. The component would include the preparation of Feasibility Studies, Environmental Impact
                     Assessments, and other project documentation necessary to secure required permits, detailed designs, bidding
                     documents, supervision and contracting of construction works.
                     Component 1 will include two sub-components:
                     Sub-component 1.1: Wastewater collection This first sub-component aims at improving the coverage and resilience of
                     wastewater collection. This will be done through:
                     (i)      Expansion of the existing sewerage network, including transport pipelines, collection pipelines, pumping
                     stations, house sewerage connection and other structures, to enable the connection for residents and commercial
                     enterprises. The priority project area will be Greater Cul de Sac, and if more funds become available later, the
                     sewerage network could be expanded to other priority areas that may include Greater Philipsburg and Lower Prince`s
                     Quarter.
                     (ii)     Rehabilitation of critical parts of the existing sewage system to improve its climate resilience and operational
                     efficiency
                     Sub-component 1.2: Upgrade of existing A. T. Illidge Road WWTP. This sub-component will include the necessary
                     rehabilitation and upgrade of the existing A. T. Illidge Road WWTP. The rehabilitation and expansion work will include
                     upgrades of both wastewater treatment and sludge treatment lines, necessary upgrade of equipment needed for




Public Disclosure
                     measurement and analysis of wastewater, improved energy efficiency, upgrade of SCADA, etc.

                     Component 2: Technical assistance for sustainable and resilient sanitation management (US$3 million)
                     Component aims at creating the framework for the provision of sustainable and resilient wastewater services in Sint
                     Maarten, and will include the following activities:
                     a)       Capacity strengthening of the line Ministry (VROMI) for planning, regulation, and supervision of wastewater
                     services through training, knowledge transfers, and IT support, including preparation of a roadmap for improving
                     VROMI capacity.
                     b)       Strengthening of the policy, legal, and regulatory framework for sustainable and resilient wastewater service
                     provision (building on existing plans and ordinances) . This would include: the development and adoption of a
                     financially viable wastewater management model, and development and adoption of cost recovery principle, support
                     for contracting the private sector for operation of the wastewater system, and establishment of an enabling policy
                     framework that would enhance the service provider’s operational, financial, and institutional capacity to cope with
                     climate- and non-climate related disasters and shocks.
                     c)       Support to GoSM in preparing and processing a long-term contract with a private operator for the operation
                     of the country’s public wastewater management system. This contract is expected to go beyond project closing date
                     and represents a long-term institutional solution for wastewater management.
                     d)       Development of a national sanitation strategy for Sint Maarten and mid/long-term implementation plans for
                     phased expansion of a wastewater management system. This comprehensive sanitation strategy would include plans
                     for safe management of sanitation for the entire population of Sint Maarten, especially those in the neighborhoods
                     that will take time to be connected or will not be connected to the formal sewerage network.



                    Jan 03, 2024                                                                                                      Page 3 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)



                     e)       Management of fecal sludge from septic tanks, including– the review and development of locally appropriate
                     standards for safe containment, collection, and treatment of fecal sludge; licensing, and monitoring and optimization
                     of fecal sludge emptying service providers.
                     f)       Development of a focused technical analysis on understanding the effects of wastewater pollution on coastal
                     water quality, which would feed in to design of a seawater quality monitoring system and the identification of
                     additional measures for reduction of surface and seawater pollution.
                     g)       Development of a system for monitoring seawater quality in coastal areas/beaches and the surface water
                     quality of inland ponds. The objective of this activity is to develop a conceptual design and baseline for surface and
                     seawater quality monitoring, with a particular focus on bathing waters quality monitoring, which would provide
                     adequate information on the status of Sint Maarten’s coastal waters, and existing inner ponds (primarily Fresh Pond
                     and Great Salt Pond).

                     Component 3: Project management (US$2 million)
                     Under this Component, the Project will support the project management and coordination capacity of the NRPB as a
                     Project Implementation Unit (PIU), including support to the PIU on: (i) project operating costs, monitoring and
                     evaluation activities; (ii) environmental and social risk mitigation measures; (iii) training of PIU and Gov staff; (iv)
                     annual audits for the project and providers; and (v) establishment of citizen engagement measures and grievance
                     redress mechanisms for the project activities.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings



Public Disclosure
                     The Government of Sint Maarten has prioritized the Greater Cul de Sac area for the rehabilitation/expansion of the
                     existing sewer network, although the coverage could be extended to Philipsburg and Lower Prince’s Quarter based on
                     availability of funds. Greater Cul de Sac is a residential area with a mix of high income and low income homes and
                     public facilities such as schools, sports fields and small businesses. Some businesses have privately operated WWTPs
                     that are not connected to the public wastewater system. Households that are not connected to the sewerage network
                     mostly rely on septic tanks. Removal of the sludge from septic tanks is mostly driven by the households own initiative
                     but the associated fees for sludge removal and disposal present a hindrance for many people, resulting in irregular
                     removal of sludge. As a result, septic tanks are prone to overflow and improper discharge. The resulting pollution
                     poses health and environmental risks to the population and to ponds, lagoons, groundwater, beaches and sea water.
                     Climate change impacts, such as frequent flooding and hurricane risks, are also likely to further contribute to
                     discharge of untreated wastewater thereby exacerbating pollution.


                     The WWTP is located on A.T. Illidge Road in a mixed residential and commercial neighborhood. Its footprint is
                     approximately 15,000 square meters and it has the nominal capacity to treat 4,750 cubic meters of sewerage per day.
                     However, due to incomplete sewerage network, it is operating at 50 percent of its design hydraulic load. An unknown
                     part of these flows originate from intrusion of stormwater and discharge from cruise ships that are docking in Sint
                     Maarten. The WWTP also receives about 450 cubic meters per day of household septic sludge delivered by trucks. The
                     WWTP biological treatment is achieved through an activated sludge process with extended aeration. Sludge
                     dewatering is achieved using drying beds and the dewatered sludge is transported to the municipal disposal site. The
                     government issued a Hindrance Permit in 2012 that mainly pertains to fire safety and emergency measures, soil/noise
                     pollution, waste disposal, effluent quality, and reporting, inspection and maintenance. Wastewater quality monitoring

                    Jan 03, 2024                                                                                                      Page 4 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)



                     process in the WWTP is inadequate and it is not clear to what extent it meets the permit standards. However, the
                     discharge requirements of the Hindrance Permit are strict and it is unlikely that the WWTP in its current state can
                     meet the required standards.


                     The WWTP is adjacent to Fresh Pond, which is a 14 hectare permanent water body of low salinity that supports
                     mangroves and hosts several bird species which, according to BirdLife International, are less common in other parts of
                     the Lesser Antilles. The treated effluent from the WWTP discharges into Fresh Pond. However, most of the influent to
                     the Fresh Pond comes from untreated sewage discharges, surface runoff, plastics and other litter from surrounding
                     neighborhoods. On one end, Fresh Pond is connected to the Great Salt Pond but there is a man-made barrier
                     separating the two water bodies which is sometimes opened to regulate water levels. The other end of the Fresh
                     Pond is connected to the Great Bay coastal area via an open canal that is blocked using a sand barrier which can be
                     opened during strong rainfall events.


                     There is currently no regular monitoring of coastal or inland water quality. A water quality assessment carried out in
                     2019 indicated that the Great Salt Pond is highly polluted by leachate discharges from the nearby municipal solid
                     waste disposal site and from sewage discharges. The Nature Foundation, an NGO in Sint Maarten, has also reported
                     poor water quality in inland and coastal waters in several instances, including elevated levels of nitrates and
                     phosphates attributed to untreated wastewater discharges.


                     Through the interventions of this project, the population is expected to benefit from access to safely managed



Public Disclosure
                     sanitation services, reduced pollution, cleaner surface and coastal waters, and a safer environment.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The project will be implemented by the National Recovery Program Bureau (NRPB). The NRPB will carry out technical,
                     administrative, legal, financial and procurement responsibilities as well as environmental and social (E&S) risk
                     management. The NRPB will work closely with the Ministry of VROMI and other relevant stakeholders to ensure the
                     effective implementation of the project.


                     The World Bank has been engaging with the NRPB since 2018. As a result, the NRPB has gained experience in
                     implementing the Bank’s Safeguards Policies and the Environmental and Social Framework (ESF). The NRPB is
                     responsible for the implementation of several projects supported by the Sint Maarten Trust Fund and administered by
                     the World Bank, including the Emergency Debris Management Project, the Fostering Resilient Learning Project, and
                     the Emergency Recovery Project I. Overall E&S performance has been satisfactory and lessons learned, particularly on
                     strengthening consultation processes, avoidance to the extent possible of land acquisition and resettlement given the
                     land challenges of SXM, supervising, monitoring and reporting on E&S aspects of civil works, and enhancing the
                     reporting of incidents and accidents, will be integrated into project implementation.


                     The NRPB has a dedicated team of E&S specialists that includes two social specialists, three environmental specialists
                     and the head of the E&S team. They are in the process of hiring a third social development professional, but finding a
                     social specialist to be based in Sint Maarten is challenging and the NRPB had to relaunch the process several times.
                     The current team is qualified and has experience in conducting E&S assessments, screening for E&S risks, and in

                    Jan 03, 2024                                                                                                      Page 5 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)



                     monitoring the implementation of mitigation measures in coordination with supervising engineers and contractors.
                     The NRPB E&S team also participated in the “ESF in Practice” virtual training that was delivered by the World Bank in
                     March 2022 and an in-person training on managing contractors’ E&S performance held in June 2023. Additionally, the
                     NRPB plans to involve 1 community engagement specialist to support communication and engagement with affected
                     neighbours and beneficiaries during planning of and actual civil works of the sewer network. One environmental and
                     one social specialist have been assigned to develop relevant E&S instruments and ensure compliance throughout the
                     Project life cycle. If required during Project implementation, the NRPB will seek additional support to ensure that E&S
                     risks are properly managed.

                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                       Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                Substantial
                     The environmental risk rating is Substantial. This rating takes into account the type and scale of the project, the
                     nature and magnitude of the potential E&S risks and impacts, the location and sensitivity of the receiving
                     environment, the capacity and commitment of the grant recipient and relevant contextual risks. The exact upgrades
                     to the WWTP and the sites and routing for the expansion/rehabilitation of the sewer network will be finalized during
                     project implementation. As such, the potential environmental benefits and impacts were assessed based on available
                     information at the appraisal stage. Overall, the project is expected to result in environmental benefits by reducing the
                     discharge of untreated wastewater into surface water and seawater which would ultimately improve the quality of



Public Disclosure
                     lagoons, beaches, coastal water and corals, and improve people’s overall health and wellbeing. The most significant
                     environmental risk is associated with soil and water pollution from the additional sludge that is expected following
                     the expansion of the sewer network. Based on information from the WWTP and projections of future connections,
                     the amount of sludge is expected to increase by approximately 40%. In the current system, sludge is dried using
                     sludge drying beds and thereafter it is collected by trucks and deposited at the municipal landfill. Sint Maarten lacks
                     an effective solid waste management system which further increases risks related to the management of dewatered
                     sludge. The sludge composition is not expected to contain high concentrations of toxic substances such as heavy
                     metals as there are no industries that would produce relevant discharges. However, sludge testing will be conducted
                     as part of the E&S Assessment to ascertain the risk. Majority of the infrastructure works will be small to medium in
                     scale and the associated environmental risks during the construction and operation of the WWTP and sewer network
                     are expected to be low to moderate, localized, temporary and can be managed using routine mitigation measures.
                     These environmental risks include nuisances such as noise, dust and release of odors; occupational health and safety
                     (OHS) risks; community health and safety risks; traffic disruption; management of construction waste; increased
                     energy consumption of the upgraded WWTP; and the sensitivity and assimilative capacity of the Fresh Pond to the
                     additional effluent. The current system relies on biological processes and does not utilize chemicals. If chemicals are
                     required as part of the upgrades to the WWTP, then the environmental risks related to their use, storage and disposal
                     will be assessed as part of the E&S Assessment and measures put in place. Given the island’s exposure to hurricanes,
                     disaster risk management provisions will be adopted as part of the project design, to the extent possible, to mitigate
                     risks of system failure and increase the resilience of the sewer network and the WWTP. The downstream
                     environmental risks of the technical assistance (TA) activities under Component 2 relate to the capacity of the
                     government to provide adequate wastewater services and to conduct long-term water quality monitoring. The


                    Jan 03, 2024                                                                                                     Page 6 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)



                     measures to address the above risks are highlighted under ESS1 below and will be detailed in the respective E&S
                     instruments. The NRPB also has a qualified and experienced environmental specialist who will manage the
                     implementation of the project. During project implementation, the environmental risk rating will be reviewed and
                     revised accordingly to ensure that it accurately represents the level of risk associated with the project.
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating                                                                                         Moderate
                     The expansion and improvement of the sewer network is expected to bring a broad range of benefits to direct
                     beneficiaries but also to the community at large, particularly sanitary conditions and health. While the areas of
                     intervention have already been identified, the exact investments at the WWTP and the sites and routing for the
                     expansion/rehabilitation of the sewer network will be known only during project implementation. Component 2 will
                     complement the infrastructure expansion with the development of a framework for the sustainable provision of
                     efficient and resilient wastewater services, which will include the introduction of cost recovery principles through
                     direct funding of services by tariffs. The social risk rating is considered moderate. The specific impacts are unknown at
                     this time, however, due to the nature of the works and activities currently planned under Component 1 and the
                     technical assistance under Component 2, the risks are likely to be: (1) potential temporary disruptions to the normal
                     operation of businesses along planned civil works route that could cause loss or reduction of income; (2) cost
                     implications for residences and commercial businesses due to the introduction of tariffs that can create resistance
                     among stakeholders if adequate engagement is not undertaken; (3) noise, dust and altered traffic patterns as a result
                     of the civil works; and, finally, (4) OHS risks consistent with expected civil works and during implementation. As noted
                     under Borrower’s Institutional Capacity, the NRPB has the capacity and experience to adequately manage these social
                     risks and has assigned one social specialist to support social aspects of the project who will coordinate with the
                     community engagement specialist during works. However, given that the portfolio of projects managed by the NRPB



Public Disclosure
                     is growing, the hiring of a third social specialist will be critical to ensure that social risks are properly managed.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESSs) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards
                       ESS1 Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and                                            Relevant
                       Impacts
                       The interventions will primarily take place in Greater Cul de Sac area. Priority was determined by the government
                       considering other government wastewater upgrades currently taking place and the Greater Cul the Sac is an area of
                       high need of wastewater improvements. The exact routing of the sewer lines and the need for additional equipment
                       and infrastructure such as pumping stations will be determined during project implementation and, hence, actual
                       beneficiaries will also be identified during project implementation. A preliminary analysis of the WWTP investment
                       needs was conducted during project preparation and the proposed upgrades include installation of additional pumps,
                       facilities for mechanical sludge dewatering, a chemical precipitation unit, a disinfection unit and an automation
                       system. Some of the drying beds may be removed to provide land to install the upgrades. The impacts related to the
                       above works are expected to be site-specific, limited in scope and duration, and can be mitigated using routine
                       technical and E&S measures.

                       To manage the risks related to the expansion/rehabilitation of the sewer network under Sub-component 1.1, the NRPB
                       shall develop, consult, adjust based on consultations and disclose a Preliminary Environmental and Social Management
                       Plan (ESMP) no later than 60 days after the Project Effective Date. The NRPB developed a table of contents (ToC) for

                    Jan 03, 2024                                                                                                      Page 7 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)



                       the Preliminary ESMP which serves as detailed Terms of Reference (ToR) for the ESMP. The ESMP ToC (that includes an
                       initial E&S assessment) was cleared by the World Bank and it was subsequently disclosed by the NRPB on September
                       8, 2023 for the purposes of consultation. The Bank also disclosed the ESMP ToC on November 10, 2023. During
                       implementation, a Preliminary ESMP will be developed and used to provide input into the analysis of alternatives and
                       feed into the proposed design of the sewer network before it is finalized. The Preliminary ESMP will be updated into a
                       final ESMP once the designs of the sewer network are available. With the information available at appraisal stage,
                       there might be temporary disruptions s to businesses located along the roads and in neighborhoods where the civil
                       works will take place. The design solutions to avoid temporary loss of income and the compensation framework to
                       respond to those impacts if they materialize, will be specified in the ESMP.

                       Regarding Sub-component 1.2, the specific works in the existing WWTP will be determined during project
                       implementation. The NRPB developed ToR for an E&S assessment (ESA) and ESMP that were submitted to the World
                       Bank for formal review. Following the World Bank’s clearance, the contents and scope of work under the ToR were
                       disclosed by the NRPB and the Bank on November 28, 2023 (prior to appraisal). The ESA will examine E&S risks and
                       impacts of the current WWTP operation, risks associated with construction activities and those expected during the
                       operational stage of the upgraded WWTP. It will incorporate the World Bank Group General Environmental Health and
                       Safety Guidelines (EHSGs), the industry-specific EHSGs for Water and Sanitation and applicable laws of Sint Maarten.
                       Following the completion of the ESA, an ESMP will be developed to manage the risks and impacts identified in the ESA.
                       The ESA will be conducted by the design firm that will carry out the technical assessment to ensure close integration of
                       both activities. The NRPB submitted a request on October 18, 2023 to conduct the ESMP in-house based on the results
                       of the ESA which was accepted by the Bank on November 2, 2023. To fulfil the independence requirements per ESS1




Public Disclosure
                       paragraph 25, the NRPB will hire an independent expert to review and advice on sludge management aspects of the
                       ESA and ESMP. The reviewer shall author a stand-alone report endorsing the sludge management measures or
                       proposing gap-filling measures. The report shall be annexed to the draft ESA and ESMP and the updated ESA and
                       ESMP will incorporate findings from independent reviewer's report, including any design and budgetary adjustments.
                       The independent expert will conduct an ex-post review to confirm whether the feedback has been addressed
                       appropriately. Prior to the finalization of the bidding documents for civil works, the draft ESA and ESMP will be
                       reviewed and cleared by the World Bank, disclosed for stakeholder consultations and will thereafter be finalized
                       incorporating feedback from stakeholders, cleared by the World Bank and redisclosed. The final ESA and ESMP will
                       inform the technical design and scope of works and will feed into the technical and E&S specifications of the bidding
                       documents for civil works. The contractor will be required to develop and regularly update a contractor’s ESMP (C-
                       ESMP), based on the project ESMPs, that will be approved by the NRPB and their supervising engineer and shared with
                       the World Bank.

                       Teachnical Assistance (TA) activities under Component 2 include the development of a wastewater framework,
                       preparation of national water supply and sanitation strategies and implementation plans for wastewater
                       management, and capacity building of VROMI. The development of said framework will include the development and
                       adoption of cost recovery principles through direct funding of services by tariffs which may have cost implications for
                       residences, particularly those more vulnerable, and commercial businesses. The requirements set out in paragraphs
                       14–18 of ESS1 will be applied to TA activities as relevant and appropriate to the nature of the risks and impacts. The
                       ToR defining the scope and outputs of TA activities will be reviewed by the World Bank so that the advice and other
                       support provided are consistent with ESS 1–10 and duly incorporate relevant requirements of the ESSs. The World
                       Bank’s responsibility will not extend beyond the World Bank-financed TA.


                    Jan 03, 2024                                                                                                     Page 8 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)




                       A draft Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) has been developed, containing the measures, actions and
                       timeframe required to ensure compliance with the Environmental and Social Standards (ESSs). A draft version of the
                       ESCP was disclosed by the NRPB and the Bank prior to appraisal and will be finalized during project negotiations.

                       Component 3 is related to project management activities, and no E&S risks are anticipated. Funding under this
                       component will support E&S capacity development initiatives for the PIU such as staffing, training activities,
                       stakeholder consultations and running the grievance redress mechanism.

                       ESS2 Labor and Working Conditions                                                                                 Relevant
                       The project is expected to engage direct and contracted workers, including contractors, subcontractors and design and
                       supervision services for the civil works proposed under Component 1 as well as for the TA planned under Component
                       2. Similar to other projects that include civil works that NRPB manages, the contractor workforce is expected to be
                       hired locally except for a few skilled workers who may come from abroad, as such labor influx and its associated risks
                       are not anticipated. Direct workers will include full-time and part-time consultants employed by the NRPB for project
                       implementation, including the E&S compliance. No primary suppliers or community workers are expected to be
                       involved.

                       The NRPB developed draft LMP that were cleared by the World Bank and subsequently disclosed by the NRPB
                       (September 8, 2023) and the Bank (September 27, 2023). The LMP specifies the terms and conditions of employment,
                       non-discrimination and equal opportunities, workers' organizations, measures against child and forced labor, OHS



Public Disclosure
                       measures for the workers, and provisions to prevent and manage SEA/SH risks. A GRM for labor disputes is already in
                       place as part of the NRPB’s institutional GRM. As reflected in the ESCP, the NRPB will submit a final version of the LMP
                       for the World Bank’s prior review and clearance and will adopt and disclose it no later than 60 days of Project Effective
                       Date. All bidding documents and contracts for civil works will include relevant provisions of the LMP, including OHS
                       requirements and the Code of Conduct with provisions on SEA/SH together with appropriate remedies for non-
                       compliance.

                       ESS3 Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                                  Relevant
                       The proposed project will reduce pollution by connecting more residents and enterprises to the sewer network and by
                       strengthening monitoring and reporting of surface water and seawater quality. However, the key ESS3 risks associated
                       with Component 1 activities include: (i) the management and disposal of dewatered sludge; (ii)construction and
                       demolition waste; (iii) hazardous material such as chemicals for wastewater treatment operations, if required, and
                       asbestos containing material if present; (iv) odor, dust, and noise; (v) impacts to water quality of the Fresh Pond; and (vi)
                       increased energy use required to operate the upgraded wastewater system. These risks will be assessed and managed
                       through the ESA and ESMP for the WWTP and ESMP of the sewer network. In addition, the technical and E&S
                       assessments will identify opportunities to introduce energy efficiency measures such as the replacement of aging pumps
                       with energy efficient pumps and resilience measures to manage climate hazards in the design of Component 1 activities.
                       The resulting measures will be included in technical and ES specifications of bidding documents and in the C-ESMP.




                    Jan 03, 2024                                                                                                        Page 9 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)



                       Under Component 2, the NRPB will develop a water quality baseline for selected surface waters and beaches prior to
                       launching the bidding process for Component 1 and conduct monitoring at the identified locations for at least one year
                       during Project Implementation.

                       The World Bank conducted a climate and disaster screening of the project and the risk rating is considered as moderate
                       based on the exposure levels, possible impacts, and the mitigation measures included in the project. Green House Gas
                       (GHG) emissions are not likely to be significant given the size, type and operating capacity of the WWTP, hence the gross
                       GHG emissions are not required under ESS3.

                       ESS4 Community Health and Safety                                                                               Relevant
                       Civil works planned under Component 1 might affect the health and safety of the people in the vicinity of the
                       construction sites. Impacts from expansion of the existing sewerage network and additional wastewater connection as
                       well as the rehabilitation and expansion or the WWTP may include air emissions and odors, possible vectors such as
                       mosquitoes, disposal of effluent water, hazardous materials, risks associated with open trenches during the
                       construction of the sewer network, traffic disruptions and traffic safety issues including possible temporary road
                       closures, and interruptions to normal operation of businesses.

                       The ESMP for the expansion and rehabilitation of the sewer network (subcomponent 1.1) as well as the ESA and ESMP
                       for the WWTP (subcomponent 1.2) will include, inter alia, the necessary measures to ensure community safety during
                       the construction and operational phases of the project, accessibility of infrastructure, safety of sanitation services,
                       management of the nuisance impacts of construction, traffic management, and measures to respond to emergencies,



Public Disclosure
                       including hurricanes and floods. During operation of the WWTP, the risks to the adjacent neighborhoods, especially
                       during floods and hurricanes, will be assessed and addressed in the respective ESMP.

                       A list of GBV service providers is available, and a sample of the Code of Conduct is included in the draft LMP. The
                       NRPB’s institutional GRM can receive SEA/SH grievances. One of the social specialists at the NRPB has overall
                       responsibility of GRM implementation and has been trained to deal with SEA/SH grievances. Direct and contracted
                       workers will be required to sign a workers’ code of conduct, including provisions on SEA/SH and will receive training on
                       SEA/SH.

                       ESS5 Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                    Not Currently Relevant
                       ESS5 is not relevant. Impacts covered under ESS5 during the civil works associated with the expansion and rehabilitation
                       of the sewer network will be part of an exclusion list in the preliminary ESMP of the sewer network. Said Preliminary
                       ESMP will also include an E&S screening tool that will support the NRPB to identify any activities with potential impacts
                       covered under ESS5 early on and take it on board in the analysis of alternatives to decide the specific routing of the
                       sewer network. Locations requiring purchase of land or resettlement will not be selected for intervention under the
                       project.

                       ESS6 Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                     Relevant
                       Resources
                       The treated effluent from the WWTP is currently discharged into Fresh Pond. Compared to other water bodies in Sint
                       Maarten, Fresh Pond has a lower salinity and a 2007 assessment by BirdLife International designated it as an Important

                    Jan 03, 2024                                                                                                    Page 10 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)



                       Bird Area due to six bird species that are less common in other parts of Sint Maarten and the Caribbean. All six species
                       are assessed as Least Concern by The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN). There are mangroves
                       along some sections of the Fresh Pond including at the discharge point of the effluent from the WWTP. Some of these
                       mangroves were planted through initiatives with the Nature Foundation.

                       There have been concerns of pollution of Fresh Pond from storm water runoff, trash, sewage outflows from the
                       neighborhood, busy traffic in the area and from the WWTP effluent. The WWTP ESA and ESMP will provide guidance on
                       biodiversity screening and mitigation measures to ensure that project activities do not alter or cause destruction or
                       degradation of the Fresh Pond habitat, including mangroves, fish and birds. Based the findings of the ESA, measures to
                       manage impacts to biodiversity, or a Biodiversity Management Plan (BMP) if required, will be included in the ESMP.
                       Most of the civil works under Component 1.1 will occur on the right of way in urban landscapes and impacts to
                       biodiversity are expected to be negligible or minor. The ESMP of the sewer network will include an E&S screening once
                       technical designs are completed, and prior to issuing bidding documents, to identify and avoid or mitigate any impacts
                       to biodiversity. Component 2 of the project includes TA activities to operationalize monitoring and reporting of
                       seawater quality which is expected to benefit Fresh Pond. These TA activities will be conducted in a manner consistent
                       with the requirements of ESS6.

                       ESS7 Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                 Not Currently Relevant
                       Local Communities
                       There is no population in the area of intervention that can be considered indigenous peoples as per the four
                       cumulative criteria set forth in ESS7.



Public Disclosure
                       ESS8 Cultural Heritage                                                                                           Relevant
                       The area prioritized for the expansion of the sewer network contain some designated monuments. However, these are
                       unlikely to be in the right of way but depending on the routing of the sewer network, some monuments may be near
                       civil works locations. The ESMP of the sewer network will include locations of these monuments once the technical
                       designs are completed, and measures to avoid or manage potential impacts to cultural heritage in line with ESS8.

                       The project will also involve excavation to expand/rehabilitate the sewer network and may include similar works at the
                       WWTP. The ESMP for the sewer network, and if necessary, the WWTP ESMP, will include chance finds procedures to
                       be implemented in line with national legislation and the requirements of ESS8. Construction contracts and C-ESMP
                       will include clauses requiring contractors to take proper protective measures in case previously unknown cultural
                       heritage sites are discovered.



                       ESS9 Financial Intermediaries                                                                     Not Currently Relevant
                       The project will not involve financial intermediaries.

                       ESS10 Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                           Relevant
                       ESS10 is relevant. Direct project beneficiaries will be around 10,500 people (approximately 25% of Sint Maarten
                       population) located in the areas that will be provided with access to new or rehabilitated wastewater infrastructure.


                    Jan 03, 2024                                                                                                      Page 11 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)



                       They will benefit from improved efficiency, quality, and resilience of sanitation services, primarily through the
                       development of an institutional framework for wastewater management and the construction, rehabilitation, and
                       modernization of sewer networks which, in turn, will translate into enhanced sanitation and health. The rest of the
                       population of Sint Maarten will also benefit from improved municipal wastewater service provision, cleaner surface and
                       coastal waters, and a safer environment.

                       The client developed a draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) that was submitted to the World Bank for formal
                       review. Following the World Bank’s clearance, the SEP was disclosed prior to appraisal. The draft SEP identifies and
                       assesses key stakeholders, including disadvantaged/vulnerable groups, describes how the NRPB will engage with
                       project affected and other interested parties during implementation and states the responsibilities for implementing
                       and monitoring the SEP. It also provides a description of the NRPB institutional GRM that will be applicable to this
                       project.

                       Initial consultations with stakeholders started before project appraisal. The NRPB organized a consultation at the
                       beginning of November with government entities and civil society; however, only one person from civil society was able
                       to attend. Consequently, the NRPB made efforts to reach those who were not able to join the in-person session. The
                       presentation and information about the project and the associated environmental and social risks was provided by
                       email allowing some time for responses. A phone number has been established for engagement purposes throughout
                       the project. It will be managed by the Project Manager until the Community Engagement Consultant is onboarded. The
                       WhatsApp function is currently operational, and a WhatsApp message was sent on December 6th, 2023 to all the
                       stakeholders that were invited to the consultation that took place on November 6th. Additionally, social media post




Public Disclosure
                       requesting feedback on the SEP is live and information on the project was published in the local newspaper. Other
                       efforts to engage with stakeholder are planned for Q1 2024.

                       The draft version cleared by the Bank was disclosed on December 19th, 2023. The draft SEP will integrate the results of
                       the consultation process, including those planned to take place in Q1 2024, and be finalized no later than 60 days of the
                       Project Effective Date. Stakeholder engagement, information disclosure, and consultations will continue during
                       implementation as set forth in the SEP.

                       Finally, the project will benefit from the existence of a functioning GRM which serves all projects implemented by the
                       NRPB and meets the requirements of the Bank, including provisions for SEA/SH grievances and anonymous complaints.
                       The NRPB’s GRM is active and is receiving and responding to complaints in a timely manner.


                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply
                       OP 7.50 Projects on International Waterways                                                                        No


                       OP 7.60 Projects in Disputed Areas                                                                                 No



                     B.3 Other Salient Features



                    Jan 03, 2024                                                                                                    Page 12 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)



                     Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                         No
                     None

                     Use of Common Approach                                                                                            No
                     None

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities
                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required during implementation?
                     During implementation, the NRPB will incorporate feedback from stakeholders and finalize the draft SEP and LMP that
                     were developed during project preparation. They will also develop an ESMP for the sewer network expansion (Sub-
                     component 1.1) following the approved ESMP Table of Contents, and develop an ESA and ESMP for the WWTP
                     upgrade (Sub-component 1.2) following the approved terms of reference. The draft SEP and LMP will be finalized
                     within 60 days of project effective date. The preliminary ESMP for the sewer network will be developed and cleared
                     by the Bank within 60 days of project effective date and the draft ESA and ESMP for the WWTP upgrade will be
                     developed as part of the design contract for Component 1. Both the ESMP for the sewer network and the ESA and
                     ESMP for the WWTP upgrade will be finalized and disclosed by the NRPB and the Bank before launching the tender
                     process for civil works. The contents of the ESMPs will feed into the technical and E&S specifications of the bidding
                     documents and eventually into contractors ESMPs which will be periodically updated as part of adaptive
                     management. Consultations and stakeholder engagement will also continue during project implementation as



Public Disclosure
                     described in the draft SEP.

                     III. CONTACT POINTS

                     World Bank
                     Task Team Leader: Stjepan Gabric                             Title:            Senior Water Resources
                                                                                                    Management Specialist

                     Email:             sgabric@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                 Stjepan Gabric, Farah Altagracia Dorval


                    Jan 03, 2024                                                                                                 Page 13 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)



                     ADM Environmental Specialist:             Brian Kamau Ndirangu

                     ADM Social Specialist:                    Erica Virginia Piber




Public Disclosure




                    Jan 03, 2024                                                      Page 14 of 14
