Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                          Project Information Document (PID)



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                          Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 10-Jul-2023 | Report No: PIDC34888




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Jan 30, 2023                                                                                           Page 1 of 10
          The World Bank
          Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)


  BASIC INFORMATION


  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE

  Country                                        Project ID                 Parent Project ID (if any)     Project Name
  Nigeria                                        P179684                                                   Sustainable Power and
                                                                                                           Irrigation for Nigeria
                                                                                                           Project (P179684)
  Region                                         Estimated Appraisal Date   Estimated Board Date           Practice Area (Lead)
  WESTERN AND CENTRAL                            Mar 01, 2024               Jul 01, 2024                   Water
  AFRICA
  Financing Instrument                           Borrower(s)                Implementing Agency
  Investment Project Financing                   FEDERAL GOVERNMENT OF      Federal Ministry of Water
                                                 NIGERIA                    Resources

   Proposed Development Objective(s)

    to improve utilization of existing storage for irrigation and hydropower generation and strengthen institutional
    arrangements for integrated water resources management in Nigeria

    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

   SUMMARY-NewFin1

    Total Project Cost                                                                                                      700.00

    Total Financing                                                                                                         700.00
                             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                              700.00

    Financing Gap                                                                                                              0.00

   DETAILS     -NewFinEnh1




    World Bank Group Financing

       International Development Association (IDA)                                                                          700.00
           IDA Credit                                                                                                       700.00




  Environmental and Social Risk Classification                              Concept Review Decision
   High                                                                     Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to
                                                                            continue

Jan 30, 2023                                                                                                              Page 2 of 10
          The World Bank
          Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)




  Other Decision (as needed)



  B. Introduction and Context

  Country Context

   1.    Nigeria is the most populous country and the largest economy in Sub-Saharan Africa. Its population is above 200
   million and it has an estimated Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of USD 473 billion in 2022. An estimated 80 million people
   in Nigeria still live in poverty, highlighting the urgent need for policy actions and sustained economic growth. Despite its
   potential, Nigeria faces significant challenges, including fragility, conflict, and insecurity, particularly in the northeast. In
   addition, the public sector suffers from insufficient capacity, and the country ranks low on many human development
   indicators.

   2.    In 2021-2022, the economy recovered from the recession induced by the COVID-19 pandemic and lower oil
   prices and real GDP growth exceeded population growth for the first time since 2015, but welfare has continued to
   deteriorate. Following the contraction of 1.8 percent in 2020, the Nigerian economy grew by 3.6 percent in 2021 and
   by 3.3 percent in 2022. However, the recovery seen in 2021-2022 has not been enough to cover the per capita income
   losses of the last 6 years. By the end of 2022, a Nigerian is projected to have the same level of income per capita as in
   2012 and it will take about roughly a decade to return to the same level of GDP per capita seen in 2014.
  3.     Macroeconomic stability has weakened considerably due to multiple foreign exchange (FX) rates, high and
  increasing inflation, rising fiscal pressures, and declining forex reserves. Nigeria’s chronically high inflation has increased
  since 2019, especially for food items, eroding the purchasing power of poor and vulnerable Nigerians and increasing
  poverty. High inflation since 2020 has pushed an estimate of 13 million Nigerians into poverty 1. The effectiveness of
  monetary policy is compromised by multiple FX windows, the central bank’s provision of development finance at
  subsidized rates, and monetization of the fiscal deficit.

  4.      Nigeria’s vulnerability to climate shocks has increased due to a combination of political, geographic, and social
  factors and, specifically, the recent spike in insecurity in the country. Nigeria is highly prone to river, urban, coastal
  floodings, water scarcity, extreme heat, and wildfires.2 These climate-related risks can have severe implications on
  livelihoods and result in increased food insecurity, famine, population displacement, conflicts, and biodiversity loss.
  Climate inaction could cost Nigeria between 6-30 percent of GDP by 2050, equivalent to a loss of US$100-460 billion.3

  5.     Nigeria is considered an FCV country and majority of its regions are faced with violence and disturbance.
  Currently, there are different peculiarities amongst the six (6) geopolitical regions of Nigeria which include political, civil
  unrest, identity, resource-based and terrorism namely. The North-East is faced with insurgency and terrorism. Boko


 1 World Bank. 2022. The Continuing Urgency of Business Unusual. Nigeria Development Update (NDU).
 2 https://thinkhazard.org/en/report/182-nigeria
 3 World Bank. 2021. Climate Risk Profile: Nigeria. The World Bank Group; World Bank Group. 2020. Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the Federal Republic of
 Nigeria for the Period FY21-FY25. World Bank, Washington, D.C.


Jan 30, 2023                                                                                                                                        Page 3 of 10
          The World Bank
          Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)


  Haram and Islamic State's West Africa Province (ISWAP) are primarily responsible for the instability and displacement of
  over 2 million people in the region. In North-Central and North-West, the scourge of banditry and few pockets identity
  and communal clashes. They also face Herder-farmer conflicts typically involving disputes over land and/or cattle.


  Sectoral and Institutional Context


  6.     While Nigeria is not a water-poor country, available resources per capita are declining and are unevenly
  distributed. Nigeria’s annual surface water resources are estimated at 375 billion cubic meters (BCM). The renewable
  groundwater resources potential is estimated at 156 BCM/year. With a water scarcity index of 1,800 m3 / capita, Nigeria
  is not a water-poor country for now. However, available water resources per capita continues to decline due to
  population growth. The resources are also extremely unevenly distributed, with mean annual precipitation ranging from
  50mm in the North to 1500mm in the South. This large variability makes Nigeria extremely vulnerable to climate shocks
  manifesting in periods of droughts and floods.

  7.      The recent devastating flooding events (both in 2012 and now 2022) suggests the need for urgent action to
  increase resilience. Nigeria is one of the 10 countries most vulnerable to climate change in the world4. Without the
  implementation of suitable risk mitigation measures, the reliability and quality of both ground and surface waters will
  continue to deteriorate, while water-related natural disasters will persistently threaten Nigeria’s infrastructure and the
  livelihoods of its people.

  8.      In the face of climate change and variability, enhanced storage and multi-purpose dams help water managers
  to store and allocate water resources for productive uses. Nigeria has over 340 storage dams of all types and capacity
  with over 180 of them classified as “large dams” by the International Commission on Large Dams (ICOLD) standard. More
  investments on storage are needed both for rehabilitation and retrofitting of existing dams for downstream uses
  (irrigation, water supply, hydropower generation, etc.), and to build multi-purpose dams, especially on the Benue basin.

  9.     The Federal Ministry of Power (FMP) and the Federal Ministry of Water Resources (FMWR) play a key role in
  hydropower projects but there is sub-optimal coordination. There is no clear institutional arrangement and strategy to
  streamline the initiation, development, coordination and implementation of hydropower projects in the country. In
  general, FMWR is responsible for the construction and maintenance of dams that serve water supply, irrigation and
  storage, as well as all multipurpose dams including hydropower. FMP is responsible for single purpose hydropower dams,
  which are put under concession to the private sector for operation. Challenges also include the absence of standardized
  national dam safety guidelines to ensure that the dams are up to specification.

  10.     Irrigation development is essential to the sustainable growth of agricultural production in Nigeria. The country
  has an estimated 3.1 million ha of potentially irrigable area , of which over 1 million ha are in the North. Of a total of
  624,000 ha planned for irrigation in 2004, only an estimated 293,117 ha has been equipped for irrigation and only
  approximately 218,000 ha has been cropped . To improve irrigation development, the Federal Government in 2016
  launched the National Irrigation Development Programme (NIDP) 2016-2030 with the goal of developing 500,000 ha of
  irrigable land. The World Bank financed Transforming Irrigation Management in Nigeria (TRIMING) project ($500 million)
  provided a boost to the achievement of the NIDP program with the addition of about 37,000 ha and to address the policy

 4 According to the 2017 Climate Change Vulnerability Index


Jan 30, 2023                                                                                                      Page 4 of 10
         The World Bank
         Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)


  reform and institutional issues noted below, which the proposed SPIN Project would build on the successes and lessons
  learned.

  11.    Over the past two decades, efforts to reform the irrigation sector and improve its governance system has been
  ongoing. Between 1998 and 2007, several policy documents were produced including the National Water Resources
  (NWR) Policy, drafts of National Irrigation Policy, Water Resources Infrastructure Operation and Maintenance policy, and
  the final Report of the Water Resources Strategy. An attempt to establish an independent regulatory commission with
  clear powers and an enabling Act called the Nigeria Integrated Water Resources Management Commission (NIWRMC),
  only partially succeeded when the President refused to sign the Bill approved by the National Assembly till it lapsed. The
  NIWRMC exists today borrowing from extant laws and regulations but without the framework it needs to fully take off.
  The NWR Policy and Strategy formed the foundation of the NWR Bill that is yet to be passed by National Assembly. It
  builds on much of the earlier work and is consistent with the global principles of Integrated Water Resources
  Management (IWRM). Key features of the Bill include (a) assigning regulatory responsibilities to the NIWRMC and the
  water resources development to RBDA, and (b) promoting stakeholder participation in water management such as Water
  User Associations (WUAs). The Bill also advocates the need for participation and consultation with states, local
  governments, communities, women and other stakeholders to achieve its objective. Notwithstanding the intentions
  behind these reform efforts, many have not borne fruit or have enjoyed limited success.

  12.     Several institutions with overlapping and duplication of mandates which are controlled by the Federal
  Government with poor coordination. This has resulted in a preference for massive, multi-state, multi-year infrastructure
  procurements without paying sufficient attention to subsequent operations and maintenance. The multiplicity and
  frequent reconfiguration (in number and function) of agencies and institutions has, in turn, led to lack of a coherent
  irrigation subsector development policy and legal framework exacerbated by piecemeal planning, political interference
  in their management and institutions that are both service deliverers and regulators at the same time. The coordination
  between RBDAs and other agencies, particularly the Ministry of Agriculture has been weak.

  13.     The participation of WUAs has traditionally been weak from design to operation and maintenance of irrigation
  projects, as these have tended to be top-down. Participatory Irrigation Management (PIM) principles, even though
  gaining in recognition, are yet to be institutionalized as the guiding philosophy for the sector, and participation of
  stakeholders continues to be weak. The WUAs do not see sufficient incentive to keep paying and much less to pay higher
  rates if they do not first see better water delivery and higher yields due to improvements in farming support services
  along the value chain, and, in some cases, there remains a perception that government should take charge of providing
  farmers with water for free.

  14.     The World Bank financed Transforming Irrigation Management in Nigeria (TRIMING 2014-2024) project ($500
  million) provided a boost to the achievement of the NIDP program with the addition of about 37,000 ha and to address
  the policy reform and institutional issues noted above. The project has achieved four (4) key results to transform the
  irrigation management to address above issues. Such results are: i) enhanced government commitment to financial
  sustainability and institutional reforms; ii) institutionalized accountability of irrigation agencies to farmers, including
  commitments from agencies to provide satisfactory services; iv) strengthened participation of water users through
  empowered WUAs; and iv) increased farmers’ willingness and ability to pay O&M fees. The proposed SPIN project would
  build on the successes and lessons learned.




Jan 30, 2023                                                                                                       Page 5 of 10
         The World Bank
         Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)


  15.     Nigeria has the highest electricity access deficit worldwide. Despite the unbundling and privatization efforts, the
  power sector in Nigeria continues to face challenges due to inadequate follow-through from both the private and public
  sectors. These challenges include insufficient investments, technical and commercial losses, and stagnant tariffs. To
  address these issues, the Power Sector Recovery Program (PSRP, 2017) was introduced. However, the underperformance
  of the sector has required significant federal funding to sustain the utilities, resulting in limited investment in essential
  infrastructure. Consequently, Nigeria has the highest rates of electricity access deficits globally, with 43 percent of the
  population (85 million people) lacking grid electricity. The energy access gap is particularly severe for the poorest 40
  percent, with only approximately 31 percent having nationwide grid access. To bridge this gap and improve energy access,
  there is a critical need for the development of hydropower projects, which offer clean and cost-effective generation
  options. The insufficient energy access affects all Nigerians, and women often bear the responsibility of ensuring access
  to traditional fuels.

  16.      The power market structure in Nigeria reflects the country's efforts to enhance its performance through
  unbundling and privatization. Guided by the Electric Power Sector Reform Act (EPSRA) of 2005 and the accompanying
  Roadmap for Power Sector Reform, the Nigerian power sector underwent significant reforms. This restructuring led to
  the establishment of the Nigerian Electricity Regulatory Commission (NERC) and later the Nigerian Bulk Electricity Trading
  Company (NBET) in 2010. The sector was subsequently divided into six generation companies (GENCOs), eleven
  distribution companies (DISCOs), and the Transmission Company of Nigeria (TCN). Most DISCOs and GENCOs were
  privatized in 2013, with the exception of Afam GENCO and Yola DISCO. Furthermore, three thermal GENCOs, utilizing
  natural gas, were sold, and two private operators5 were granted concessions to manage three hydropower plants6. TCN,
  a fully government-owned company, operates the national transmission network and fulfills the roles of both the Systems
  Operator (SO) and Market Operator (MO). NERC and NBET play crucial regulatory and facilitative roles in electricity
  trading between GENCOs and DISCOs.

  17.    The power sector and climate change. The PSRP has been implemented for seven years since 2017, aiming to
  bring about improvements in the sector. While progress has been made in certain areas, such as reaching 97 percent cost
  recovery for end-user tariffs, significant strides in addressing climate change are yet to be achieved. The Nigerian
  government has shown commitment to combat climate change through the introduction of the Energy Transition Plan
  (ETP). Approved by the Federal Executing Council (FEC) on February 2, 2022, the ETP sets ambitious goals, including the
  aim of achieving universal energy access by 2030 and establishing a carbon-neutral energy system by 2060. This plan
  envisions the transformation of Nigeria's energy sector, with targets such as expanding hydro and utility-scale solar
  capacities, electrifying the transport fleet, and promoting the use of zero-emission cookstoves. However, the road to
  carbon neutrality requires substantial investment, estimated at approximately US$410 billion over the next three
  decades, surpassing business-as-usual spending. The ETP also foresees a transitional role for natural gas, with a 48
  percent decrease in gas production by 2050 compared to 2019 levels.

  18.    As the energy transition progresses, the share of hydropower in the energy mix is expected to increase while
  the role of gas diminishes. Hydropower not only provides a clean and cost-effective source of electricity but also enables
  the integration of various renewable energy sources. Nigeria possesses a vast untapped hydropower potential, estimated
  at over 14,120 MW, with the capacity to generate more than 50,800 GWh of electricity annually. With approximately 85
  percent of this potential remaining untapped, hydropower presents promising solutions to address existing challenges

 5 Mainstream Energy Solutions Limited (MESL)and North South Power Company Limited (NSP).
 6 Kainji (760 MW), Jebba (580 MW), and Shiroro (600 MW) hydroelectric power plants.

Jan 30, 2023                                                                                                         Page 6 of 10
          The World Bank
          Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)


  such as gas supply limitations, power shortages, and climate change concerns. In conjunction with the ETP, Nigeria's 2015
  National Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Policy (NREEEP) underscores the government's commitment to fully
  harnessing the country's hydropower potential. This policy framework prioritizes decarbonization and promotes private
  sector and indigenous involvement in hydropower development. As part of the efforts outlined in NREEEP, the 700 MW
  Zungeru hydroelectric power plant is currently under construction and nearing completion. The project is also in the
  negotiation phase with the potential concessionaire, Mainstream Energy Solutions Limited (MESL), further progressing
  towards its successful implementation.


  Relationship to CPF


  19.     The proposed project is aligned with the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS, FY21 – FY25) for Nigeria. In
  particular, the proposed project is very closely aligned to the CPF on the following objectives:

           •   Core Objective 8 - Increase access to reliable and sustainable power for households and firms
           •   Core Objective 10 – Enhance climatic resilience
           •   Complementary Priority 6 - Modernize agriculture.

  C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

   To improve utilization of existing storage for irrigation and hydropower generation and strengthen institutional
   arrangements for integrated water resources management in Nigeria.

  Key Results (From PCN)
   20. The key results (PDO Indicators) expected are as follows:

     i.    Improved irrigation and drainage service provided area (hectares);
    ii.    Increased or reoperated water storage capacity (cubic meter);
   iii.    Increased hydropower generation efficiency (percentage);
   iv.     Direct project beneficiaries, including the percentage of females benefiting from improved services
           disaggregated into improved irrigation and allied services, and/or enhanced supply of hydroelectric power
           (number, percentage); and
   v.      Increased number of dams following safe operational procedures and safety measures in place (number).


  D. Concept Description


  21.    The objective of this project is to address water resources management, food security, and energy security
  challenges in Nigeria through investments in irrigation, dams, storage infrastructure, and hydropower facilities. By
  mobilizing water for productive purposes, optimizing the use of existing storage facilities, and enhancing hydropower
  generation capacity, the project aims to promote sustainable development, efficient water resource utilization, and
  strengthen integrated water resources management practices. The proposed project includes four main components
  (the US$ amounts for each component are indicative at this stage, and may vary substantially during preparation, in


Jan 30, 2023                                                                                                      Page 7 of 10
         The World Bank
         Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)


  particular between components 2 and 3). Building upon the lessons learned and achievements of past projects such as
  TRIMING, the project moves to promoting a more holistic water and storage management by the inclusion of hydropower
  sector and supporting institutional strengthening, such as on dam safety regulations and guidelines. The project
  components and related interventions would be chosen through economic, technical and geographical criteria, to act
  synergistically and promote an integrated water and storage management. It would also strengthen institutional
  coordination on storage and water management between the related ministries and departments. The proposed project
  includes four main components:

                 i.   Institutional strengthening and capacity building for Irrigation, Hydropower and Storage Management;
                ii.   Irrigation and Agricultural Services Modernization;
               iii.   Rehabilitation and Improvement of Hydropower and Storage Services; and
               iv.    Project Management.

   Component 1: Institutional strengthening and capacity building for Irrigation, Hydropower and Storage Management


  22.     The objective of this component is to strengthen irrigation, hydropower and storage management and to improve
  the operation and maintenance of storage infrastructure, irrigation perimeters, and flood management systems at the
  national and local levels. This will be conducted through two areas of intervention: i) development and adoption of
  monitoring systems and decision-making institutional framework and tools; ii) institutional and human resources capacity
  reinforcement. The inclusion of a PBC is considered for this component to promote institutional changes on dam safety
  (this will be discussed in more detail during preparation).


   Component 2: Irrigation and Agricultural Services Modernization


  23.     This component will support the rehabilitation and revitalization of about 30,000 hectares of irrigated command
  area. The availability of appropriate water resources will be ensured at all stages through detailed studies on the
  feasibility, which are also ready from the existing work, such as under TRIMING. Investments under this component will
  be selected from the list of national irrigation schemes provided by the government using technical and economic
  selection criteria, which ensure the IWRM support approach of having irrigation, hydropower and dam safety
  components in the same geographical locations.


   Component 3: Strengthening of Hydropower Storage Infrastructure


  24.     The proposed component focuses on two key sub-components: (1) enhancing dam and storage safety, and (2)
  improving hydropower through studies, improvement measures, investments, and technical assistance. By integrating
  these elements, Component 3 aims to improve the overall performance and sustainability of hydropower and storage
  infrastructure, promote responsible investment, and build the technical capacity of stakeholders involved in the sector.




Jan 30, 2023                                                                                                       Page 8 of 10
             The World Bank
             Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)


         Component 4: Project Management


     25.     The objective of this component is to effectively implement, monitor, and evaluate project activities. It involves
     establishing the National Project Management Unit (NPMU) to oversee and coordinate project implementation, as well
     as setting up a monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system. An external M&E agency will be contracted to assess project
     activities and their impact. The component includes financing for consultancies, training, materials, office equipment,
     and operating costs. It also provides investment and technical support for a robust management information system
     (MIS) and ICT system. The Component will also support and strengthen the capacity of the government counterparts on
     the application of Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) and Citizen Engagement activities. These measures ensure
     efficient project management, monitoring, and citizen participation, contributing to the successful achievement of
     project outcomes.




     Legal Operational Policies                                                            Triggered?
     Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                           Yes
     Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60                                                    No

     Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
     .




 .
     CONTACT POINT


     World Bank
     Jun Matsumoto, Daniel Camos Daurella, Emmanuel Chinedu Umolu
     Senior Water Resources Management Specialist


     Borrower/Client/Recipient
     FEDERAL GOVERNMENT OF NIGERIA
     Aisha Omar
     Director IERD
     aomar@mof.gov.ng

     Implementing Agencies


Jan 30, 2023                                                                                                         Page 9 of 10
         The World Bank
         Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



  Federal Ministry of Water Resources
  Peter Manoj
  National Project Coordinator
  ympeter@gmail.com


  FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
  The World Bank
  1818 H Street, NW
  Washington, D.C. 20433
  Telephone: (202) 473-1000
  Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects



  APPROVAL

  Task Team Leader(s):                       Jun Matsumoto, Daniel Camos Daurella, Emmanuel Chinedu Umolu

  Approved By
  APPROVALTBL
  Country Director:                          Shubham Chaudhuri                  07-Aug-2023




Jan 30, 2023                                                                                            Page 10 of 10
