Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Balochistan Water Security And Productivity Improvement Project (P179227)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                             Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                         Date Prepared/Updated: 05/16/2024 | Report No: ESRSA03453




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Jan 17, 2025                                                                          Page 1 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Balochistan Water Security And Productivity Improvement Project (P179227)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                 Operation Acronym          Approval Fiscal Year

                     P179227                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)      BWSPIP                     2025

                     Operation Name            Balochistan Water Security and Productivity Improvement Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries          Region                      Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Pakistan                  Pakistan                                SOUTH ASIA                 Water


                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                Estimated Appraisal Date   Estimated Board Date

                     Islamic Republic of       Balochistan Irrigation Department       17-Apr-2024                08-May-2025
                     Pakistan                  , Public Health Engineering
                                               Department

                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost




Public Disclosure
                     Review Date

                     28-Mar-2024               101,300,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve flood protection, increase access to water for productive use,
                     and improve water supply service delivery in selected areas of Balochistan


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The Project includes three components Component A – Flood and watershed management strengthening Component B
                     – QWASA service delivery strengthening Component C – Contingent Emergency Response


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings


                    Jan 17, 2025                                                                                                  Page 2 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Balochistan Water Security And Productivity Improvement Project (P179227)



                     The project is located in Balochistan province; covering two distinct areas: (a) Kachhi plains; and (b) Quetta valley. While
                     administratively these two areas fall in three districts: (i) Kachhi/Bolan, (ii) Sibi; and (iii) Quetta district.
                     Kachhi Plains - the project area for “Component A” largely with rural landscape - is an arid, dry, and hot temperate zone
                     stretching across an area between two mountain ranges, the Sulaiman Range to the east and the Kirthar Range to the
                     west. The area is constituted by rangelands, agricultural, forested, barren, and unproductive mountain slopes. The
                     surface water sources such as streams and rivers are scarce due to the arid climate. However, during the monsoon
                     season, some rivers and streams flow and people store this water in village ponds and use for drinking and irrigation.
                     The groundwater is generally saline and is not fit for drinking purposes. Sibi district depends upon the Nari canal for
                     irrigation. A large area is irrigated through the spate or rod kohi irrigation system. The Bolan/Kachhi district is mostly
                     canal irrigated and is in the monsoonal belt. The Kacchi plain is dominated by various species of thorny shrubs such as
                     acacia species, prosopis cineraria (known as kandi or khejri), and desert grasses like Cenchrus ciliaris commonly known
                     as buffel grass and tamarisk trees. There are no state forests in Kachhi district. There are some irrigated, privately-
                     owned plantations in the district, which include Direnjin, Drazbent and Bamboo (all at Dhadar). Crop farming, fruit
                     farming, and livestock rearing are extremely important occupations in rural Balochistan, including the Kachhi plains.
                     Communities reliant on these as their main sources of income are facing a major challenge of access to reliable sources
                     of water. The groundwater in Balochistan's aquifers provides a buffer against drought for crop production and for
                     livestock and human needs. However, inefficient water management practices and excessive groundwater use have
                     created severe economic, social, and environmental challenges for the province. Quetta Valley –the project area for
                     Component B is a predominantly built up/urban settlement – located in Lora basin comprised of alluvial aquifers in the
                     valley and bedrock aquifers in the surrounding mountains. Beneath the earth surface the alluvial aquifer has a depth of
                     30-900 m in the main valley. The valley is characterized by a flat, sandy plain that is dissected by a network of streams




Public Disclosure
                     and rivers. There is however no perennial river in the Quetta District. The whole area is drained by Quetta Lora (Sariab
                     Lora) and its confluents. In absence of any reliable and financially viable surface water source in and around Quetta, the
                     area is mainly dependent on groundwater resources. About three million inhabitants of Quetta are currently facing an
                     acute issue of water scarcity due to rapid growth and over exploitation of its major and available source; groundwater.
                     Water quality is also an issue and 65 percent of drinking water sources are deemed unsafe for human consumption.
                     Sanitation and wastewater management have been largely neglected, which contributes to the fecal contamination of
                     drinking water in Quetta. In Quetta, about 48 percent of children under five are stunted and an underlying cause is
                     frequent exposure to fecal pathogens due to poor water, sanitation, and Hygiene (WASH) services. The situation is even
                     worse in Kacchi Abadis (slums) in Quetta where none of the many overlapping agencies including QWASA provides
                     services. According to UNICEF, 85 percent of households in slums have no public water provision. Separately, 85 percent
                     have no functional sewerage or drainage system, making Kacchi Abadis public health hotspots.
                     The Quetta region is known for its extensive juniper forests. Juniperus excelsa and Juniperus macropoda are the
                     dominant species found in the area. Pistacia khinjuk, a species of pistachio tree, is native to the region. It is an important
                     tree for local communities providing edible nuts and valuable timber. Though there are five wetlands in Balochistan
                     province under protection through Ramsar Convention but none falls in the project districts. However, the water bodies
                     like “Hanna Lake” and “Spin Karez” – the potential water sources for Quetta water supply - support migratory birds
                     population during their seasonal migration. Similarly, the Bolan and Nari rivers, despite their limited flow, provide a
                     habitat for waterfowl.
                     At provincial level the water availability per capita (1,120 m3) is slightly higher than the national average (1,102 m3),
                     and water withdrawal as a percentage of the available resource (29 percent) is the lowest in the country – implying that
                     Balochistan still has scope to develop its water resources for productive use. Further, seasonal variability in water
                     availability is far higher than the national average, and per capita water storage represents only 20 percent of the


                    Jan 17, 2025                                                                                                        Page 3 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Balochistan Water Security And Productivity Improvement Project (P179227)



                     national average. Overall the province has a semi-arid climate compounded by rugged topography, insecurity, and
                     sparse irrigation/flood control schemes rendering the delivery of development interventions, particularly challenging.
                     Recent economic growth in the province has been largely driven by the expansion of unsustainable tube-well irrigation
                     for agriculture, especially horticulture, and orchards.
                     The province is also acutely susceptible to extreme weather-related hazards, such as floods, droughts, extreme heat-
                     waves, wildfires, cyclones, coastal erosion, and rising sea levels which are becoming increasingly intense and frequent
                     due to climate change. The recurring floods between 2010 and 2022 also led to significant loss of life, livestock, and
                     cropland and caused critical infrastructure damages. Likewise, the southern parts of Balochistan, which have always
                     been prone to flash floods and landslides, are more vulnerable due to changing climatic conditions.
                     Culturally, Balochistan is highly tribal (the term ‘tribal’ referring to ethnic groups living in Balochistan who have
                     communal land ownership, and collective code of living; however, none of these groups meet ESS7 criteria for IPs) with
                     FCV context, affecting resource sharing decision making as experienced in previous World Bank projects (BIWRMDP).
                     Decisions on water infrastructure are usually taken through tribal engagement and consultations, with limited
                     government control.




                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Balochistan Irrigation Department (BID) will be the Implementing Agency for component A while the Quetta Water
                     and Sanitation Authority (QWASA) at Balochistan Public Health Engineering Department (PHED) will be the
                     Implementing Agency for component B. BID will rely on the existing PMU of the BIWRMDP for project management. For




Public Disclosure
                     the QWASA/PHED, a new project implementing unit will be created and staffed with relevant specialists. For both PIUs,
                     project management functions will include staffing, procurement, contract management, project supervision, and
                     financial management, as well as E&S management and coordination. While the PIUs will also be responsible for
                     collaboration with the communities, customers, community organizations and the farmers’ organizations, as well as for
                     sub-project implementation. The PIUs will have the overall responsibility for project monitoring and evaluation in their
                     respective domains and locations but will outsource an M&E consultant for support. They will both benefit from a
                     robust technical assistance through project design and supervision consultants. The BIWRMDP PMU at BID currently has
                     Environmental and Social Development Specialists (ES&SDS) with demonstrated knowledge and experience in
                     implementing WB safeguard policies and instruments. However, BID has not implemented any project under ESF. The
                     PMU does not have a Gender Specialist. The ES & SD Specialists in PMU of BIWRMDP have received ESF training
                     provided by the WB under ESF capacity development program. QWASA/PHED, responsible PIU for implementing
                     Component B, has no experience with World Bank funded projects and the E&S requirements. Currently PHED and Q-
                     WASA do not have adequate E&S staff to ensure compliance with E&S instruments during project implementation.
                     In conclusion, borrower capacity to manage E&S risks is moderate to weak. Additional E&S staff would be required at
                     BID and adequate number at QWASA, to implement and oversee the E&S requirements. Each PIU will be required to
                     have one Environment Specialist, one Social Development Specialist and one Gender Specialist. Apart from this regular
                     E&S set-up, “Project Design and Supervision Consultants (PSDC)” planned to be hired for overall project will also be
                     responsible for E&S implementation, compliance monitoring in the field and reporting; as being successfully done for
                     implementing BIWRMDP. Additionally, the effectiveness of safeguards implementation and compliance would be
                     regularly validated and assessed by the “Monitoring and Evaluation Consultants”; as an independent/third party
                     monitor.



                    Jan 17, 2025                                                                                                   Page 4 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Balochistan Water Security And Productivity Improvement Project (P179227)



                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                          Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                   Substantial
                     Environmental Risk Rating Substantial As per environmental and social due diligence, the project activities are
                     envisaged to have Substantial environmental risks due to moderate to large scale civil works, likely reduction of water
                     availability in lower riparian area, multiple locations of project activities, unstable security situation in the province,
                     institutional capacities, and general implementation challenges. The project will have overall positive impacts under
                     both components by improving water security and increasing the economic productivity of water use in the selected
                     areas of Balochistan Province. However the medium to large scale construction activities for the proposed
                     interventions may cause adverse environmental risks and impacts if not managed timely and properly. The likely
                     environmental risks and impacts include: generation of spoil from excavation activities, dust generation caused by
                     excavation and running of project vehicles on unpaved roads/tracks, air emissions released by construction machinery
                     and vehicles, soil and ground/surface water contamination caused by release of contaminants at the worksites and
                     discharge of domestic sewage and other wastewaters from temporary facilities, solid waste generation, clearing of
                     natural vegetation and trees, CHS risks associated with movement of heavy machinery, dump trucks, and deep
                     excavations; OHS risks associated with the construction works, security of workers and equipment, concerns related
                     to river water quantity and quality. In case of the flood water detention, water harvesting and ground water recharge
                     under Component A, there is likely reduction of surface water flow during the rainy season for lower riparian areas.
                     Other likely impacts for Component B activities include: traffic congestion in urban setting, temporary disruption on



Public Disclosure
                     supply and quantity of water to the communities and related health and safety risks during implementation. Most of
                     these environmental risks and impacts are however temporary, site specific and largely reversible in nature and can
                     be managed and mitigated through appropriate mitigation measures. The above-mentioned environmental risks
                     could be mitigated as per mitigation hierarchy and tools given under respective ESSs.
                                                                                                                                     Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     Project activities are envisaged to have Substantial social risks due to moderate to large scale civil works, unstable
                     security situation in the province, congested project areas in Quetta city, including kacchi abadis (slums), risk of
                     unequitable project benefits, institutional capacities, and general implementation challenges. The Project will have
                     significant positive social impacts in terms of access to improved water quality and quantity to some of the poorest
                     farming communities in Balochistan, and in the shape of improved sanitation and water supply for Quetta city. The
                     moderate to large scale civil works under both components may cause adverse social impacts (localized) if not
                     managed timely and properly. Associated social risks with the civil works may include impacts on land, labor
                     management, OHS and community health and safety. Activities under Component B on rehabilitation of water supply
                     and sewage infrastructure in the densely populated and congested areas of Quetta city carry risks of temporary
                     economic and physical displacement of people and businesses (including informal settlers) during civil works. Road
                     closures, disrupted access for civilians and digging for the replacement of water and sewage lines may also carry risks
                     of CHS and GBV/SEA/SH. Improved water supply in Quetta, may also carry risks of equity in water supply, water
                     quality, and ensuring access to increased water. Identified risks for land, CHS and equitable benefits will be further
                     amplified for the project activities conducted in the ‘kacchi abadis’ (slums) of Quetta city. There are reports of Anti
                     Encroachment Drives (AED) in Quetta city which Component 2 will have to be sensitive towards. There is a risk of


                    Jan 17, 2025                                                                                                       Page 5 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Balochistan Water Security And Productivity Improvement Project (P179227)



                     exclusion of women under Component A from benefiting from on-farm water productivity activities due to lack of
                     inclusion of women in Water Users Associations. Inter and intra tribal conflicts may also impact equity and targeting,
                     which is a primary social risk associated with Component A. Security challenges in project areas under Component A
                     may also carry a risk to project staff and labor. BIWRMDP has focused extensively on this, and has made considerable
                     headway in gaining trust, through constant engagement with tribes of Nari and Porali basin. The project will capitalize
                     on the same. Other social risks include the risk of GBV/SEA/SH across project activities. The IA for Component A
                     (Balochistan Irrigation Department), while having extensive experience with World Bank projects has not
                     implemented a project under ESF. The IA for Component B, QWASA/PHED does not have any experience of
                     implementing a World Bank project. Given these, the social risk rating is Substantial.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                Relevant

                      ESS1 is relevant. As the final locations, type and design of project/construction activities are not precisely known at
                      appraisal, Government of Balochistan (GoB) through Balochistan Irrigation Department (BID) has conducted a
                      detailed E&S assessment using a framework approach; and has prepared an Environmental and Social Management
                      Framework (ESMF) in accordance with the ESS1. The ESMF sets out the principles, rules, and procedures to assess the
                      environmental and social risks and impacts of project activities and identifies the applicable policies and regulatory
                      framework under which the project would be implemented. The ESMF also suggests the E&S screening process of the



Public Disclosure
                      subprojects/sites that would guide/lead to identifying the methods, tools and instruments required to be prepared
                      for managing environmental and social risks and impacts. It further suggests the generic mitigation measures for
                      anticipated adverse risks and impacts. These measures would guide on E&S management during subproject(s)
                      execution. The project will have overall positive impacts under both components “A” and “B” by improving water
                      security and increasing the economic productivity of water use in the selected areas of Balochistan Province. For
                      instance the introduction of new technologies under Component A will promote water use efficiency and improve the
                      management of groundwater while delivering benefits to poor smallholder farmers. Further the watershed
                      management activities will improve the ecological status in the project area of Kachhi plains; while limiting the
                      destruction caused by flash floods. The project will also improve the vegetation cover simultaneously contributing to
                      both climate change mitigation and adaptation. Likewise, the activities under Component B will contribute to
                      reducing the amount of untreated effluent currently being disposed of in the environment or directly used in
                      agriculture, thereby reducing the impacts on public health. The better access to potable drinking water would
                      generate significant health related benefits for the inhabitants of Quetta district. The adverse environmental and
                      social risks and impacts are anticipated due to medium to large scale civil works such as construction of flood
                      dispersal structures, embankment protection works, water detention structures/ponds under Component A. Similarly
                      for Component B, the activities such as: construction of water supply and sewerage network; rehabilitation of
                      conveyance system, construction of bulk supply lines and implementation of groundwater recharge program,
                      rehabilitation of selected non-functional groundwater pumping stations, construction of public water points; and
                      provision of solar energy for Sabzal Sewage treatment plant (STP); may cause adverse environmental impacts. These
                      impacts are likely to occur mostly during implementation/construction stage and largely related to air, soil and water
                      pollution; apart from the impacts due to borrow pits/material, excavated soil and collection, disposal of surplus


                    Jan 17, 2025                                                                                                    Page 6 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Balochistan Water Security And Productivity Improvement Project (P179227)



                      construction material. Besides, the issues related to occupational health and safety of labor and community, including
                      risk of GBV may arise if appropriate measures are not adopted. As the project activities will be largely carried out in
                      the built/already transformed environment; so the project interventions would not likely to have a significant impact
                      on the biodiversity. In addition to the implementation stage adverse impacts, the ESMF also identifies the risks and
                      impacts during design and operational stages. The design stage risks include: inappropriate technical design and
                      layout planning not covering the aspects such as on/underground public utilities (water supply, sewerage and gas
                      pipelines, telephone and electric poles); seismic hazard and water sharing issues. Similarly for operational stage; the
                      likely risks and impacts include: incidence of water borne diseases due to water contamination, reduction in storage
                      capacity or improper distribution leading to reduced water supply to the consumers, fire and explosion hazards; and
                      enhanced use of pesticides owing to increased irrigation water availability. Most of these environmental and social
                      risks and impacts are assessed as temporary, site specific and largely reversible in nature and can be mitigated
                      through appropriate mitigation measures. The ESMF prepared for the project provides adequate measures for
                      mitigating the potential adverse impacts for all project stages. The ESMF comprehensively suggests the
                      environmental mitigation and monitoring plans for managing E&S risks and impacts including periodic validation by
                      TPV, capacity building framework and reporting mechanism, procedures for inclusion of E&S instruments/methods
                      and tools in the contractors’ bidding documents; and allocation of corresponding budgets/costs against the proposed
                      measures. The requirements of World Bank Group’s Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines (EHSGs) are also
                      incorporated in the ESMF. In case of CERC activation during implementation, the risks associated with the proposed
                      activities will be addressed by preparing CERC ESFM/CERC Manual by the project. Risks associated with GBV/SEAH
                      will be addressed through the development and implementation of a detailed GBV/SEA/SH Action Plan.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                     Relevant



Public Disclosure
                      The Project has prepared a Stakeholder Engagement Plan to provide a framework for consistent and inclusive
                      engagement with stakeholders throughout the Project lifecycle. The SEP ensures that appropriate Project related
                      information (including information on risks and impacts) is disclosed to stakeholders in a timely, understandable, and
                      accessible manner. It describes all stakeholder parties, including Affected Parties (APs), Other Interested Parties
                      (OIPs) and vulnerable groups, and provides guidance for Project implementers on how to meaningfully engage with
                      these groups through the Project lifecycle. The SEP also includes a grievance redress mechanism (GRM) to receive and
                      facilitate the resolution of concerns and grievances including SEA/SH incidents. The SEP will be disclosed at appraisal
                      stage. The guidance provided in the SEP is especially relevant for the project’ citizen engagement activities,
                      community-level behavior change initiatives and in ensuring women participation in project activities. The SEP also
                      includes activities for citizen engagement and to garner citizen feedback throughout the project life.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                           Relevant

                      ESS2 is relevant. The Project is expected to involve direct workers (including staff of the PIUs), government workers
                      (existing government staff from the Irrigation Department, PHED and QWASA), contracted workers (firms that will
                      provide Project Supervision and Implementation Assistance (PSIA), NGOs, INGOs, RSPs, semi government
                      organizations, contractors, sub-contractors, short terms individual consultants and service providers/consultants
                      needed for project implementation) and primary supply workers (employees of companies from which the Project
                      will procure goods and services). The primary labor risks are related to OHS, and may arise during moderate to large
                      scale construction and rehabilitation activities under Components A and B. These risks include personal injury due to
                      construction activities, risk of personal injury due to operating or working in close proximity to heavy machinery,


                    Jan 17, 2025                                                                                                    Page 7 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Balochistan Water Security And Productivity Improvement Project (P179227)



                      chemical exposure, inappropriate storage, handling, and disposal of hazardous materials, risk of drowning in rivers
                      during flash floods, risk of injury or death by being caught in tribal conflicts, and exposure to water-borne diseases.
                      There may also be a risk of child labor and forced labor in civil works, particularly under Component A, as the project
                      areas will be spread out and often remote. All such categories have been explained in the LMP and mitigation
                      measures suggested. Risks related to labor influx and GBV/SEA/SH are moderate. The Project has prepared Labor
                      Management Procedures (LMP) which contain detailed guidance on employment terms, labor risks and mitigations,
                      and other information related to labor and working conditions. The LMP also describes a dedicated workers’
                      Grievance Redress Mechanism which will be housed in the PIUs. Through the LMP, construction contractors are
                      required to prepare site-specific OHS management plans—guidance for the preparation of the OHS management
                      plans is provided in the LMP. This LMP will be implemented across the project life. Risks related to GBV/SEA/SH will
                      be addressed through the implementation of a GBV/SEA/SH Action Plan.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                             Relevant

                      ESS3 is relevant. Among other beneficial impacts described under ESS1; the project’s interventions will also
                      contribute towards resource efficiency. For instance the energy demand for irrigation systems is expected to
                      decrease following the increased water use efficiency achieved because of the proposed activities of component A.
                      Similarly the water supply activities and introducing better utility (Q-WASA) management practices through
                      interventions under Component B will contribute in improving energy efficiency and avoiding relying on diesel as the
                      main energy source. The project will initiate specific studies/assessments focusing on capturing the resource
                      efficiency gained particularly on energy use, water availability and productivity during the course of project
                      implementation. The project civil works will generate dust, air emissions, noise, solid and construction waste, and can



Public Disclosure
                      contaminate and pollute soil, ground and surface water. During the rehabilitation of water distribution pipelines, the
                      quality of water may deteriorate due to infiltration owing to negative pressures in the empty lines. As the
                      Component-A activities will promote climate smart agricultural techniques and will improve on-farm and field
                      irrigation water efficiency and farm productivity; as a result increased use of synthetic pesticides are likely. The
                      project is not anticipating procurement of any pesticides but will focus on delivering targeted training on IPM,
                      sustainable use of fertilizers, safe disposal of empty containers; and not using the restricted pesticides identified by
                      WHO. The ESMF Prepared for the project adequately proposes the mitigation measures against the risks involved for
                      water, air and land pollution. Further the site specific ESMPs prepared as per outcome of the E&S screening will
                      integrate the mitigation measures for risks involving provisions, installation, operations and maintenance (O&M) of
                      solar panels for waste treatment plant (WTP).

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                             Relevant

                      ESS4 is relevant. The Project will carry out moderate to large scale civil works under both Components. Component A
                      will involve contact between Project workers and beneficiary communities, particularly in the case of agreeing on
                      scheme designs, water sharing, inter and intra tribal shares, etc. Such contact may result in the exploitation of
                      economically disadvantaged, flood affected, or otherwise vulnerable community members. Ill-planned
                      community/tribal engagements can lead to conflicts which can be harmful for the communities and the Project
                      workers. Other risks include physical harm to communities due to accidents, traffic incidents and security. Kacchi
                      Plains is a sensitive area where incidents of insurgency have been reported, and hence the contractor staff and labor
                      will remain at risk. In order to mitigate this risk, a Security Management Plan will be prepared which will provide
                      documentary requirements (need for an MoU or other formal agreement, code of conduct for the public security


                    Jan 17, 2025                                                                                                     Page 8 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Balochistan Water Security And Productivity Improvement Project (P179227)



                      force, incident follow up etc.) will be elaborated. It will also describe the roles and responsibilities of each
                      implementing entity; from the PIU to the supervision consultants, to the contractors. No use of military force is
                      anticipated or recommended. Government of Baluchistan regularly uses support of the local distract administration
                      and Police (both under the auspices of GoB), to protect sites for ongoing civil works, including those under BIWRMDP.
                      No reports of use of force or violence by the Police against any stakeholder has been recorded during BIWRMDP
                      implementation to date. The rehabilitation and construction of water and sewage infrastructure under Component A
                      will involve civil works in congested areas of Quetta city, including ‘kachi abadis’. These civil works will include digging
                      of roads and streets, therefore carrying a risk of injury, GBV, SEA/SH and disruption to people and businesses, unless
                      there are design modifications such as replacement of supply lines based on tunneling techniques. Other CHS risks
                      include health issues related to exposure to air and noise pollution, inappropriate disposal of solid waste, and risks
                      related to increased traffic of heavy machinery and construction vehicles. The Project ESMF contains an assessment
                      of the specific risks and impacts to communities arising from project activities, and includes necessary mitigation
                      measures. Site specific CHS risks will be managed through the development of ESMPs during project implementation.
                      Additionally, the Project will develop a standalone GBV/SEA/SH Assessment and Action Plan to assess in detail and
                      manage the risks related to GBV/SEA/SH prior to commencement of bidding process for any civil works.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                     Relevant

                      There is no large to medium scale acquisition of private lands expected under the project. Following the mitigation
                      hierarchy, the project will prioritize the use of existing government lands if required for civil works. Under Component
                      A, the rehabilitation/construction of on-farm community water infrastructure such as water channels, rainwater
                      harvesting structures and access roads may require community lands through Voluntary Land Donation (VLD) where



Public Disclosure
                      government lands are not available and VLD is acceptable as per requirements of ESS5. Component B will support the
                      rehabilitation and replacement of aging underground water conveyance infrastructure in densely populated parts of
                      the city. Many of these pipelines run under public rights of way (main roads, markets) with significant existing
                      commercial activity. Pipeline rehabilitation activities within the city are likely to cause temporary economic
                      displacement, as significant civil works will be required to implement these activities, leading to road closures and
                      temporary loss of business for the commercial establishments located on these roads. Temporary physical
                      displacement of people and businesses, and removal of informal settlers will be higher in the densely populated and
                      congested areas of Quetta city including ‘kachi abadis’ (slums). Public lands in Quetta city and Baluchistan as a whole
                      are loosely documented, and hence may be encroached. Anti encroachment drives (AED) have been reported in
                      Quetta city mainly conducted by the district government and the Metropolitan Corporation Quetta (MCQ), focusing
                      primarily on clearing illegal settlements from storm water drains (nullahs). These range from ‘soft’ AED activities,
                      which are routine operations like the removal of temporary shelters or obstructions on footpaths by vendors; and
                      ‘hard’ AED activities, which are more extensive and include the demolition of illegal building. The task team has
                      conducted a preliminary investigation on AED in Quetta City, with a particular focus on areas impacted by anti-
                      encroachment drives, conditions in Kachi Abadis, and issues surrounding resettlement and displacement. Information
                      provided by the client indicates that there have been significant anti-encroachment activities in the recent past (over
                      six months to a year). Records of AEDs conducted are present with the MCQ and DC Office, including locations and
                      details of structures/people removed. As per Board of Revenue (BOR), there are 47 identified encroached sites in
                      Quetta district, with a total built up area of 257 acres. Details of these areas along with maps are available on the
                      Baluchistan Land Revenue Management Information System (BLRMIS). While encroached areas are identified by the
                      BOR, Anti-Encroachment Drives (AEDs) are conducted by the Metropolitan Corporation Quetta (MCQ) or the district


                    Jan 17, 2025                                                                                                         Page 9 of 12
                              The World Bank
                              Balochistan Water Security And Productivity Improvement Project (P179227)



                      government (DC Office). A GIS mapping of Anti-Encroachment Drives in Quetta city is underway to identify and ring-
                      fence areas where AED has taken place within 3 years of project preparation and to identify potential areas where
                      AEDs may be conducted in anticipation of the project. A Resettlement Framework (RF) has been prepared for the
                      project, and Resettlement Plans (RPs) will be prepared during implementation after identification of site-specific
                      impacts. The RF focuses on mitigating land taking impacts through negotiated agreement, expropriation and
                      compensation and includes annexures with protocols for acceptance of VLD where circumstances meet requirements
                      under ESS5.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                     Relevant
                      Resources

                      ESS6 is relevant. Project is not likely to have a significant impact on the biodiversity and forests as most of the
                      construction/rehabilitation activities will be carried out in the built/already transformed environment. Clearing of
                      vegetation and cutting of trees is however expected for construction works. Further, the project will not introduce
                      any alien or non-native species of flora or fauna in the project area and only selective native species of trees and
                      shrubs will be planted as part of rangeland management. The potential impacts on biodiversity due to water
                      harvesting is not anticipated at this stage as only part of seasonal flood water will be utilized in the project. The water
                      will not be extracted from rivers and no flow modification of perennial rivers is expected and the additional water will
                      come from reductions in non-revenue water (mainly leakages), rainwater harvesting and recharge of aquifers. The
                      ESMF prepared for the project suggests the necessary measures (such as: no project activity will be carried out near
                      or in the vicinity of natural and critical habitats) to mitigate any likely adverse impacts on biodiversity and living
                      natural resources.



Public Disclosure
                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                 Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      This standard is not relevant. No indigenous people meeting the ESS7 criteria are present in the Balochistan province.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                          Relevant

                      Project districts in Kacchi Plains and Quetta valley have culturally significant sites and resources. As the specific
                      information on exact location and scale of project activities are not known at appraisal; and accordingly resulting
                      impacts on these resources are unknown. The ESMF prepared for the project, however, has developed “Chance Find
                      Procedures” to be followed during project implementation in case of any chance find for physical culture resource.
                      Also all the subprojects would be screened for the presence of physical cultural resources prior to commencement of
                      construction and rehabilitation works. In addition, in case there are impacts recorded on a notified cultural heritage
                      within the project implementation, a Cultural Heritage Management Plan (CHMP) will be prepared accordingly.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                    Not Currently Relevant

                      Not relevant for this project as no FI are being considered in the project delivery.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply



                    Jan 17, 2025                                                                                                       Page 10 of 12
                               The World Bank
                               Balochistan Water Security And Productivity Improvement Project (P179227)



                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                     No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                              No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                         No
                       Not considered at concept stage


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                            No
                       None yet.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     1.      Implementation of ESMF, RF, RP, LMP and SEP
                     2.      Assessment Studies/Reviews O&M for identified dams/storage Reservoirs: To be initiated and completed prior
                     to physical execution of relevant subprojects under Component B.
                     3.      Preparation and implementation of site-specific instruments (ESMPs/Checklists)
                     4.      Preparation and implementation of a GBV/SEA/SH Assessment and Action Plan
                     5.      Preparation and implementation of Security Management Plan



Public Disclosure
                     6.      Supervision and monitoring by PMU and respective PIUs and submission of quarterly progress reports to the
                     bank
                     7. Cultural Heritage Management Plan; if needed as per outcomes of E&S screening
                     8.      CERC ESMF/CERC Manual; if CERC activated in case of emergencies




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Carolina Dominguez Torres              Title:         Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                    Specialist

                      Email:                  cdominguez1@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Yoro Sidibe                            Job Title:     Senior Water Specialist

                      Email:                  ysidibe@worldbankgroup.org

                      TTL Contact:            Basharat Ahmed Saeed                   Job Title:     Senior Water Specialist



                    Jan 17, 2025                                                                                                Page 11 of 12
                               The World Bank
                               Balochistan Water Security And Productivity Improvement Project (P179227)



                      Email:                  bsaeed1@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                     Carolina Dominguez Torres, Yoro Sidibe, Basharat Ahmed Saeed

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:            Nida Asif

                     ADM Social Specialist:                   Babar Naseem Khan




Public Disclosure




                    Jan 17, 2025                                                                                             Page 12 of 12
