Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Access To Basic Services And Performance Improvement Project (pasbap) (P179643)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                          Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                    (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                       Date Prepared/Updated: 10/31/2025 | Report No: ESRSA04554




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Nov 03, 2025                                                                              Page 1 of 20
                              The World Bank
                              Access To Basic Services And Performance Improvement Project (pasbap) (P179643)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                   Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P179643                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)        PASBAP                      2026

                     Operation Name            Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (PASBAP)

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries            Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Gabon                     Gabon                                    WESTERN AND CENTRAL          Water
                                                                                        AFRICA

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                 Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     Gabonese Republic,        CNTIPPEE, Gabonese Energy and Water      07-Aug-2025                  20-Nov-2025
                     Ministry of Economy,      Company (SEEG), Ministry of Universal
                     Finance, Debt, and        Access to Water and Energy
                     Holdings,
                     Responsible for



Public Disclosure
                     Combating the High
                     Cost of Living

                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost
                     Review Date

                     05-Aug-2025               150,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The PDO is to improve performance in the water supply and electricity sectors and increase access to water supply,
                     sanitation, and electricity services in Gabon.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The Project aims to increase access to water supply, sanitation, and electricity services in select areas of Gabon and
                     improve performance in the water supply and electricity sectors. The Project finances: (i) the construction and

                    Nov 03, 2025                                                                                                      Page 2 of 20
                              The World Bank
                              Access To Basic Services And Performance Improvement Project (pasbap) (P179643)



                     rehabilitation of water supply and electricity infrastructure in urban and rural areas; (ii) technical assistance to sector
                     institutions to improve their capacities to plan, develop, manage, monitor and regulate water, sanitation, and electricity
                     services; (iii) the procurement and installation of meters, regularization of connections, extension of access to both
                     services, and improved management systems to reduce losses and improve cost-recovery and service continuity,
                     particularly in Greater Libreville where 36 percent of the Gabonese live; (iv) the construction of a fecal sludge treatment
                     plant in Greater Libreville; and (v) studies for critical short- and medium-term investments to improve electricity service
                     delivery in Gabon.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     Located along the Atlantic coast in Central Africa, the Gabonese Republic is bordered by the Republic of Congo,
                     Cameroon and Equatorial Guinea. The country is relatively small, with a total area of 270,000 km2, an estimated
                     population of 2.2 million (sparsely populated), and forests covering over 91% of its territory. Gabon’s 22.5 million
                     hectares of tropical rainforests, virtually untouched coastline, and tremendous biodiversity are endowments that could
                     position Gabon as a world-class ecotourism destination. Gabon's great forest wealth has enabled it to establish several
                     Parks and Nature Reserves that characterize their settlement areas. Gabon has a total of 13 parks. Among the main
                     protected areas are the national parks of WAKA, LOPE and IVINDO, MOKALABA DOUDOU and LOANGO, MINKEBE and
                     PLATEAUX BATEKE. Congo Basin rainforest covers 88% of the country, which has a uniquely rich ecosystem with thriving
                     wildlife populations and extensive endowments of fertile land, extensive water sources, and well-stocked marine
                     fisheries. Gabon in general, is dominated by the climate Equatorial. Overall, rainfall is regular, abundant with a bimodal
                     regime. The pluviometry varies from 1500 to 3000 mm per year, with a distribution varying according to the seasons.



Public Disclosure
                     Average temperatures in Gabon are between 22 and 26°C. They decrease with altitude and have a maximum from
                     February to April and a minimum in July-August. In 2022, Gabon was ranked 126 out of 187 countries on the ND-Gain
                     Index which measures a country’s vulnerability to climate change, as well as its readiness to improve resilience.
                     Though Gabon is one of the least densely populated countries in the world with a mere 8 persons/km2, the country has
                     one of Africa's highest urbanization rates : more than four out of five Gabonese citizens live in cities. The rate of
                     urbanization has increased from 20% in the early 1960s to 89% in 2017 and is expected to reach 92% and 95% by 2030
                     and 2050, respectively. Libreville, the political capital, and Port Gentil, the Country's economic capital, are home to 59%
                     of the population. The project is nationwide and will take place in some of 9 provinces of the Country. The nine
                     provinces of Gabon (with their respective capitals in parentheses) are: Estuaire (Libreville), Haut-Ogooué (Franceville),
                     Moyen-Ogooué (Lambaréné), Woleu-Ntem (Oyem), Ngounié (Mouila), Nyanga (Tchibanga), Ogooué-Ivindo (Makokou),
                     Ogooué-Maritime (Port-Gentil), and Ogooué-Lolo (Koulamoutou). These provinces are named after the country’s main
                     rivers.The project targets a mix of provincial capitals and underserved rural and peri-urban communes, notably in Port-
                     Gentil, Lambaréné, Franceville, Mouila, and Oyem. Several of these areas—particularly in Woleu-Ntem, Ngounié, and
                     Ogooué-Ivindo—are located in or near ecologically sensitive forested zones that may overlap with protected areas or
                     biodiversity corridors. Gabon is at significant risk from sea level rise, and coastal, urban, and riverine flooding. They pose
                     a particularly high risk for some regions such as Lambarené and Kolamoutou. Potentially damaging and life-threatening
                     river floods are expected to occur at least once every ten years.
                     As part of its preparation and implementation phase, the project could undergo significant adjustments, including the
                     restructuring of its components, the redefinition of certain specific objectives, as well as the revision of the geographical
                     scope, particularly the intervention locations. Despite substantial progress in SDGs, reaching major challenges remain,
                     particularly in health, the fight against HIV/AIDS, education, sanitation, and social protection. Added to this are strong
                     inequalities between provinces. The Common Country Assessment (2018/2022) has confirmed these challenges. Their

                    Nov 03, 2025                                                                                                        Page 3 of 20
                              The World Bank
                              Access To Basic Services And Performance Improvement Project (pasbap) (P179643)



                     importance underscores the need to pursue the effort to invest in inclusive human development, emphasizing the
                     reduction of inequalities and the promotion of gender equality. The immediate causes of this situation are the low level
                     of development of basic social services, the low level of the financial capacity of the populations to access them, and the
                     dysfunctions of the existing structures.
                     Although Gabon's HDI (0.706) places the Country in the high human development category, the current poverty rate of
                     33% remains a major concern for the government[ii]. The difference between its economic and social development
                     rankings indicates significant social inequalities and multidimensional poverty. The access rate to sanitation services in
                     urban areas is estimated at 45.70%. These disparities are also observed in the health, water, electricity, and education
                     sectors. For instance, only about 25% of rural areas have reliable access to electricity compared to over 90% in urban
                     areas despite a 92% nationwide access.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Government of Gabon has environmental laws, regulations, and policies that guide the protection of the
                     environment. Over the past decade, the authorities have made some progress in mainstreaming environmental
                     sustainability into their decision-making processes, starting first with Law No 007/2014 pertaining to environmental
                     protection and Decree 000539/PR/MEFEPEPN of 15 July 2005 regulating Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
                     (ESIA) calling for environmental and social due diligence. ESIA is part of the feasibility studies, and detailed risk
                     assessments and public consultations are required as part of the process. The General Directorate of the Environment
                     and Nature Protection (DGEPN), under the Ministry in charge of Environment, is responsible for national and provincial
                     ESIA. DGEPN’s capacity and track record for managing environmental risks associated with development initiatives and
                     overseeing and ensuring environmental compliance monitoring are in place but remain limited at provincial level,




Public Disclosure
                     particularly in rural areas targeted by the project.. Decentralized units are in charge of the environment for each
                     province and municipality covered by the project, which may be involved during consultations and project monitoring
                     phases.
                     The project will be implemented by a Project Management Unit (PMU). The project is headed by the Ministry of
                     Universal Access to Water and Energy (MAUEE) who coordinates all technical aspects of Project implementation and
                     ensures effective involvement of key sector institutions. The PMU hosted by MAUEE includes two entities, a technical
                     team from MAUEE and fiduciary and E&S team from CN-TIPPEE, which is under the Ministry of the Economy and Public
                     Debt (MEFDP).
                     Under the PPA, the CN-TIPPEE reccruited : an environmental risk management specialist, and a social risk management
                     specialist who are already on board. This team will be complemented by a gender-based violence specialist, with
                     additional staff (a GBV specialist, a communication specialist, and a Health and Safety Specialist) and consultants
                     available to support peak workloads. Specialists and Consultants will be recruited based on terms of reference vetted by
                     the Bank. The roles and responsibilities of each specialist will be finalized in the Project Operational Manual. The PMU
                     will coordinate overall implementation activities as well as Environmental, Social and Occupational Health and Safety
                     (ESHS).
                     The PMU will be in charge of (i) implementation of the ESCP; (ii) incorporating the requirements of the relevant ESHS in
                     terms of reference of technical assistance activities, in a manner acceptable to the Bank, and monitoring their
                     implementation; (iii) preparing the ESHS requirements for all project documents, including bidding, for Bank's non-
                     objection; (iv) prepare the ESHS quarterly monitoring reports to be submitted to the Bank; and (v) implement the
                     project's stakeholder engagement plan, including the grievance redress mechanism, and prepare their reports.
                      The Project Steering Committee (PSC) is chaired by the Secretary General of MAUEE and co chaired by the Secretary
                     General of MEFDP. Members include Members include the Director Generals of Water and Electricity (MAUEE), the


                    Nov 03, 2025                                                                                                     Page 4 of 20
                              The World Bank
                              Access To Basic Services And Performance Improvement Project (pasbap) (P179643)



                     Public Debt Directorate (MEFDP), the Water and Electricity Sector Regulation Agency (ARSEE), the national asset holding
                     company (SP), and SEEG. The SC meets quarterly or as needed to endorse annual work plans and budgets.
                     The project will also provides technical assistance to SEEG, ARSEE and supports the operationalization of the National
                     Fund for Energy and Water (FNEE); both institutions will require guidance to integrate Environmental and Social
                     Framework (ESF) requirements into their future operations. The World Bank will support the Borrower through a
                     capacity building plan covering environmental, social, health and safety, labor, and stakeholder engagement throughout
                     the project cycle.
                     A comprehensive training capacity building was prepared and shall be appropriately resourced and include (a) Training
                     for the MAUEE, CN-TIPPEE, and PMU staff, SEEG, on ES screening steps and tools for subprojects, stakeholders
                     engagement including participatory strategies and tools at the community level, grievance redressing, OHS and road
                     traffic management, specific aspects of environmental and social assessment, emergency preparedness and response,
                     community health and safety, gender-based violence: sexual exploitation and abuse and sexual harassment (GBV:
                     SEA/SH), ES incident notification, response and reporting; and (b) Create or strengthen environmental and social units in
                     the municipalities to monitor the implementation of E&S risks management instruments at the city level. These units
                     will receive technical assistance to prepare simple manual procedures and tools to ensure the proper and timely
                     implementation of E&S instruments with active citizen engagement. Capacity-building activities will include the
                     development or strengthening of guidelines for occupation and health safety monitoring and other ES risk management
                     and participatory strategies and tools to enable local communities to voice their concerns and needs in the selection
                     and operation of infrastructure, as well as in urban land planning or implementation in their cities. Participatory tools
                     will include how to carry out meaningful consultation, satisfaction surveys, and grievance redressal, among others.




Public Disclosure
                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                         Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                  Substantial
                     The Environmental risk is rated as Substantial - a rating influenced by several intertwined factors under components
                     1, 2 and 3. The project encompasses technical assistance, construction, and operational activities across policy, water
                     and sanitation, and energy sectors, each presenting unique environmental challenges. These activities can generate
                     adverse impacts with different level or magnitude in rural or urban areas. Component 1 focuses on the rehabilitation
                     and expansion of water supply systems, installation of metered connections, and improvements to sanitation
                     infrastructure in both rural and urban settings. These operations introduce risks such as land disturbance, vegetation
                     loss, and the possibility of contaminating water sources during trenching, material transport, and well construction.
                     The construction of a Fecal Sludge Treatment Plant (FSTP) in Greater Libreville, though intended to mitigate pollution
                     from unregulated dumping, introduces substantial risks—potential odor, groundwater contamination, and the
                     challenge of community acceptance due to possible land use conflicts and perceived environmental impacts. The
                     Igoumie construction site located in the commune of Owendo has been chosen for the FTSP. Technical and
                     environmental studies funded by the AfDB will be supplemented by a review conducted by the Bank. Component 2
                     entails the extension of electricity distribution networks and the installation of hybrid solar/diesel mini-grids. These
                     activities raise localized risks, including air emissions from diesel combustion, particulate pollution including e-waste
                     management aspects linked to solar panels inappropriate disposal and also possible land use implications, and


                    Nov 03, 2025                                                                                                      Page 5 of 20
                              The World Bank
                              Access To Basic Services And Performance Improvement Project (pasbap) (P179643)



                     occupational hazards such as electrocution or injury from working at height. Furthermore, the geographical
                     dispersion of subprojects increases the difficulty of maintaining consistent environmental oversight, particularly in
                     remote or peri-urban settings. Other components include implementation support and capacity building, and a
                     contingency emergency response component. Mitigation strategies include robust feasibility and ESIA studies,
                     engagement of experienced professionals, and the integration of environmental-friendly technologies, especially for
                     innovative projects like FSTP, which aims for agricultural byproducts and renewable energy integration. Nevertheless,
                     diligent monitoring and adaptive management will be crucial, considering the scale and diversity of environmental
                     contexts involved. Under component 3, extensive technical assistance activities, including the updating of master
                     plans for greater Libreville and national master plan of water and energy, as well as feasibility studies, are anticipated.
                     These activities not only demand broad stakeholder consultations but also may necessitate extensive travel and
                     complex logistical arrangements, potentially resulting in a greater carbon footprint and an increased risk of incidents..
                     Additionally, the rehabilitation of SEEG’s training center may mostly consider OHS risks while environmental risks
                     related to the establishment of a new physicochmical and isotopic laboratory might include pollution, resource
                     depletion, and habitat destruction, impacts on local livelihoods, health, and well-being. The construction and
                     operation of the laboratory must then consider waste management and energy consumption, compliance issues
                     including local and international safety, a detailed evaluation of the project's site, including existing environmental
                     conditions and local community dynamics. This involves collecting baseline data on air and water quality, soil
                     conditions, and biodiversity, as well as understanding the socio-economic context of the affected communities.
                                                                                                                                      Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The project social risk classification is rated substantial at this stage of project preparation, given that preliminary




Public Disclosure
                     screening of the project shows that it does not include activities associated with potentially significant and
                     irreversible negative social impacts. As part of its preparation and implementation phase, the project could undergo
                     significant adjustments, including the restructuring of its components, the redefinition of certain specific objectives,
                     as well as the revision of the geographical scope, particularly the intervention locations. Project activities with
                     potential social risks and impacts center on a) extension and densification of medium- and low-voltage electricity
                     networks and installation of hybrid solar/diesel mini-grids in selected rural areas; b) increasing access to water and
                     sanitation through the rehabilitation and extension of mini water supply systems in rural localities and secondary
                     towns, including the installation of metered household connections; construction works to improve water supply and
                     sanitation facilities in schools and health centers in selected areas; and the construction of a fecal sludge treatment
                     plant in Greater Libreville.. Project interventions target peri-urban and rural areas in the country’s nine provinces. The
                     project poses potential social risks and associated impacts on project communities, including women and children.
                     The implementation of project activities could lead to: i) physical and/or economic involuntary displacement from loss
                     of lands and assets as well as temporary and permanent displacement of livelihoods and restrictions on land use; ii)
                     the potential exclusion of women and other vulnerable groups from access to employment opportunities related to
                     the project; iii) risks of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH), Violence Against Children
                     (VAC) and child labor which could be aggravated during construction works as job seekers stream into rural
                     communities in search of employment; iv) labor influx in rural areas could also put pressure on existing but limited
                     social services including health services as well as aggravate the incidence of sexually transmittable diseases in project
                     communities; v) land conversion for the installation of project construction sites the loss/disruption of ecosystem
                     services, particularly provisioning and cultural services; vi) the construction of a fecal sludge treatment plant, in
                     addition to impacts from the loss of land or livelihoods, may increase incidences of water-borne diseases in project
                     communities in the event of the overflowing of untreated sludge into agricultural fields, nearby water sources or


                    Nov 03, 2025                                                                                                        Page 6 of 20
                              The World Bank
                              Access To Basic Services And Performance Improvement Project (pasbap) (P179643)



                     roads. Moreover, the construction of the fecal sludge treatment plant also presents particular environmental and
                     social risks, including foul odors and the potential groundwater pollution, which may deter project community project
                     acceptance in addition to the loss of lands and livelihoods; vii) risks of exclusion or marginalized and indigenous
                     people leaving in rural and peri-urban project zones; viii) given the plethora of social risks, the project may be unable
                     to properly ensure the participation of citizens and beneficiaries in project activities, including studies required to
                     develop project plans; ix) labor risks, including child/forced labor by subcontractors or through informal labor
                     arrangements; and x) and risks related to the procurement of solar PV materials, including potential exposure to
                     unethical labor practices in global supply chains.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                   Relevant

                      This standard is relevant because investments are likely to result in loss of vegetation, soil erosion and degradation,
                      soil and surface water pollution, dust and noise emissions, air emissions, impact on water use and quality, generation,
                      and disposal of construction waste, wastewater and sludge, occupational health and safety concerns, community
                      health and safety risks caused by public nuisances, such as foul odors and the potential groundwater and waterbodies
                      pollution (particularly in relation to the fecal sludge treatment plant), which may deter project community project
                      acceptance. Increased road traffic, and potentially biodiversity risks and impacts are among the other E&S issues to
                      consider. Lack of maintenance and malfunctioning of water infrastructure and sludge can lead to community health



Public Disclosure
                      and safety issues, such as illnesses caused by standing water. Socially, as a nationwide operation, the project may
                      affect vulnerable communities including women, children, and Indigenous Peoples. Project workers may also face
                      risks related to labor conditions. The implementation of project activities could lead to: i) physical and/or economic
                      involuntary displacement from loss of lands and assets as well as temporary and permanent displacement of
                      livelihoods and restrictions on land use; ii) the potential exclusion of women and other vulnerable groups from access
                      to employment opportunities related to the project; iii) of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment
                      (SEA/SH), Violence Against Children (VAC) and child labor which could be aggravated during construction works as job
                      seekers stream into rural communities in search of employment; iv) labor influx in rural areas could also put pressure
                      on existing but limited social services including health services as well as aggravate the incidence of sexually
                      transmittable diseases in project communities; v) land conversion for the installation of project construction sites
                      could lead to loss of livelihoods as well as the loss/disruption of ecosystem services, particularly provisioning and
                      cultural services; vi) the construction of a fecal sludge treatment plant, in addition to impacts from the loss of land or
                      livelihoods, may increase incidences of water-borne diseases in project communities in the event of the overflowing
                      of untreated sludge into agricultural fields, nearby water sources or roads. Moreover, foul odors and the potential
                      groundwater pollution may lead to the reticence of people living in communities where the fecal sludge treatment
                      plant would be constructed to accept the presence of the plant in their neighborhood; vii) the project footprint will
                      cut across zones with the presence of indigenous people who may disproportionately bear the negative social
                      impacts of the project or may be excluded from project benefits; and viii) given the plethora of social risks, the
                      project may be unable to properly ensure the participation of citizens and beneficiaries in project activities, including
                      studies required to develop project plans. There is a high expectation that lessons learned from previous PASBMIR
                      will be strongly capitalized to prepare and anticipate the management of the risks and impacts expected from the


                    Nov 03, 2025                                                                                                       Page 7 of 20
                              The World Bank
                              Access To Basic Services And Performance Improvement Project (pasbap) (P179643)



                      project. Because the project will finance different activities and locations at this stage that are not-well known in each
                      of the nine provinces, the Borrower has develop an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) during
                      the project preparation phase and has been disclosed and consulted it before the end of project Appraisal. Nine out
                      of ten Environmental and Social Standards (ESSs), are therefore relevant for the project: EES1, ESS2; ESS3, ESS4; ESS5;
                      ESS6; ESS7, ESS 8, and ESS10. The ESMF provides an overview of the project and its components, the applicable
                      legislative and regulatory frameworks and policies, the baseline conditions, and a summary of the main anticipated
                      environmental and social impacts, in accordance with the relevant standards, alonside a standalone GBV/SEA/SH
                      assessment and GBV/SEA/SH action plan. It provides mitigation and monitoring measures with their associated
                      implementation costs, and a screening tool to assess and rank impacts at the sub-project level. It also
                      provideguidance for the preparation of environmental and social assessments (ESIAs) specific to sub-projects
                      including, Management plans (ESMPs), occupational health and safety (OHS) for workers and community health and
                      Safety plans, traffic management plan. The ESMF and associated draft instruments elaborated address several key
                      environmental and social issues. These include establishing the environmental and social baseline for components 1,
                      2, and 3 in the targeted provinces; identifying individuals or groups who may be disadvantaged or vulnerable,
                      including those with disabilities or subject to discrimination, and ensuring their inclusion in project benefits; and
                      mapping the locations of Indigenous Peoples to analyze project risks and opportunities for their meaningful
                      participation. Finally, the ESMF examine broader social dynamics, including community perceptions related to access
                      to electricity, water, and sanitation services; risks of exclusion or social fragmentation; issues of safety, violence, and
                      conflict; and how to foster inclusion, a sense of belonging, and universal access to project benefits. The ESMF includes
                      capacity-building measures, including a tailored training program and a dedicated budget. In addition to ESMF, the
                      borrower has prepared the following instruments as standalone documents ; a Resettlement Framework (RF);




Public Disclosure
                      Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) , a Labor Management Procedures (LMP); Stakeholder Engagement
                      Plan (SEP) including a Grievance Redress Mechanism for the project and a budget for the required training program.
                      The project has also develop a screening tool to assess all subproject sites for risks of physical or economic
                      displacement. It includes a biodiversity risk screening in accordance with ESS6, particularly in forested, riverine, or
                      other ecologically sensitive areas where activities may lead to habitat degradation. Complementing this, the
                      Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) outlines the specific measures and actions the Borrower will
                      undertake to address institutional capacity gaps. These include targeted training and technical support for
                      environmental and social specialists, as well as relevant project stakeholders. The ESCP outlines key measures and
                      actions the Government will undertake to manage the project’s E&S risks. As part of its preparation and
                      implementation phase, the project could undergo significant adjustments, including the restructuring of its
                      components, the redefinition of certain specific objectives, as well as the revision of the geographical scope,
                      particularly the intervention locations. During project implementation, once subproject locations are known, the
                      borrower will carry out screening for potential E&S risks, including potential risks on critical endangered flora and
                      fauna from proposed subproject activities and prepare site-specific plans (ESIAs specific to sub-projects and
                      corresponding ESMPs, Occupational health and safety (OHS) and community Health and Safety plans, traffic
                      management plan, RAPs, and IPPs before the launch of any procurement process for any project activities that
                      include in part or full civil works. Moreover, a Social Assessment will precede the preparation the IPP.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                         Relevant

                      ESS10 is relevant. The Borrower has developped a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) consistent with ESS 10. The
                      SEP (i) provide an overview of project stakeholders; (ii) establish a systematic approach for consultation and their


                    Nov 03, 2025                                                                                                        Page 8 of 20
                              The World Bank
                              Access To Basic Services And Performance Improvement Project (pasbap) (P179643)



                      engagement in the project’s preparation and implementation; (iii) provide guidelines regarding the maintenance of a
                      constructive relationship with them through a participatory approach that takes into account their concerns and
                      views; iv) and (iv) include a budget for implementing these activities.The SEP also developped specific measures so
                      that engagement activities align with gender and social inclusion objectives and that the project benefits target all
                      beneficiaries, including vulnerable populations. The draft SEP has been prepared by appraisal and will be finalized and
                      consulted upon no later than effectiveness t will be re-disclosed both on the CN-TIPPEE website and on the World
                      Bank’s website before the negotiations. Key stakeholders of this project at this stage include: Affected parties: (i)
                      Government agencies: Ministry of Interior;Infrastructure and Equipment; Ministry of Economy and Recovery; Ministry
                      of Budget and Public Accounts; Ministry of Territorial Planning, Urban Planning, Housing and Public Hygiene; Ministry
                      of the Environment and the Fight against Climate Change; Ministry of the Interior; Ministry of Decentralization and
                      Local Development; Presidency of the Republic; National Commission for Public Procurement (CNTIPPEE); Ministry of
                      Energy and Hydraulic Resources; Ministry of Finance (including public debt); decentralized entities such as
                      Governorates and Prefectures; and Société d’Énergie et d’Eau du Gabon (SEEG) ;(ii) Project
                      communities/beneficiaries: include communities getting electric connections and proper sanitation facilities schools
                      benefiting from the WASH program as well as the most disadvantageous and vulnerable individuals and groups
                      (young people, women, migrants, disabled people, etc.), and iii) vulnerable and marginalised groups affected by
                      project activities including women, children, the elderly, indigenous peoples, female-headed households or single
                      mothers with minor children, people belonging to ethnic or religious minorities, and other minorities living within the
                      wider community. Other interested parties: (i) the private sector, (ii) Civil Society Organizations, (iii) Non-
                      governmental organizations, (iv) universities, (v) the press, etc. The sive and effective stakeholder engagement and
                      timely disclosure of accessible and understandable project information.The SEP also incorporates the project’s




Public Disclosure
                      grievance mechanism (GM), developed based on an inclusive and participatory approach, to address complaints
                      related to the implementation of project activities. The GM is designed to receive and record general project-related
                      grievances and includes specific provisions for the safe, confidential, and survivor-centered handling of SEA/SH-
                      related complaints. The SEP reflects the perspectives and inputs of Indigenous Peoples (IPs) based on previous
                      surveys and consultations conducted under the DIGITAL Gabon and CAB4 projects served as a foundational
                      information base. Stakeholder engagement will follow the principles of meaningful consultation and timely disclosure
                      of relevant and accessible information. During public consultations related to the development of the Indigenous
                      Peoples Plan the Borrower will undertake meaningful consultations with IPs to enable them to express their views on
                      the project’s risks, impacts, and proposed mitigation measures, and to allow the Borrower to consider and respond to
                      these views in a culturally appropriate manner. These consultations will be carried out on an ongoing basis, as project
                      risks and opportunities evolve. In cases where potential adverse impacts on Indigenous Peoples are identified—
                      including impacts on land and natural resources under traditional ownership or customary use, relocation, or impacts
                      that are material to their cultural, spiritual, or ceremonial identity—Free, Prior, and Informed Consent (FPIC) will be
                      required in accordance with ESS7. FPIC will be established through meaningful consultation and good faith
                      negotiation between the Borrower and affected Indigenous Peoples. The IPPF and/or site-specific IPPs will document
                      (i) the mutually agreed process for good faith negotiations and (ii) the outcomes of these negotiations, including
                      agreements reached and any dissenting views.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                               Relevant

                      The project workforce will consist of (i) direct workers for the PMU, all staff (consultants); (ii) Contracted workers:
                      people employed or engaged through third parties such as contractors and subcontractors for the construction of


                    Nov 03, 2025                                                                                                        Page 9 of 20
                              The World Bank
                              Access To Basic Services And Performance Improvement Project (pasbap) (P179643)



                      electrical, water supply, and sanitation facilities; and (iii) primary supply workers for the provision of goods and
                      services, including solar PV systems. The project is expected to recruit both skilled and unskilled workers for project
                      activities pertaining to both Components 2and 1. The majority of unskilled workers would likely come from project
                      communities or surrounding areas. Labor influx will thus result from the migration of both skilled and unskilled
                      workers. Labor-related social risks linked to labor influx include SEA/SH, child and forced labor, and increased
                      community incidences of communicable diseases, including STI and HIV/AIDS. In sum, a considerable workforce will
                      be required, and the project will face difficulties in promoting sound worker-management relationships and
                      guaranteeing safe and healthy working conditions. There may be a potential risk of child labor and forced labor. This
                      is a significant risk, particularly in the global supply chain for solar panels and solar components. To support forced
                      labor risk mitigation, the Bank requires the Borrower to strengthen solar-related procurement processes by including
                      forced labor bidder declarations, qualification requirements, and strengthened contractual provisions in
                      procurements involving financing of solar panels/solar components by the WBG. The project has prepared a Labor
                      Management Procedures (LMP) according to ESS2 and relevant ESHS guidelines, as well as the provisions of the ILO.
                      This LMP will be applied to all project workers. More specifically, the LMP developed includes (i) provisions and
                      measures to ensure equal treatment in recruitment, working conditions, promotion, payment, and no child or forced
                      labor use for any category of project workers and suppliers; (ii) a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) for all direct
                      workers and contracted workers (and, where relevant, their organizations) to raise workplace concerns (This GRM is
                      provided separately from the GRM required under ESS10) and will foresee a tailored window for Gender-Based
                      Violence issues (GBV), particularly Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/sexual harassment and (SEA)/SH claims; (iii)
                      measures relating to occupational health and safety (OHS) and traffic risks that will be applied to the project that will
                      include as relevant the requirements of paragraphs 24 -33 of the ESS2, and will take into account the General EHSGs




Public Disclosure
                      and, as appropriate, the industry-specific EHSGs and other GIIP. These OHS measures will also be set out in the legal
                      agreement and the ESCP; and (iv) Code of Conduct to adequately manage risks related to GBV, particularly SEA/SH, in
                      the workplace and the community and any other risks from labor influx. Given the identified risk of the potential
                      exclusion of women and other vulnerable groups from access to employment opportunities related to the project,
                      the LMP includes measures for the inclusion of women and vulnerable groups in project work opportunities. The
                      project worker's grievance mechanism annexed to the project’s Labor Management Procedures (LMP), is
                      proportionate to the nature and scale of the proposed IPF activities and accessible for all project workers to raise
                      workplace concerns. This grievance mechanism is provided separately from the Grievance Mechanisms required
                      under ESS10. The grievance mechanism will not impede access to other judicial or administrative remedies available
                      under the law or through existing arbitration procedures or substitute for grievance mechanisms provided through
                      collective agreements. The LMP also contains the provision on which functions of the project will be executed by
                      government civil servants that will remain subject to the terms and conditions of their existing public sector
                      employment agreement and, therefore, ESS 2 will not apply to them, except as set out in ESS2 para 8.The project
                      workforce will consist of (i) direct workers for the PMU, all staff (consultants); (ii) Contracted workers: people
                      employed or engaged through third parties such as contractors and subcontractors for the construction of electrical,
                      water supply, and sanitation facilities; and (iii) primary supply workers for the provision of goods and services,
                      including solar PV systems. The project is expected to recruit both skilled and unskilled workers for project activities
                      pertaining to both Components 2and 1. The majority of unskilled workers would likely come from project
                      communities or surrounding areas. Labor influx will thus result from the migration of both skilled and unskilled
                      workers. Labor-related social risks linked to labor influx include SEA/SH, child and forced labor, and increased
                      community incidences of communicable diseases, including STI and HIV/AIDS. In sum, a considerable workforce will
                      be required, and the project will face difficulties in promoting sound worker-management relationships and


                    Nov 03, 2025                                                                                                     Page 10 of 20
                              The World Bank
                              Access To Basic Services And Performance Improvement Project (pasbap) (P179643)



                      guaranteeing safe and healthy working conditions. There may be a potential risk of child labor and forced labor. This
                      is a significant risk, particularly in the global supply chain for solar panels and solar components. To support forced
                      labor risk mitigation, the Bank requires the Borrower to strengthen solar-related procurement processes by including
                      forced labor bidder declarations, qualification requirements, and strengthened contractual provisions in
                      procurements involving financing of solar panels/solar components by the WBG. The project has prepared a Labor
                      Management Procedures (LMP) according to ESS2 and relevant ESHS guidelines, as well as the provisions of the ILO.
                      This LMP will be applied to all project workers. More specifically, the LMP developed includes (i) provisions and
                      measures to ensure equal treatment in recruitment, working conditions, promotion, payment, and no child or forced
                      labor use for any category of project workers and suppliers; (ii) a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) for all direct
                      workers and contracted workers (and, where relevant, their organizations) to raise workplace concerns (This GRM is
                      provided separately from the GRM required under ESS10) and will foresee a tailored window for Gender-Based
                      Violence issues (GBV), particularly Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/sexual harassment and (SEA)/SH claims; (iii)
                      measures relating to occupational health and safety (OHS) and traffic risks that will be applied to the project that will
                      include as relevant the requirements of paragraphs 24 -33 of the ESS2, and will take into account the General EHSGs
                      and, as appropriate, the industry-specific EHSGs and other GIIP. These OHS measures will also be set out in the legal
                      agreement and the ESCP; and (iv) Code of Conduct to adequately manage risks related to GBV, particularly SEA/SH, in
                      the workplace and the community and any other risks from labor influx. Given the identified risk of the potential
                      exclusion of women and other vulnerable groups from access to employment opportunities related to the project,
                      the LMP includes measures for the inclusion of women and vulnerable groups in project work opportunities. The
                      project worker's grievance mechanism annexed to the project’s Labor Management Procedures (LMP), is
                      proportionate to the nature and scale of the proposed IPF activities and accessible for all project workers to raise




Public Disclosure
                      workplace concerns. This grievance mechanism is provided separately from the Grievance Mechanisms required
                      under ESS10. The grievance mechanism will not impede access to other judicial or administrative remedies available
                      under the law or through existing arbitration procedures or substitute for grievance mechanisms provided through
                      collective agreements. The LMP also contains the provision on which functions of the project will be executed by
                      government civil servants that will remain subject to the terms and conditions of their existing public sector
                      employment agreement and, therefore, ESS 2 will not apply to them, except as set out in ESS2 para 8.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                              Relevant

                      ESS3 is relevant as the project includes the construction of water systems and wells and the operation and
                      maintenance of sanitation infrastructures that would increase water use, generating wastes and sludge. Key adverse
                      impacts of the project may be seen as follows: Water infrastructure projects carry risks of water pollution, altered
                      flow regimes, and waste generation. The technical studies and advisory services funded by component 1 must
                      incorporate pollution prevention and resource efficiency principles from the earliest stages of project design and
                      ensure comprehensive Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) are conducted. The ToRs of studies will
                      also need to incorporate provisions for ESSs. Resource Use: while the project emphasizes climate resilience and low-
                      carbon solutions under component 1, rehabilitation and extension of water supply networks, as well as the operation
                      of new facilities, will require significant quantities of water and energy. If not managed efficiently, this could place
                      additional pressure on local water sources, especially during the construction phase. Fortunately, Gabon is a rainy
                      country. Construction activities related to electricity distribution in peri-urban and rural zones and the construction of
                      hybrid solar/thermal power plants and the fecal sludge treatment plant may result in noise and vibration, soil erosion,
                      sedimentation of waterbodies, air emissions, solid waste, and hazardous materials. In addition, operations of hybrid


                    Nov 03, 2025                                                                                                      Page 11 of 20
                              The World Bank
                              Access To Basic Services And Performance Improvement Project (pasbap) (P179643)



                      solar/thermal power plants will be punctually the source of primary emissions to air from the combustion of fossil
                      fuels, and greenhouse gases. The wastewater discharges from the hybrid solar/thermal power plants might be
                      contaminated with heavy oil. Hazardous materials stored at the fecal sludge plant will need to be carefully managed
                      in line with good international industry practice during the operational phase. The cleaning and disinfection processes
                      at the SEEG laboratory’s water treatment facility will involve the use of chemical agents, leading to the production of
                      hazardous waste, particularly during the construction phase. Additionally, liquid chlorine will be utilized as part of the
                      planned works to disinfect water extracted from wells before it is introduced into the main bulk water supply system.
                      To mitigate these risks, waste management plans will be prepared under each subproject specific ESIA/ESMPs. Best
                      practices recommended in the World Bank EHS General Guidelines, the specific EHS Guidelines for Water and
                      Sanitation, and the EHS Guidelines for Electric Power Transmission and Distribution is reflected in the ESMF and
                      subproject-specific ESIA/ESMP. The design of FTSP and its ESIA/ESMP consider environmental-friendly technologies
                      that minimize the generation of GHG emissions and production of inputs for agriculture (excreta as hygiene fertilizer)
                      or the production and injection of electricity into the grid. Contractors will be required to implement C-ESMPs
                      integrating pollution control measures: waste segregation and collection systems, storage of hazardous materials on
                      waterproof platforms, recovery and disposal of used oils through authorized channels, and regular inspection of
                      machinery. Construction sites should be equipped with adequate sanitation facilities and retention systems for
                      accidental discharges. A waste management hierarchy will be applied: source reduction, reuse, recycling, and, as a
                      last resort, safe disposal. for the FSTP the project will ensure implementation of specific protocols for safe collection,
                      storage, and elimination. In addition, awareness campaigns will be conducted for local populations and site workers
                      to promote environmental responsibility. Other measures include : - Integrate ESS 3 requirements into all TORs for
                      studies, master plans, and technical assistance activities. - Ensure that capacity-building activities include training




Public Disclosure
                      modules on resource efficiency and pollution prevention. - Prioritize sustainable procurement for all equipment and
                      rehabilitation works funded by the project. - Embed resource efficiency and pollution prevention criteria in the design
                      of the new information management systems and laboratory upgrades. - For future infrastructure with substantial
                      risks level supported by the project (e.g., FSTPs, laboratories,), require ESIAs that specifically address ESS 3
                      compliance. Although the project can present several adverse impacts, there are many areas of alignment with ESS 3
                      requirements that can be met during operation. For example, (i) Component 3’s focus on institutional strengthening,
                      strategic planning, and capacity building presents a strong opportunity to mainstream ESS 3 principles into Gabon’s
                      water, sanitation, and energy sectors. With deliberate integration of resource efficiency and pollution prevention
                      measures, the component can significantly contribute to sustainable sector growth and improved environmental
                      outcomes. (ii) Component 1, which focuses on the development of climate-resilient water supply and sanitation
                      infrastructure, aims to provide substantial benefits in terms of public health, resource efficiency, and environmental
                      sustainability. The construction of the FSTP will be complemented by subcomponent 3.1 activities which will support
                      the development of a holistic sanitation value chain for fecal sludge management and transport to the FSTP. Beyond
                      supporting the development and implementation of a strategy for the upstream activities of containment, emptying,
                      and transport, subcomponent 3.1 will also assess options of management models for the FSTP. In addition,
                      Component 2, as designed, strongly aligns with the objectives of ESS 3, as it emphasizes enhanced resource efficiency
                      and a shift towards clean, renewable energy, while taking concrete steps to minimize pollution and improve the
                      sustainability of electricity services. Component 3 support comprehensive diagnostics and master planning for water
                      and power sectors. Strategic reviews (such as the water supply master plan update and power sector master plan)
                      directly address supply-demand balance, least-cost planning, and integrated resource management. These actions
                      are in line with ESS 3 by prioritizing efficient resource allocation and infrastructure optimization. Training of staff and
                      modernization of equipment for SEEG, CNEE, and SP will build institutional capacity to implement best practices in


                    Nov 03, 2025                                                                                                       Page 12 of 20
                              The World Bank
                              Access To Basic Services And Performance Improvement Project (pasbap) (P179643)



                      efficient resource usage. For example, expanded drinking water testing capacity ensures that water resources are
                      used safely and efficiently. - Rehabilitation of the Jean Violas Training Center presents opportunities for integrating
                      energy- and water-efficient technologies into facility upgrades. Training programs can be designed to include
                      modules on resource efficiency and pollution management. The master plans for water and power sectors emphasize
                      sustainability, demand management, and interconnection of grids for optimal resource sharing. Modernization of
                      Infrastructure: Upgrading the electricity dispatching system and introducing smart pre-paid meters are steps that can
                      enhance operational efficiency. These improvements are likely to optimize energy management, reduce technical and
                      commercial losses, and encourage responsible electricity usage. - Network Upgrades: The extension and densification
                      of grids, including upgrading overloaded transformers and expanding MV/LV networks, help reduce losses in
                      transmission and distribution. This translates into less energy waste and more efficient use of existing resources. -
                      Promotion of Renewable Energy: The hybridization of existing diesel power plants with solar photovoltaic (PV) mini-
                      grids and battery storage significantly increases the share of renewable energy in the electricity mix. This not only
                      diversifies the energy supply but also improves resource efficiency by leveraging abundant solar energy and reducing
                      reliance on fossil fuels. - Distributed Energy Solutions: By incorporating solar home systems, the project delivers
                      electricity to off-grid and hard-to-reach areas in a resource-efficient manner, minimizing the need for costly and
                      resource-intensive grid extension in remote locations. Pollution Prevention: - Studies on sanitation (Citywide Inclusive
                      Sanitation - CWIS) and the development of a sanitation value chain roadmap will promote improved waste
                      management and pollution control. The focus on upgrading laboratories for water quality monitoring and aligning
                      with WHO recommendations is an important step for pollution detection and prevention. - Supporting the
                      operationalization of ARSEE as the sector regulator increases oversight of pollution sources and promotes adherence
                      to environmental guidelines. The procurement of laboratory and monitoring equipment enables better detection and




Public Disclosure
                      response to pollution incidents. The operationalization of an electronic archival system also reduces reliance on
                      paper, contributing to resource efficiency. - By training staff on best practices for pollution prevention and equipping
                      them with up-to-date knowledge, the project supports the long-term sustainability of sector operations Promotion of
                      Cleaner Practices: - The planned introduction of information management systems (GIS, ERP) and technical
                      equipment upgrades are likely to support better operational decisions, which can reduce losses, improve leak
                      detection, and optimize resource use—thus indirectly contributing to pollution reduction.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                             Relevant

                      This standard is relevant. The project is national in scope and will involve many local communities. Under
                      components 1, 2 and 3 of the project, members of these communities will be subject to noise and dust pollution
                      related to the construction of water and sanitation infrastructure, disruptions in their daily lives, and insecurity,
                      potentially increased insecurity due to heightened activity and the availability of materials and fuel. If small water
                      retention structures are financed, it is necessary to ensure that these systems are designed by competent engineers,
                      as required by ESS4. Civil works such as the construction of water supply and sewerage systems can generate traffic
                      and road safety hazards associated with obstructions, diversions, or closures of roads to give rise to works with a
                      concomitant increase in the volume of traffic on public roads and the risk of accidents. Civil works can also generate
                      dust, noise, vibration, waste, soil, and water pollution, which will impact surrounding communities, and
                      communicable diseases such as HIV/AIDS, which may be exacerbated by labor influx. To mitigates these risks, site-
                      specific ESMPs will outline detailed management and mitigation measures for community health and safety
                      management (including a waste management plan , traffic management plan, and road safety) during operations and
                      civil works to rehabilitate and renovate social infrastructure. The potential leaks from the collection and transport of


                    Nov 03, 2025                                                                                                    Page 13 of 20
                              The World Bank
                              Access To Basic Services And Performance Improvement Project (pasbap) (P179643)



                      sludge may have potential impacts on the health of the local community and operating personnel. Proper sludge
                      empyting and transport trucks (vaccum truck and vacutug). Likely negative impacts include accidents, labor influx,
                      and associate impacts such as SEA/SH allegations/incidents, pressure on limited socio-economic infrastructures in
                      rural areas, frustrations due to restrictions of access to homes or offices/ locations of economic activities' during
                      construction, community reticence to endorse project activities linked to the fecal sludge treatment plan due
                      potential foul smells, soil, and water pollution. Mitigation measures will be identified in the ESMF and subproject
                      ESIA/ ESMP. The site-specific ESIAs will determine whether a specific labor influx management plan is required (in the
                      case of significant impacts) or whether (in a low-risk scenario) the ESMP can include labor-related clauses. For all civil
                      works, the sub-project ESIA/ESMPs will include a Community Health and Safety (CHS) plan, including prevention of
                      STI/HIV-AIDS and a Code of Conduct that will be signed by all workers and enforced by the contractors. The
                      Community Health and Safety (CHS) plan could include measures such as fences and security guards intended to
                      secure equipment and vehicles/engines at the construction base camp to protect community and worker safety. It
                      will also include procedures to use in case of incidents. It will include guidance for preparing an incident report
                      consistent with the Bank’s Environmental and Social Incident Report Tool (ESIRT). Adverse community health and
                      safety impacts may be especially significant for project sites close to communities and in peri-urban areas. A
                      preliminary assessment of SEA/SH risk has been conducted using the World Bank SEA/SH screening tool indicating
                      moderate risk rating at this stage of the project. A risk assessment addressing sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA),
                      sexual harassment (SH) and violence against children (VAC) risk assessment has been developed to assess the SEA/SH
                      risks associated with the project’s activities and an associated plan will be developed and implemented throughout
                      the project life. The project ESMF will detail a workers’ Code of Conduct for the prevention of SEA/SH and VAC, to be
                      included in the contractors’ bidding documents and the C-ESMP. The ESMF will also incorporate the general and




Public Disclosure
                      sector-specific EHSGs for the identified sub-projects in relation to community health and safety. Appropriate and
                      proportional mitigation and monitoring measures related to relevant community health and safety risks has been
                      included in the ESMF..

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                   Relevant

                      ESS5 is relevant. As part of PASBAP implementation, potential adverse social impacts are expected to arise primarily
                      from infrastructure works, including the construction and/or rehabilitation of potable water networks, a pilot fecal
                      sludge treatment plant in Owendo (Igoumié), hybrid PV-diesel power plants in rural areas, electricity distribution
                      extensions, and the development of a new source substation in Greater Libreville. These activities may result in
                      limited land acquisition, temporary or permanent loss of assets (structures, cultivated areas, trees), and potential
                      disruptions to livelihoods (e.g., small businesses or informal economic activities). However, risks of physical
                      displacement are expected to be low or negligible. The construction, rehabilitation, or extension works of networks
                      and related facilities may, in some cases (particularly for structures to be rehabilitated) not require land acquisition,
                      as the sites already exist and are available. However, for newly constructed or expanded facilities, land acquisition
                      will be necessary. As part of its preparation and implementation phase, the project could undergo significant
                      adjustments, including the restructuring of its components, the redefinition of certain specific objectives, as well as
                      the revision of the geographical scope, particularly the intervention locations. While the exact technical details and
                      locations of all investments are not yet finalized, the PMU conducted an early resettlement screening exercise on a
                      sample of prioritized sites to identify potential impacts, particularly in areas where informal structures or “cadres
                      bâtis” may be present. A civil works engineer was recruited to support the technical validation of these sites, and the
                      results will help estimate costs of land acquisition and resettlement prior to appraisal.The electricity extension


                    Nov 03, 2025                                                                                                      Page 14 of 20
                              The World Bank
                              Access To Basic Services And Performance Improvement Project (pasbap) (P179643)



                      activities are expected to lead to mainly temporary restrictions on land use, although there may be some permanent
                      restrictions along the project's right of way as well as on land marked for the installation of substations and Hybrid
                      Solar PV mini-grids. Water supply activities may also lead to permanent land loss in rural areas where land would be
                      acquired for the construction of mini-water supply systems. There may be temporary restrictions on land required to
                      establish water connection networks. Permanent land restrictions are expected for the construction of the fecal
                      sludge treatment plant of Libreville. Thus, project land acquisition would likely lead to the loss or disruption of
                      income or livelihood activities and physical and/or economic displacement for individuals or groups of people,
                      particularly those occupying the existing rights of way for the LV and MV networks and marked project sites for the
                      Hybrid Solar PV mini-grid, water supply facilities, and the fecal sludge treatment plant sites.It is also likely that areas
                      marked for transmission corridors would require tree cutting. In rural areas, the project entails engaging communities
                      towards voluntary land donations for small plots of land required for the construction of mini-water supply systems.
                      The exact locations of the marked activities are not yet known. Therefore, a draft Resettlement Framework (RF)
                      compliant with the national legal and regulatory framework and ESS 5 has been developed for the project and
                      disclosed before Appraisal. It will be finalized, re-disclosed and consulted upon no later than effectiveness . The RF
                      covers all the above-listed activities to be performed under Components 2 and 1 of the project. The RF details the
                      principles that will be used during the implementation phase of the project, where individual Resettlement Action
                      Plans (RAPs) will be prepared for each component of the civil works of the project, including the fecal sludge
                      treatment plant. The draft RF has been prepared,disclosed by Decision Meeting. It will be finalized and re-disclosed in
                      the country and on the World Bank’s website before Board approval, and consulted upon by Appraisal in the country
                      and on the World Bank’s website before Board approval. In addition, the RF and/or RAPs will also include ESS5
                      requirements, as relevant: A. General: eligibility classification, project design, compensation and benefits for affected




Public Disclosure
                      persons, community engagement, grievance mechanism, planning, and implementation; B. displacement: physical
                      displacement, economic displacement; C. Collaboration with other responsible agencies or subnational jurisdictions;
                      D. Technical and financial assistance.; and Elements of the involuntary resettlement instruments: A. Resettlement
                      plan; and B. Resettlement framework In addition, a screening tool would be developed as part of the ESMF, and there
                      will be a requirement to screen all sites/facilities to assess the potential for project activities to cause economic or
                      physical displacement. Some voluntary donation of land is foreseen in rural areas for small infrastructures for water
                      supply and Hybrid Solar PV mini-grids. However, the project will avoid any land taking in areas inhabited by
                      indigenous people. All project voluntary land donations would be done following the World Bank ESF guidance note
                      for borrowers on land acquisition, restrictions on land use, and involuntary resettlement. The RF includes a section on
                      voluntary land donation, including relevant forms and a database of concerned persons. After screening specific
                      intervention sites (if occupied), the possibilities for resettlement or compensation will be analyzed and determined. In
                      all cases, the basic principle will always be to avoid resettlement (both physical and economic resettlement).

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                    Relevant
                      Resources

                      Most of the project sites are in rural and peri-urban areas with high biodiversity conservation value and/or ecosystem
                      services that the project may impact. The extension and densification of electricity grids, transformer upgrades,
                      installation of substations, and deployment of solar mini-grids, rehabilitation of water supply infrastructure (pipelines,
                      treatment plants, reservoirs, mini-grids) and the Fecal Sludge Treatment Plant (FSTP) —could intersect with sensitive
                      ecosystems, particularly in peri-urban, rural, and remote regions. Key risks and impacts may include: • Habitat
                      disturbance or fragmentation: Laying new transmission and distribution lines and installing substations may require


                    Nov 03, 2025                                                                                                       Page 15 of 20
                              The World Bank
                              Access To Basic Services And Performance Improvement Project (pasbap) (P179643)



                      land clearing, which can disturb natural habitats, affect wildlife corridors, and potentially fragment ecosystems if
                      routes cross forested or ecologically sensitive areas. • Impacts on flora and fauna: Construction activities can lead to
                      temporary or permanent loss of vegetation and may disrupt local fauna, especially if work is undertaken near areas of
                      high biodiversity value or critical habitats. • Introduction of solar mini-grids: While solar energy is a clean alternative,
                      sitting solar arrays and associated battery systems in natural areas can alter surface conditions, affect plant cover,
                      and impact soil and hydrological patterns if not carefully planned. • Access to previously undisturbed areas: Extending
                      grids or infrastructure to remote communities may inadvertently facilitate further human encroachment, resource
                      extraction, and indirect pressure on natural resources. • The increased draw on local water sources to supply
                      expanding service areas may affect downstream ecosystems, particularly aquatic species reliant on minimum flow
                      levels or specific water quality conditions. Careful analysis and management of abstraction rates will be needed to
                      avoid degradation of wetlands, rivers, or groundwater-dependent ecosystems However, given that site locations for
                      electric distribution and hybrid solar/thermal power plants are yet unknown, additional information will be obtained
                      during implementation. The ESIA/ESMP of Igoumie FSTP that will be financed under the project (one out of four FTSP
                      with studies carried out by AfDB) does not show at this stage any protected area around the chosen domain. The
                      adoption of innovative technologies such as omni-processors, biogas generation, and the reuse of treated sludge as
                      fertilizer or biochar demonstrates alignment with circular economy principles. These approaches can reduce during
                      operational phase, environmental pollution, cut greenhouse gas emissions, and limit the need for chemical fertilizers,
                      indirectly protecting biodiversity in agricultural landscapes. Moreover, the subprojects ESIA once further information
                      becomes available, will contain a chapter containing as assessment of the level of risk on biodiversity conservation
                      and sustainable natural resource management, mitigating measures to assess and manage risks, including inter alia:i)
                      Procedures to assess biodiversity and natural habitats and services that Project activities could impact; ii) A screening




Public Disclosure
                      mechanism to avoid any high-risk ecological areas; iii) Guidance to Site-Specific Biodiversity Action Plan (SS-BAP)
                      including mitigation measures in line with the mitigation hierarchy. The subprojects ESIAs or ESMPs will assess the
                      impacts on habitats of importance, if any are within the impact area, and will propose alternative routes for the
                      infrastructures. Adequate mitigation measures in line with the ESS6 will be proposed as necessary. Additional
                      information will be obtained and assessed on impacts on natural/critical habitats once the exact project location and
                      final project design are known.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                                Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      This Standard is relevant as the project is nationwide, covering activities in all nine provinces of the country, and the
                      likely to be implemented in areas where Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan Historically Underserved Traditional Local
                      Communities (IPs) are present or in areas which they have a collective attachment, or within very close proximity to
                      their settlements. The main IP groups in Gabon are the Baka, Babongo, Bakoya, and Baghame, primarily located in
                      Ogooué-Ivindo (Makokou and Mékambo), Ogooué-Lolo (Koulamoutou and Lastourville), Ngounié (Mouila, Mbigou,
                      and Lébamba), and Woleu-Ntem (Minvoul, Mitzic, and Oyem). .IPs are mostly hunger-gatherers, although some may
                      live partly in towns/villages and partly in the forest. However, since Indigenous Peoples will not be the sole or
                      overwhelming majority of direct beneficiaries, the project will be designed and implemented in a manner that
                      provides Indigenous Peoples with the opportunity to culturally adequate participate of the consultations and planning
                      processes and design and implementation arrangements of the project and access to project benefits. The project will
                      conduct a Social Assessment, which will examine potential risks, impacts, and potential project benefits for the IPs.
                      Using a consultative approach, the Social Assessment will identify measures to mitigate risks and ensure culturally


                    Nov 03, 2025                                                                                                       Page 16 of 20
                              The World Bank
                              Access To Basic Services And Performance Improvement Project (pasbap) (P179643)



                      acceptable benefits to IPs. The Social Assessment will also explore the appropriate consultation methods for the
                      different IP groups and examine culturally appropriate grievance mechanisms. These measures will be detailed in an
                      Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) and will be incorporated into the project design, including, but not limited to, the
                      Stakeholder Engagement Plan and the grievance mechanism. Consultations with IP communities will take place
                      during the development of the Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP). The stakeholder consultation process—including the
                      Ministry in charge of Water and Electricity, resource persons specializing in Indigenous Peoples issues,
                      representatives of local organizations and associations or NGOs recognized for working in the interest of Indigenous
                      Peoples and based in Libreville, as well as other relevant services—will be conducted both prior to and during project
                      implementation. The potential social impacts can be adequately managed/ mitigated through developing,
                      implementing, and monitoring appropriate measures. The borrower will proactively engage with the IPs to ensure
                      their ownership and participation in project design, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation. In addition,
                      measures will be provided in the Social Assessment to ensure that IPs and other vulnerable groups can share in
                      project benefits. Consultations and how issues have been addressed in project design will be duly documented,
                      together with ongoing consultation and monitoring arrangements. The Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) and the
                      Grievance Redress Mechanism that have been developed under the project are tailored to be culturally appropriate
                      and accessible to Indigenous Peoples. The Stakeholder Engagement plan includes outreach programs to ensure
                      indigenous communities, especially those living in remote areas, are informed of project activities and associated
                      benefits. A draft Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) has been prepared and disclosed prior to Appraisal. It
                      will be finalized, redisclosed and consulted upon no later than project effectiveness. As previously mentioned,
                      Indigenous Peoples (IP) communities were not consulted during the development of this Indigenous Peoples Planning
                      Framework. However, findings from previous surveys and consultations conducted under the DIGITAL Gabon and




Public Disclosure
                      CAB4 projects served as a foundational information base. The IPPF covers specific measures to ensure that IPs in
                      project zones receive culturally appropriate social and economic benefits, ensure that project activities do not
                      adversely impact Indigenous peoples, and estimate the costs of such measures. For instance, the IPPF contains
                      arrangements for IP water access and maintenance of water supply facilities for semi-sedentary IP communities.
                      Once specific project sites are identified, if needed, the PMU will prepare an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) depending
                      on locations and timing, acceptable to the Bank that sets out specific actions through which the project will ensure
                      that: (i) IPs affected by the project receive culturally appropriate social and economic benefits; and (ii) if potential
                      adverse effects on IPs are identified, those adverse effects are avoided, minimized, mitigated or compensated. IPP
                      will be prepared before the implementation of any activities in areas where IPs are present. Project activities that
                      could potentially lead to adverse impacts on a) IP land and natural resources subject to traditional ownership or
                      under customary use or occupation, b) cause relocation of Indigenous Peoples from land and natural resources
                      subject to traditional ownership or under customary use or occupation; c) or have significant impacts on Indigenous
                      Peoples that is material to the identity and or cultural, ceremonial, or spiritual aspects of the affected Indigenous
                      People’s lives will not be implemented in IP zones. Thus, Free, Prior, and Informed Consent (FPIC) of IPs will not be
                      required.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                        Relevant

                      Environmental and Social Standard 8 (ESS8) is relevant to the project because certain activities may directly or
                      indirectly affect cultural heritage, whether tangible or intangible, particularly in urban or peri-urban environments.
                      Earthworks, excavations, or construction activities planned under the project could lead to the destruction,
                      degradation, or disturbance of sites with historical, archaeological, religious, or community significance. The


                    Nov 03, 2025                                                                                                     Page 17 of 20
                              The World Bank
                              Access To Basic Services And Performance Improvement Project (pasbap) (P179643)



                      extension of water and electricity networks, construction of sanitation blocks in schools or health centers, and
                      construction of the faecal sludge treatment plant and its facilities could require digging or land clearance in areas
                      where cultural or sacred elements exist (such as shrines, burial sites, sacred trees, or ceremonial places). In the
                      absence of proper prior investigation or supervision, these assets could be irreversibly affected. Moreover, noise and
                      vibration generated by certain construction activities may disturb local populations or affect heritage structures (e.g.,
                      old buildings, places of worship). To mitigate these risks, the project will ensure that all infrastructure subprojects
                      undergo prior screening to identify the presence of cultural heritage. In areas of potential cultural significance,
                      consultations will be conducted with communities, traditional authorities, and relevant cultural institutions to assess
                      risks and define preventive measures. The presence of culturally significant sites associated with the project cannot
                      be determined at this stage of project preparation because subproject are not yet assessed. The ESMF contains a
                      chance find procedure which will also be included in the tender documents. This procedure determines the methods
                      of management of any fortuitous discovery made within the framework of the project. The ESMF has identified the
                      protected areas around project areas that are home to classified cultural heritage. Measures are recommended to be
                      included in site-specific ESMPs to avoid harm to identified cultural heritage in accordance with national and
                      international requirements. Contractors and workers will be required to comply with a chance finding procedure,
                      which must be included in ESMPs and the works contracts. This procedure requires suspension of works, securing of
                      the site, and immediate notification of relevant national authorities in the event of an accidental discovery of cultural
                      property. Work can only resume after authorization and, if necessary, documentation, conservation, or relocation of
                      the discovered item. In addition, local customs and beliefs will be respected, particularly regarding sacred places,
                      burial sites, and community ceremonies. The project will ensure that cultural or symbolic objects are not removed,
                      altered, or handled without prior consent. Where necessary, technical experts in cultural heritage may be mobilized




Public Disclosure
                      to assess and monitor sensitive sites. The project will promote community involvement in the preservation and
                      management of heritage. Participatory tools, such as community registers of heritage elements, may be used to
                      document and safeguard intangible cultural elements.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                   Not Currently Relevant

                      The standard is not currently relevant because the project does not include financial intermediaries.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                         Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                   No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                          In Part
                       The project consists of multiple components and subprojects.

                       The use of part of the Borrower’s E&S Framework (BESF) may be applied to subprojects with low to moderate risks
                       and impacts. The ESIA/ESMP for low and moderate ES risks activities will use partially the Borrower Environmental
                       and Social Framework (BESF), including Law 07/2014 on Environmental Protection and its subsequent application



                    Nov 03, 2025                                                                                                     Page 18 of 20
                               The World Bank
                               Access To Basic Services And Performance Improvement Project (pasbap) (P179643)



                       decrees. The Terms of reference of the studies and measures and plans will include the relevant provisions of the
                       applicable Environment and Social Standards (ESS) to fulfill remaining gaps, including relevant aspects of the
                       Environmental Health and Safety Guidelines (EHSG). The DGPEN will oversee national approval of ESIA/ESMP reports
                       and handle administrative E&S monitoring during project implementation.

                       The Borrower is obliged to notify the Bank of any change in the BESF that may have an impact on E&S risk
                       management for the Project.

                       Subprojects assessed as having a substantial risk level will be governed exclusively by the Environmental and Social
                       Standards (ESSs), which are more stringent than national regulations, and will also incorporate pertinent elements
                       from the Environmental Health and Safety Guidelines (EHSG) and WHO guidelines.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                 Yes
                       The African Development Bank (AfDB) is involved in the development of a fecal sludge treatment plant near Libreville.
                       The AfDB is providing financing for prefeasibility studies. The use of the World Bank Environmental and Social
                       Framework (ESF) for managing the facility’s environmental and social risks has been discussed and agreed with
                       partners during the concept stage. PASBAP also identifies the need for a comprehensive sanitation value chain to
                       support the planned construction of fecal sludge treatment plants through both PASBAP and additional AfDB funding,
                       in order to achieve the intended benefits for beneficiaries.




Public Disclosure
                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     The project will finalize the selection of subprojects to finance during project implementation.
                     Specific subprojects ESIASs and ESMPs will be prepared as per provisions of the ESMF, RF, GBV; SEA/SH Action Plan,
                     LMP, SEP-GRMs that final version will be redisclosed before the end of appraisal. All ESIAs and ESMPs must be
                     developed in accordance with Terms of Reference reviewed and approved by the Bank.

                     Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) will be prepared alongside under technical assistant for the
                     Master Plans.


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:      Michael Thibert                         Title:          Senior Water Specialist

                      Email:                 mthibert@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:           Yang Liu                                Job Title:      Senior Energy Economist



                    Nov 03, 2025                                                                                                   Page 19 of 20
                               The World Bank
                               Access To Basic Services And Performance Improvement Project (pasbap) (P179643)



                      Email:                  yliu41@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Xavier Chauvot De Beauchene         Job Title:     Lead Water Specialist

                      Email:                  xchauvot@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                       Michael Thibert, Yang Liu, Xavier Chauvot De Beauchene

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:              Charlie Foyet Sonkeng

                     ADM Social Specialist:                     Graciela Sanchez Martinez




Public Disclosure




                    Nov 03, 2025                                                                                         Page 20 of 20
