Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Southern Niger Connectivity and Integration Project (P179770)



                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                 Project Information Document (PID)



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 04-Apr-2025 | Report No: PIDIA00825




Public Disclosure Authorized
        The World Bank
        Southern Niger Connectivity and Integration Project (P179770)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)        Region                        Operation ID               Operation Name
                                                                                         Southern Niger
                                WESTERN AND CENTRAL
Niger                                                         P179770                    Connectivity and
                                AFRICA
                                                                                         Integration Project
Financing Instrument            Estimated Appraisal Date      Estimated Approval Date    Practice Area (Lead)
Investment Project
                                03-Apr-2025                   15-May-2025                Transport
Financing (IPF)
Borrower(s)                     Implementing Agency
                                Ministère des Transports et
Republic of Niger
                                de l'Equipement

Proposed Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve climate-resilient road connectivity and to enable value chain
logistics development in southern Niger.

Components
Climate-resilient improvement of Niger’s transport backbone
Enabling environment for southern Niger basin logistics
Institutional strengthening and project management
Contingent emergency response component (CERC)

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                     No
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?               No

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                          370.60

  Total Financing                                                                                               370.60
               of which IBRD/IDA                                                                               363.60
  Financing Gap                                                                                                   0.00


                                                                                                                   Page 1
             The World Bank
             Southern Niger Connectivity and Integration Project (P179770)



    DETAILS
      World Bank Group Financing
         International Development Association (IDA)                                                                                                                                                              363.60
              IDA Credit                                                                                                                                                                                          343.60
              IDA Grant                                                                                                                                                                                             20.00
      Non-World Bank Group Financing
         Counterpart Funding                                                                                                                                                                                           7.00
              National Government                                                                                                                                                                                      7.00




    @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
Environmental And Social Risk Classification
High


    Decision
    The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate



    Other Decision (as needed)
    B. Introduction and Context
    Country Context

1. Niger, a landlocked Sahelian country that stretches over 1,267,000 kilometers (km)² and is home to 27.2 million
inhabitants,1 heavily depends on its road infrastructure and the agropastoral sector to drive socioeconomic
development, fight food insecurity, prevent conflict, and mitigate forced displacement. The country’s economy relies
on agriculture, which employs 71 percent of the workforce and is the main contributor to GDP at 44.6 percent, compared
to 18.6 percent for industry and 36.8 percent for services.2 Poor road connectivity and rural access, as well as logistical
challenges, impact agropastoral sector performance and economic prospects to fight the pervasive food insecurity.3 In
Niger, 40.8 percent of the population lives below the national poverty line and 20.4 percent live in extreme poverty.
Ensuring that the youth, women, and other vulnerable groups, such as refugees and host communities (RHC), including
internally displaced persons (IDPs),4 are gainfully employed can reduce poverty and put communities on a trajectory of
recovery and economic growth (in the Transport sector women hold less than one percent of jobs; although data on the
share of women in technical roles is not available, this share of women is expected to be even lower5 due to lack of

1
  World Bank Group. 2022. Data. Population, Total – Niger. https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.POP.TOTL?locations=NE.
2
  International Development Association. N. d. Niger. https://ida.worldbank.org/en/country/niger" \l ":~:text=Agriculture%20and%20the%20rural%20economy,for%2040%20percent%20of%20GDP
3
  Recent data from the World Food Program indicates that over 3.3 million individuals were classified as acutely food insecure during the 2023 season (June–August). An estimated 4.3 million people (2.4 million of whom are
children) require humanitarian assistance. Additionally, Niger’s global acute malnutrition rate is estimated at 12.7 percent, and 42 percent of children under 5 years old are stunted. Severe recorded food crises in 1980, 1988,
1990, 1997, 2001, 2005, 2009, 2011–-.https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/37620).
4
  When referring to host communities in this document, IDPs are considered part of the host population.
5
  ILOSTAT. 2022. https://rshiny.ilo.org/dataexplorer0/?lang=en&segment=indicator&id=EAP_2WAP_SEX_AGE_RT_A.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page 2
            The World Bank
            Southern Niger Connectivity and Integration Project (P179770)


adequate skills and strong gender norms). Employment also lowers fragility and reduces the incidence of conflict,
especially in the context of climate change, which exacerbates these challenges.
2. Women face major mobility barriers in accessing maternity care in Niger. In sub-Saharan Africa, the travel time for
women to access obstetric and general health care is about 180 minutes.6 In a comparable country like Nigeria, women
may travel up to 240 minutes to access obstetric care.7 It is expected that this travel time is longer in Niger particularly in
the project areas which are mainly rural. Contributing factors are among others, limited access to reliable transportation
and poor-quality roads that are safe and reliable.8 Gender-based violence and harmful practices such as child marriage
are prevalent in the country, with 76.3 percent of girls aged 20 to 24 married before the age of 18 and 28 percent before
the age of 15.9
3. Niger relies on access to its strategic corridors to improve its international trade, particularly with Nigeria and other
neighboring countries. National Road 1 (RN1) is the lifeline of the country and the backbone of its economy, serving as
the artery for about 70 percent of its population, supporting close to 88 percent of its agricultural activities,10 and
connecting the borders of Mali, Burkina Faso, Nigeria, and Chad. As illustrated in Error! Not a valid bookmark self-
reference., the RN1 comprises the following: (i) the Malian border–Niamey section, which is part of the Trans-Saharan
Road (TSR);11 (ii) the Niamey–Maradi section, which is part of the Trans-Sahelian Highway (TSH); 12 (iii) the Maradi–Zinder
section, which connects the TSH and TSR within the RN1; and (iv) the Zinder–Chadian border section, which is also part of
the TSR corridor. The Maradi–Zinder section of the RN1 serves approximately 16.4 million people, 5.2 million in Niger and
11.2 million in Nigeria.13 Ensuring all-year resilient connectivity between the RN1, the TSH and the TSR corridor will
improve access, agropastoral produce flow, and the trade potential of selected value chains at the subregional level.
                            Figure 1 – Southern Niger’s RN1 and Strategic Regional Corridors14




6
  P. Florio, S. Freire, and M. Melchiorri. 2023. “Estimating Geographic Access to Healthcare Facilities in Sub-Saharan Africa by Degree of Urbanisation.” Applied Geography. doi:
7
  A. Banke-Thomas et al. 2021. “An Assessment of Geographical Access and Factors Influencing Travel Time to Emergency Obstetric Care in the Urban State of Lagos, Nigeria.” Health Policy and Planning 36: 1384–1396.
https://doi.org/10.1093/heapol/czab099.
8
   J. Blanford et al. 2012. “It’s a Long, Long Walk: Accessibility to Hospitals, Maternity and Integrated Health Centers in Niger.” International Journal of Health Geographics 11: 24. https://ij-
healthgeographics.biomedcentral.com/counter/pdf/10.1186/1476-072X-11-24.pdf.
9
  Girls Not Brides. Niger. https://www.girlsnotbrides.org/learning-resources/child-marriage-atlas/atlas/niger/.
10
   P. Thenkabail et al. 2016. Global Food Security Support Analysis Data (GFSAD) Crop Dominance 2010 Global 1 km V001 [Ddata set]. NASA Making Earth System Data Records for Use in Research Environments (MEaSUREs)
NASA EOSDIS Land Processes DAAC. https://lpdaac.usgs.gov/products/gfsad1kcdv001/.
11
   The Trans-Saharan Road corridor is one of the oldest transnational road corridors in Africa. It is 4,500 km long, crossing the Sahara Desert and linking Algeria, Chad, Mali, Niger, Nigeria, and Tunisia.
12
   The Trans-Sahelian Highway, also known as Trans-African Highway 5 (TAH-5), links Dakar in Senegal with N'Djamena in Chad through Mali, Burkina Faso, Niger, and Nigeria. The key Niger TSH section connects Niamey with
Maradi, and both cities to Burkina Faso and Nigeria, respectively.
13
   These figures correspond to populations located within a 150-km radius from the Maradi–Zinder section of the RN1 (WorldPop, 2020).
14
   World Bank International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. 2025.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Page 3
            The World Bank
            Southern Niger Connectivity and Integration Project (P179770)


4. Niger, which is classified as a fragile and conflict-affected situation, is grappling with increasing forced displacement.
This is due to internal fragility and cross-border insecurity from neighboring Mali, Burkina Faso, Chad, and Nigeria. When
Niger first accessed the IDA18 Window for Host Communities and Refugees, it hosted 340,000 persons forcibly displaced
by conflict. As of February 2025, Niger hosted 975,694forcibly displaced persons, including 421,809 refugees and asylum
seekers and 507,438 IDPs, highlighting the continued cross-border spillover conflict dynamics (see map, Error! Reference
source not found.).15 Forcibly displaced populations are mainly in the Tahoua, Maradi, and Diffa Regions (Nigerian
refugees) and in the Tillabéry and northern Tahoua Regions (Malian and Burkinabè refugees). More than 80 percent of
refugees are women and children. The government’s out-of-camp policy, continued by the new authorities, facilitates
local integration and self-sufficiency, with most refugees living in informal settlements or with host communities in rural
and peri-urban areas. While poverty rates are high across all groups, they are highest among refugee and IDP households.
The inflow of refugees and IDPs into these rural communities exacerbates existing challenges, straining already limited
resources and increasing poverty, unemployment, human capital deficits, and inadequate basic services. The existing poor
infrastructure, including degraded roads, further hinders access to basic social services and disrupts agropastoral value
chain activities in these communities. Despite barriers to accessing land and assets, agriculture remains one of the most
viable pathways for refugees to achieve self-reliance and economic integration. The sociocultural similarities between
RHC in Niger support social cohesion. Niger’s robust legal framework (1997 Refugee Law) grants refugees rights to work
and access to health care, education, and justice, among others. However, further steps are needed, including the
adoption of a revised asylum law and its implementation decree, and the implementation of the 2023 Global Refugee
Forum commitments.16 The World Bank, in consultation with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), confirms that Niger’s protection framework for refugees continues to be adequate. Ongoing conflicts in
neighboring countries are expected to drive a continued increase in refugees and IDPs in the medium term, leading to
evolving challenges in hosting and reinforcing the need for sustained international support.
5. The Nigerien government has undertaken a comprehensive approach to improve the institutional environment and
advance long-term solutions for RHC. This approach materializes in the pursuit of a policy of alternatives to camps, closing
refugee camps and developing humanitarian land allocation comparable to social housing and villages of opportunity to
facilitate the controlled resettlement of refugees and promote integration, assisting over 45,000 refugees in finding
durable housing outside of camps since 2019. This strategy includes signing international conventions on refugees,
displaced persons, and stateless persons, and adopting associated legal instruments to ensure refugees are treated equally
with citizens regarding key socio-economic rights such as property, security, access to courts, basic services, freedom of
expression, and free movement. The government has internalized the Kampala Convention through a national law for the
assistance and protection of displaced persons (December 2018) and, in the absence of a parliament, an ordinance to
revise the 1997 law establishing the status of refugees and its 1998 implementing decree governing the rights of refugees
and asylum-seekers to enhance efficiency and fairness. A decree (n°2019-463) has been enacted to allow systematic
registration of civil status events in refugee camps, and prima facie refugee status has been granted to Nigerian nationals
fleeing insecurity in certain northern states (arrêté n° 00571 / MISP / D / ACR / SG / DGECM-R du 9 juillet 2020).
Coordination and cooperation have been strengthened through collaboration between several governmental institutions
and UNHCR, focusing on improving service delivery, knowledge transfer, and monitoring and evaluation. To address land
access issues, a memorandum of understanding was signed with the Ministry of Urban Planning (January 31, 2020) to
strengthen legal access to land for housing, leading to the creation of "lotissements à but humanitaire" (humanitarian land
allocations) or urbanized sites providing land titles or deeds guaranteeing free occupancy. Infrastructure development has
been a priority, with investments in housing (over 6,426 houses built on humanitarian land allocations using the Hydraform
technique) and plans to further develop infrastructure through IDA20 funding, focusing on transport and economic
inclusion near villages of opportunity. Efforts to improve access to basic services (water, education, health, energy) for

15
  UNHCR. 2025. UNHCR Niger - Map Population of Concern - Janvier 2025. https://data.unhcr.org/en/documents/details/114354.
16
  As per the IDA20 WHR guidelines, the updated strategy note of the Government of Niger describing the concrete steps taken toward long-term development solutions for RHC was finalized on XXX and can be found in
Annex 4.



                                                                                                                                                                                                            Page 4
             The World Bank
             Southern Niger Connectivity and Integration Project (P179770)


both RHC include expanding social safety nets and capacity-building projects. The government also plans to support the
return and resettlement of displaced populations in their villages of origin and when the security situation improves,
providing assistance with transportation, food, supplies, habitat rehabilitation, and agricultural inputs. Additionally, the
Niger has committed to improving access to education and strengthening adaptation to climate change, including with
green shelters, resilient crops and clean energy solutions, through its pledges at the Global Refugee Forum held in
December 2023. This comprehensive strategy represents a long-term vision to address the challenges faced by refugees
and host communities, with continued support from the World Bank considered essential for implementing these political
reforms and institutional changes.
6. Climate change and associated disasters have detrimental impacts on the road network and connectivity, farming,
livestock herding, markets, and food value and supply chains. Niger's vulnerability to climate change is evident from the
recent increases in sandstorms, rising temperatures, extreme heat, droughts, and floods. The agropastoral sector in Niger
is highly susceptible to these severe climate shocks, which adversely impact water resources, soil quality, agricultural
production, livestock herding,17 human livelihoods, food security, and economic growth. The 2024 rainy season, which has
been linked to linked to climate change,18 caused extreme floods that led to landslides, destroyed homes, trees, and
businesses, caused hundreds of deaths and injuries, and damaged drinking water and road infrastructure, including the
Maradi–Zinder section of the RN1.19
     Sectoral and Institutional Context

7. Niger suffers from infrastructure deficits that have been detrimental to primary-sector value chains, especially in
the Eastern Plains.20 About 95 percent of domestic and foreign trade is transported by roads. Niger’s trade system is
informal, with fragmented transport services;21 the lack of professionalization and formalization of the transport and
logistics sector, combined with a weak regulatory environment and a lack of transparent procedures, results in low
competitiveness. A combination of inadequate road infrastructure and logistical challenges results in economic losses,
food shortages, and high spoilage rates in Niger's most productive agropastoral zones.
8. Poor road quality, high transport costs, and cumbersome border-crossing procedures hinder agropastoral trade,
access to basic social services, and deepens inequality and poverty among RHC and non-RHC. The road network
comprises approximately 22,787 km of roads, of which under 25 percent are paved (along primary links and trunks), with
a national average Rural Access Index of 38.1 percent,22 with southern Niger exhibiting considerably higher levels of
connectivity compared to the northern regions.23 In some areas, unpaved roads become impassable during the rainy
season, which coincides with the peak period when RHC transports their farm produce to markets or to storage facilities.
The lack of roadside emergency assistance further compounds this challenge. Poor quality roads lead to higher
transportation costs due to the resulting increased fuel consumption, vehicle wear and tear, and higher maintenance
requirements. Conversely, the limited extent of paved roads in the country impacts the conditions under which goods are
transported to remote areas and exacerbates accessibility gaps. This predominantly impacts rural communities under the
pressure of refugee inflow, limiting access to basic social services and markets to promote agropastoral value chain
activities, which are a major source of livelihood for RHC. Frequent border closures and stringent customs regulations
disrupt the flow of trade and create uncertainty for traders.


17
   Livestock rearing provides primary or secondary employment for 87 percent of the workforce in the country.
18
   According to World Weather Attribution, the 2024 rainy season mirrors the 2022 flooding, whose attribution study concluded that ”due to human-caused global warming, similar events are no longer rare, and are expected
to become even more frequent with further warming.“
19
   As of October 16, 2024, bad weather had affected 1,438,627 people (195,697 households) and caused 391 deaths across the country. Damage included the collapse of 152,232 houses, the destruction of 242 classrooms,
and the loss of 25,728 head of livestock (OCHA Niger Flash Update # 2).
20
   The Eastern Plains, also known as the national breadbasket, is located at the Maradi–Zinder basin. Its primary-sector value chains are cowpeas, millet, sorghum, peanuts, nutsedge, onions, livestock, and fish.
21
   Eighty percent of the system is informal, with vehicle ownership limited to one truck per person. There are a limited number of commercial companies operating an average fleet of 30 trucks and organized into unions.
22
   World Bank Group. 2025. InfraSAP Niger.
23
   There is a relatively high concentration of all-weather roads along the southern border with Nigeria and the axis connecting Zinder with the export hub of Magaria. Districts along these routes have accessibility indices
exceeding 25 percent, with urban centers such as Maradi and Zinder nearing full accessibility at 100 percent. This underscores the importance of these districts for trade routes and their higher development status, supported
by established agricultural production zones.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Page 5
             The World Bank
             Southern Niger Connectivity and Integration Project (P179770)


                                                   Figure 2 – Road Conditions and Financing Needs along the RN1 Basin




9. The RN1 is under increasing pressure from climate change impacts. The increasing frequency and intensity of flooding
events and extreme temperatures are accelerating the deterioration of RN1. The vulnerability and degradation of road
infrastructure pose significant challenges for both agropastoral logistics and access to secondary city markets in Niger. The
frequent occurrence of extreme climatic events contributes to the structural failures of the already fragile and aging road
network, underscoring the need for urgent rehabilitation and improved maintenance planning. The RN1’s most vulnerable
sections are critical to its all-season accessibility. While certain sections are in good condition and others are undergoing
rehabilitation, there are still sections that require significant capital expenditure. The Maradi–Zinder section has been
identified by the Government of Niger as its highest priority due to its high risk to climate change,24 overall bad existing
condition and crucial role in sustaining both the local and national economy. The condition of the RN1 sections and their
associated financing needs are illustrated in Niger suffers from infrastructure deficits that have been detrimental to
primary-sector value chains, especially in the Eastern Plains. About 95 percent of domestic and foreign trade is
transported by roads. Niger’s trade system is informal, with fragmented transport services; the lack of professionalization
and formalization of the transport and logistics sector, combined with a weak regulatory environment and a lack of
transparent procedures, results in low competitiveness. A combination of inadequate road infrastructure and logistical
challenges results in economic losses, food shortages, and high spoilage rates in Niger's most productive agropastoral
zones.
10. Poor road quality, high transport costs, and cumbersome border-crossing procedures hinder agropastoral trade,
access to basic social services, and deepens inequality and poverty among RHC and non-RHC. The road network
comprises approximately 22,787 km of roads, of which under 25 percent are paved (along primary links and trunks), with
a national average Rural Access Index of 38.1 percent, with southern Niger exhibiting considerably higher levels of
connectivity compared to the northern regions. In some areas, unpaved roads become impassable during the rainy
season, which coincides with the peak period when RHC transports their farm produce to markets or to storage facilities.
The lack of roadside emergency assistance further compounds this challenge. Poor quality roads lead to higher
transportation costs due to the resulting increased fuel consumption, vehicle wear and tear, and higher maintenance

24
   In 2024, as of September 4, the Ministry of Humanitarian Action and Disaster Management registered a total of 710,767 people impacted by flooding in Niger. Maradi and Zinder were among the most affected regions,
with 96, 526 people affected in Zinder alone. Health and education infrastructure were impacted by floods, limiting access and forcing the relocation of critical medical equipment to prevent damage. Classrooms were also
used as shelters for displaced people. The lack of adequate sanitation increased the health risks for the population during the floods. Floods destroyed 13,289 hectares of crops, killed 17,979 head of livestock, and destroyed
approximately 21,145 tons of food, contributing to food insecurity in affected regions (source: UNICEF; ReliefWeb; FloodList).



                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page 6
            The World Bank
            Southern Niger Connectivity and Integration Project (P179770)


requirements. Conversely, the limited extent of paved roads in the country impacts the conditions under which goods are
transported to remote areas and exacerbates accessibility gaps. This predominantly impacts rural communities under the
pressure of refugee inflow, limiting access to basic social services and markets to promote agropastoral value chain
activities, which are a major source of livelihood for RHC. Frequent border closures and stringent customs regulations
disrupt the flow of trade and create uncertainty for traders.
11. Figure 2. Driven by climate change adaptation as its main objective, the project aims to strengthen Niger’s resilience
to climate shocks by upgrading and rehabilitating the Maradi–Zinder section of the RN1 and selected feeder and rural
roads in the region to climate-resilient standards25 and supporting the adoption of climate-resilient road asset
management practices.
12. Despite road maintenance reform efforts,26 financial sustainability as well as annual maintenance planning and
execution remain a key sectoral challenge. Managed across several institutions, namely the Road Network Management
and Monitoring Directorate (DGSR), the Road Maintenance Fund (FER), the Project Management Agency for Road
Maintenance (AMODER), and the Road Maintenance Audit Organization (CACER),27 coordination and programming are
hindered by insufficient sector revenue and underperforming road asset management systems. Road maintenance faces
significant challenges due to a combination of factors, including: a vast and deteriorated road network; extreme weather
conditions; limited financial resources; capacity constraints; planning delays; and governance and contractual
management issues.28 This conjunction of factors has resulted in maintenance backlogs and an accelerated continuous
loss of road asset value. Equally challenging, investment priorities and funding are frequently directed toward
reconstruction rather than targeting maintainable sections of the road network that would maximize the value for money
in a constrained budget environment vulnerable to climate change.
13. A transition to medium-term planning and multi-year contracting for routine and periodic road maintenance can
improve investment efficiency. This approach would create greater efficiency and effectiveness of road maintenance
operations, ensuring better infrastructure quality and connectivity in Niger, as well as strengthening preparedness and
response for urgent works due to climate change impacts. However, this requires the DGSR to transition from the current
reactive approach, which prioritizes reconstruction and rehabilitation, to proactive risk-informed strategies that
emphasize climate resilience and extend the lifespan of assets. The recently established Second Generation Road
Maintenance Fund29 managed by FER collected only about US$20 million30 to partially finance a US$75 million annual
program (2024) of periodic and routine maintenance and emergency works for the total network.31 However, while the
road reform process currently stipulates that 90 percent of the revenue allocation is to be dedicated to road maintenance,
only about one third of the funds collected in 2022 were allocated to FER, while the remaining stayed in treasury.
Furthermore, AMODER was only able to commit approximately 50 percent of the available resources through an inefficient
annual contracting approach. To further advance Niger’s road asset management reform agenda, it is essential to
institutionalize additional funding streams, enhance programming robustness, and improve contract management.
Addressing CACER’s annual and past audit recommendations for strengthening internal controls and performance could
also significantly enhance the effective implementation of road reform and maintenance quality in Niger.
14. Improved climate-resilient road connectivity and subregional trade facilitation would enhance opportunities
between Niger and Nigeria. Trade between Niger and Nigeria is vitally important to regional economic integration. In

25
   Climate-resilient standards address current and projected extreme heat, sandstorms, droughts, and flood episodes, as well as changing rainfall patterns, and include the use of nature-based solutions, soft measures, and
innovative technology for (i) systems planning and financing; (ii) engineering and design; (iii) operations and maintenance; (iv) contingency programming; and (v) institutional capacity and cooperation.
26
   According to the provisions under Directive No. 11/2009/CM/UEMOA on harmonization of road maintenance strategies in West African Economic and Monetary Union (UEMOA) member states, Niger’s road maintenance
cycle has four distinct stages: (i) financing; (ii) programing; (iii) implementation and monitoring; and (iv) audit and verification.
27
   DGSR is tasked with collection of data and annual needs planning; FER is tasked with fund collection, appropriation, and contract payments; AMODER is tasked with procurement, supervision, and validation of maintenance
works; and CACER is tasked with auditing and validating throughout the different processes of the annual maintenance campaign.
28
   World Bank. 2025. Infrastructure Sector Assessment Program (InfraSAP) for Niger on Road Asset Management.
29
   The fund has been designed to (i) better secure road maintenance resources and (ii) introduce more accountability to road users through mandatory financial and technical audits, private sector participation in its
supervisory board, and a performance contract for the managing director.
30
   Mainly through a fuel levy, tolling fees, and fines for overloaded trucks.
31
   These funds cover less than 25 percent of the network’s routine maintenance needs and fall short of covering needed periodic maintenance to extend the life of key infrastructure.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Page 7
             The World Bank
             Southern Niger Connectivity and Integration Project (P179770)


2022, Niger officially exported US$91.6 million to Nigeria while importing $287 million.32 Southern Niger’s agropastoral
production represents an important share of the trade flows to northern Nigeria, especially for cowpeas, onions,33 and
livestock,34 as illustrated in Error! Not a valid bookmark self-reference.. For instance, Maradi and Zinder account for 45
percent of the total national production of cowpeas, with average yields of 479 kilograms/hectare and 459
kilograms/hectare respectively,35 with women serving as the main actors in their processing and selling. However, total
trade volumes and values are likely underreported, highlighting the level of informal cross-border activities and
inefficiencies in the management of formal border facilities. As such, strategic investments in the southern RN1 corridor
basin, together with surrounding feeder road connections, can unlock the economic potential of the rural catchment areas
and densely populated border areas through improved access to larger markets.
           Figure 3 – Agropastoral Products Trade Flow from Niger: Cowpeas (left); Onions (center); Livestock (right)36




15. The proposed dry port in Maradi will complement ongoing rail investments between Nigeria and Niger toward
increasing trade opportunities and potential private sector participation. Significant volumes of cowpeas, onions, and
dairy products are expected to be shipped to Nigeria from Maradi Region, which presents a prime opportunity to capitalize
on the railway linking Maradi, Niger, to Kano, Nigeria, which is fully financed by the Government of Nigeria and scheduled
for completion in June 2026.36 Coupled with the planned dry port in Maradi, this infrastructure could create a seamless,
efficient export corridor to Nigeria, eliminating last-mile connectivity challenges.37 Rail transportation offers substantial
advantages over traditional road transport as transport bulk cargo in high volumes leads to substantial economies of scale,
reducing unit transportation costs.
16. Escalating security challenges and climate-related risks have altered migration patterns in the Maradi area, further
affecting food security and financial inclusion for RHC. Despite the region’s productive agropastoral resources, food
insecurity remains a challenge, especially for RHC which suffer from poor access to essential services such as healthcare,
education, and markets. This particularly affects underserved areas in need of assistance during extreme weather events,
which can lead to food shortages and consequent humanitarian crises such as forced displacement.38 Security concerns,
particularly in border areas with Nigeria plagued by insurgency and banditry, further complicate the situation. To foster
social cohesion, it is critical to include all these communities in development projects; however, limited access to improved
technologies and finance undermines opportunities for RHC and rural communities overall. All weather road infrastructure

32
   Observatory of Economic Complexity. 2022. Nigeria/Niger. https://oec.world/en/profile/bilateral-country/nga/partner/ner#:~:text=Niger%2DNigeria%20Trade%3A%20In%202022,and%20Bovine%20(%245.36M)
33
   Women dominate the processing node of the onion value chain in Niger, as the artisanal processing of onions, including drying and crushing onions, is mainly carried out by women. They also professionally process onions,
mainly in Niamey, where they produce onion strips, powders, and purees for markets such as Senegal.
34
   About 95 percent of the total livestock products exported from Niger to Nigeria (equivalent to 2 percent of Niger’s GDP) through informal channels due to the openness of the border and non-tariff barriers (World Bank.
2017. Niger – Systematic Country Diagnostic: Priorities for Ending Poverty and Boosting Shared Prosperity. Washington, D.C. https://documentsinternal.worldbank.org/search/29166651.
35
   World Bank. 2024. Global Facility for Decarbonization of Transport (GFDT)’s Regional Decarbonization & Resilience Assessment of Rural Logistics & Accessibility in the Sahel. Component 4: Southern Niger Deep Dive. GRID
Engineers.
36
   January 2025 pre-appraisal mission discussions with the Government of Niger.
37
   A self-funded pre-feasibility study in July 2024 proposed two dry port design scenarios: a lower capital expenditure (CapEx) scenario of 5 to -7 billion FCFA and a higher CapExAPEX scenario of 27 billion FCFA, with a short-
term return on investment of 25 percent and 20 percent, respectively.
38
   For instance, Maradi faces significant displacement, though it is less severe than in other regions. Approximately 80 percent of these displaced populations are women and children, with children comprising over 55
percent. This insecurity, along with measures implemented by the Government of Niger to combat it, has crippled the region's economic activity by restricting access to productive land, fisheries, transport, and cross-border
trade.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page 8
             The World Bank
             Southern Niger Connectivity and Integration Project (P179770)


facilitates the transport of goods and services, which is essential for the economic integration of refugees. By connecting
agricultural production zones to local markets, roads help RHC engage in trade and improve their livelihoods. Improved
road infrastructure is also critical for the delivery of humanitarian aid and relief to refugees in affected areas as it ensures
that aid can reach those in need promptly, especially during emergencies. For instance, an UNHCR report39 indicates that
all three villages of opportunity in the Maradi region lack reliable all-weather road access to markets, agropastoral
production sites and essential services, which ultimately disproportionally affects refugees in the region of Maradi. While
lack of access also affects non-refugees, refugees in Niger are more likely to live in poverty compared to the host
population due to the poor economic environment, which depends on road connectivity and rural access.
17. Logistics are constrained by inefficient intermediate modes of transport as well as inadequate agglomeration
facilities. Local transport services in Niger are organized as follows: (i) from production sites to consolidation markets
(primary collection centers) using donkeys, camels, carts, or vans; (ii) from consolidation markets to large urban centers
(secondary collection centers) using vans; and (iii) from urban centers to importing countries using trucks with capacities
of 10 to 40 tons. However, 65 percent of rural transport from production sites to villages and 21 percent to markets is
done by women on foot.40 The transport of goods depends on the typology of the value chain.41 Logistical challenges
disproportionately impact women and remain numerous—they include the following: (i) an absence of cold storage
facilities for meat and fish products, leading to inconsistent meat quality and an increased risk of contamination;42 (ii) a
lack of refrigerated isothermal vehicles to maintain appropriate temperatures during the transport of fish, leading to
distribution delays, spoilage, and foodborne illnesses; and (iii) poor dry storage conditions for agricultural products that
can cause food to spoil quickly43 due to the local climate conditions. To fulfill Niger’s potential for the development of
relevant value chains, and to mitigate food insecurity, investment in constructing or rehabilitating logistics centers for
sustainable storage solutions for locally produced agricultural products can be complemented by facilitating intermediate
modes of transport mobility options.
18. The growth of a nascent logistics sector is also hampered by the lack of access to finance for informal value chain
operators and the absence of institutional coordination. In 2021, only 14 percent of the population used formal banking,
microfinance, and e-money.44 Access to banking services for the agropastoral sector also remains limited, both in absolute
terms and as a proportion of total lending.45 Similarly, a coherent financing framework that integrates commercial
borrowing and microfinance institutions is missing. Such a framework could potentially offer suitable financial products
and services tailored to informal logistics service operators and micro, small, and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs),
including women and RHC. This opportunity requires institutional coordination to facilitate stakeholder ownership
incentivized through access to capital for intermediate modes of transport and agglomeration facilities in the southern
Niger RN1 basin. This would also help stabilize food availability throughout the year and reduce the seasonal spikes in
food insecurity after harvest, as well as improve subregional flow of agropastoral products from surplus production areas
to deficit areas.
19. Niger confronts significant road safety challenges in part due to poorly maintained and aging vehicle fleets. Official
statistics from the Road Safety Agency of Niger (ANISER) reported 1,152 fatalities in 2023, though more dire assessments
by the World Health Organization (WHO) would place the annual mortality rate estimate at 6,278 people.46 Niger’s fatal
road crashes are often caused by a combination of inadequate or poor road infrastructure, unroadworthy vehicles,
excessive speeding, overloading of trucks, and poor road user behavior. Total vehicle registrations in 2020 were 354,723,

39
   UNHCR. 2021. Report on the study of market systems and value chains analysis with the perspective of improving the livelihoods of host populations and refugees in the Maradi region - November
40
   Ministry of Transport of Niger. 2015. Study on Intermediary Means of Transport for Rural Logistics (French).
41
   Cattle are often transported to livestock markets, consolidation points, and border assembly areas by foot; export of cattle to Nigeria is also done by foot. Similarly, dairy is distributed by foot, as well as by cart and
motorcycle. Conversely, sheep, goats, and other small ruminants are primarily transported using informal vans or trucks (89 percent without proper documentation), with a cost of US$4.67 per head by van and $2.4 per head
by 10-ton truck.
42
   Open-air kilichi production is laborious and time consuming, taking two or three days or longer during rainy seasons.
43
   Transporting onions can require time, taking up to 15 days, and may result in a 6 or 7 percent loss.
44
   International Monetary Fund. 2022. Financial Inclusion in Niger: Challenges and Opportunities.
45
   The Food and Agriculture Organization Corporate Statistical Database reports that commercial banks’ loan portfolio share or both agropastoral production and logistics amounted to only US$15.61 million, equivalent to 1
percent of the total outstanding loan portfolio—the lowest in the UEMOA region.
46
   WHO. 2023. Global Status Report on Road Safety 2023. Available at: https://cdn.who.int/media/docs/default-source/country-profiles/road-safety/road-safety-2023-ner.pdf?sfvrsn=dd3f54fa_3&download=true



                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Page 9
             The World Bank
             Southern Niger Connectivity and Integration Project (P179770)


with 11.7 percent being registered in Maradi and Zinder Regions. Though Niger has regulations on the import of used
vehicles, and an import age limit of five years that requires inspection, periodic inspections are poorly regulated and not
currently enforced.47 The SNCA (National Society for Automobile Control) operates one station in Niamey, which has
inspection lines for both light vehicles and heavy vehicles. The GUAN (Niger Automobile Single Window) also operates one
station with dedicated light vehicle and heavy vehicle inspection lines. However, regional directorates do not have any
technical inspection stations, relying on visual inspection when registering vehicles. Establishment of vehicle inspection
centers in Maradi and Zinder could enable a gradual improvement of the quality of regional fleet stock operating within
the RN1 basin.
Synergies with Other Programs and Projects
20. Guided by the National Strategy for Transport (2017–2025) and the National Strategy for Rural Roads, the proposed
operation focuses on building local resilient connectivity while improving access at national and regional levels. The
Ministry of Transport and Equipment (MTE)48 leads the implementation of the transport strategy, which aims to improve
the climate-resilient connectivity of Niger’s road network. This includes better connecting cities, increasing rural
accessibility for villages with over 500 inhabitants, and enhancing transport links between Niger, Nigeria, and neighboring
countries. Furthermore, the National Strategy for Rural Roads aims to contribute to the government’s objective of building
and rehabilitating 1,000 kilometers of rural roads per year to reduce the country's internal isolation. The project
complements both initiatives by investing in the RN1 catchment area between Maradi and Zinder through a “basins of
integration” approach49 to unlock the economic potential of the subregion.
21. Project-financed activities will complement and seek synergies with ongoing interventions that support critical
needs in Maradi and Zinder. Ongoing interventions financed by World Bank operations collectively aim to: (i) enhance
access to essential services, including electricity, water, sanitation, health, education, and digital connectivity, in
underserved rural areas; (ii) address poverty reduction; and (iii) support economic development, particularly through
agricultural productivity in Maradi and Zinder. The proposed project supports the objectives of these interventions by
improving resilient road connectivity between Maradi and Zinder and within the RN1 basin, thus ensuring reliable access
to these services. The proposed project will further complement investments from strategic operations while avoiding
duplication, including the following: (a) the Niger Rural Mobility and Connectivity Project (PMRC, P164498), which is
financing rural roads in selected communities, including in Maradi and Zinder; (b) the Enhancing Niger Northeastern
Connectivity Project (PACNEN, P171793), which is improving connectivity between Zinder and Agadez; and (c) the Lomé–
Ouagadougou–Niamey Economic Corridor Project (PCE-LON, P168386), which is improving regional connectivity with
Burkina Faso and Togo; (iv) the Livestock and Agriculture Modernization Project (LAMP, P179276) Multi-Phase
Programmatic Approach (MPA), which currently invests on the production, storage and processing of agropastoral goods
and on the rehabilitation of markets in Niger, including the Maradi-Zinder region; and (v) the Energy Niger Accelerating
Electricity Access Project (HASKE, P174034) MPA which also share a focus on supporting refugee populations and host
communities in Maradi through improved infrastructure access. The selection of rural roads and to be financed by this
project will be informed by the LAMP’s and HASKE’s investments to ensure all-year climate adapted connectivity and
accessibility. The synergies with these World Bank–financed transport projects and projects from other sectors are
summarized in Annex 3.
22. The Directorate General of Civil Status, Migration, and Refugees (DGECMR) under Niger's Ministry of the Interior,
Public Security, and Territorial Administration (MIPSTA) is responsible for managing civil status events, regulating
migration, and coordinating refugee protection and assistance. It oversees the registration of births, marriages, and

47
   The provisions of Article 94 of the 2017-518/PRN/MT decree of June 16, 2017, regarding the application modalities of Law No. 2014-62 of November 5, 2014, on the Highway Code stipulate: "The age of vehicles to be
imported is set by a joint order of the Minister in charge of Transport and the Minister in charge of Commerce." Similarly, the provisions of Article 15 of Law No. 2014-62 of November 5, 2014, regulate the age of all
vehicles at the time of importation. As a result, the MTE has already confirmed that the importing age limit will be set to 5 years; however, this regulation is yet to be developed and adopted.
48
   The MTE manages the development of transport infrastructure, including roads, waterways, and dry ports, as well as transport services, road safety, and regulation.
49
   “Basins of integration” is a concept that aims to invest in both hard and soft transport and logistics infrastructure within a basin and with a backbone corridor to enable the basin’s population and businesses to connect to
the regional, national, and international markets as an enabler of resilience and economic and social prosperity.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page 10
             The World Bank
             Southern Niger Connectivity and Integration Project (P179770)


deaths, formulates migration policies, and ensures the rights and integration of refugees into host communities. The
DGECMR collaborates with national and international organizations to address the needs of refugees and displaced
persons, ensuring their access to essential services and support.
23. Public sector investment in the road sector in Niger is essential, as the country currently lacks the necessary reforms
and traffic volumes to attract private investment. The current project is part of a larger program proposed by the MTE,
with a range of interventions around the rehabilitation of the RN1 basin, which has the potential to mobilize the
participation of other financial partners, including donors and the private sector. The project will also support road asset
management reform and provide extensive capacity building to ensure the viability of RN1 investments and the
sustainability of the country’s road network. The project is not expected to directly contribute to Maximizing Finance for
Development Enabling (MFD-E) and Private Capital Enabling (PCE).
     C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
 Development Objective(s) (From PAD)
 The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve climate-resilient road connectivity50 and to enable value chain
 logistics development in southern Niger.51
  Key Results
Improve climate-resilient road connectivity in southern Niger:
    • PDO indicator 1 – Direct users that benefit from and inferred beneficiaries of improved access to sustainable
    transport infrastructure and services (Number of people, gender-disaggregated, youth-disaggregated).52 Baseline: 0;
    Target:53 772,000 direct users (390,000 women; 581,000 youth); 1,412,000 inferred beneficiaries (713,000 women;
    1,059,000 youth).
    • PDO indicator 2 – Refugees, internally displaced persons and people in host communities supported with
    accessing and utilizing services and livelihoods54 (Number of people, gender-disaggregated, youth-disaggregated).55
    Baseline: 0; Target: 80,080 refugees (20,020 women; 52,850 youth); 18,697 IDPs (2,990 women; 12,900 youth);
    2,561,000 hosts excluding IDPs (1,293,000 women; 1,935,000 youth).56
    • PDO indicator 3 – Reduced travel time between Maradi and Zinder (Hours). Baseline: 5.5; Target: 4.0.
Enable value chain logistics development in southern Niger:
  PDO indicator 4 – Adoption57 of value chain development initiatives in southern Niger (Yes/No). Baseline: N; Target:
  Y.

  D. Project Description
24. Component 1: Climate-resilient improvement of Niger’s transport backbone (US$355.5 million; US$309.0 million
PBA IDA credit, US$19.5 WHR IDA credit, US$20.0 WHR IDA grant, and US$7.0 million counterpart funding). This
component benefits indirectly 80,080 refugees, 18,697 IDPs and 2,561,000 hosts excluding IDPs in the Maradi region (not
in Zinder) through the rehabilitation/construction of key roads and drainage works in the Maradi-Zinder RN1 basin to
improve climate-resilient connectivity and access to basic infrastructure, services and job opportunities towards enhanced
living conditions for displaced populations and their host communities in Niger.

50
   “Climate-resilient road connectivity” is defined as roads which are usable year-round and in all weather conditions that have also been climate risk informed in their design and operations.
51
   Southern Niger is defined as the RN1 basin around Maradi and Zinder.
52
   This indicator assesses the number of people that experience improved access to climate-resilient road infrastructure, defined as being climate risk informed in its design and operations.
53
    The population data for Maradi and Zinder Regions in Niger indicate that the ratio of women to men is 50.5 percent to 49.5 percent. Therefore, considering a 2030 total target of inferred beneficiaries of 772,861 people,
it is estimated that roughly 390, 000 are women. The population aged 0 to 24 in Niger is estimated at roughly 75 percent of the total population, so a target of approximately 581,000 youth beneficiaries is proposed.
54
   This indicator measures number of refugees, IDPs, and hosts excluding IDPs (disaggregated by gender and youth) with improved access to health centers, schools and markets and enhanced employment opportunities.
55
   The host community population does not include IDPs to avoid double-counting.
56
    UNHCR reports that 25 percent of the refugee population in this region are women, while 66 percent are youth. UNHCR also reports that 16 percent of the IDP population in this region are women, while 69 percent are
youth. The disaggregation of female and youth populations for host communities in the Maradi region is calculated using the same ratio assumed for PDO indicator 1 (i.e.,50.5 percent women and 75 percent youth).
57
    Adoption in this indicator refers to the active engagement and participation of the targeted stakeholders in the designed value chain development initiatives, leading to improvements in their institutional capacities and
plans to implement them.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Page 11
            The World Bank
            Southern Niger Connectivity and Integration Project (P179770)


• Subcomponent 1.1: Climate-resilient rehabilitation of the RN1 (US$304.0 million; US$292.0 million PBA IDA credit,
US$11.5 WHR IDA credit). This subcomponent will strengthen the resilience of Niger’s road network and the communities
it serves through the rehabilitation and upgrading to climate-resilient standards of the existing RN1 Maradi–Zinder (232.89
km) road section. A detailed climate vulnerability analysis of the project area was carried out by the World Bank58 and
identified the RN1 Maradi-Zinder Road section as its most vulnerable section to climate change, as evidenced by recent
years’ damage and indirect losses due to climate-exacerbated events. This rehabilitation and upgrade will unlock systemic
resilience at the road network by reducing climate change vulnerability in areas with high agropastoral potential and RHC
concentration, while improving all-year climate-adaptive connectivity in southern Niger. Adaptation interventions to be
implemented include mainstreaming natured-based solutions (NBS), stabilizing dunes, improving drainage structures, and
other risk reduction measures that will be reinforced during routine and periodic maintenance phases to ensure all-year
climate-adapted connectivity and accessibility.59 The project will also finance facilities for non-motorized transport (NMT)
such as cycling and walking, including pedestrian crossings, pathways, and sidewalks with solar-powered street lighting at
urban crossings following violence prevention environmental design criteria. Design-stage road safety audits will ensure
that upgraded roads integrate effective speed management strategies, including traffic-calming measures and appropriate
road safety horizontal and vertical signaling for safe and climate-resilient road connectivity. While this component will
benefit both RHC and non-RHC populations, approximately 15 percent of the indirect beneficiaries of the Maradi-Zinder
road section are part of the RHC population. Given that the RHC population will benefit from improved connectivity due
to the rehabilitation of this key road section, it is proposed that less than 5 percent of the financing needs be covered by
the WHR IDA credit. The improved connectivity to this corridor plays a vital role in enhancing the quality of life for refugees
in Niger by providing better access to essential services, economic opportunities, and ensuring their protection and
integration into the host communities. Improved corridor infrastructure helps stabilize fragile areas by enhancing the
presence of the state and integrating refugees into the national administrative system.
• Subcomponent 1.2: Climate-resilient rehabilitation/construction and upgrading of selected feeder and rural roads
and construction of drainage systems within the RN1 basin (US$33.0 million; US$5.0 million PBA IDA credit, US$8.0 WHR
IDA credit, US$20.0 WHR IDA grant). This subcomponent will strengthen the resilience of the Niger’s road network and of
communities served through financing the rehabilitation and upgrading to climate-resilient standards of approximately:
(i) 25 km of feeder roads connecting to the RN1 Maradi–Zinder section; and (ii) 165 km of rural roads connecting to the
rural hinterland of the RN1 basin in the Maradi–Zinder regions. These roads will be selected following a climate risk-
informed prioritization methodology that considers their contribution to the resilience of the road network,
complemented by GIS analyses and consultations with community groups, particularly women and RHC, taking into
account their specific mobility needs (better lighting, pedestrian pathways, and roads that better connect villages and
existing health facilities and markets); and (iii) construction of 50 km of concrete block gutters in areas with high flood
exposure, deploying the high labor intensity (HIMO) method.60 About 85 percent of the feeder and rural roads to be
financed by this project will be rehabilitated/constructed to connect areas populated exclusively by RHC with agricultural
production sites, health facilities, schools and markets, including connecting better Niger’s only three villages of
opportunity Chadakori, Dan Daji and Garin Kaka, as well as other RHC within the Maradi region. It is estimated that 80,080
refugees, 18,697 IDPs and 2,561,000 hosts excluding IDPs will directly benefit from enhanced access and all-weather
connectivity, and this will lead to increased trade and economic potential of the region. This is particularly important for
refugees who may rely on small-scale businesses or agriculture for their livelihoods. This subcomponent will support local
communities utilizing the HIMO approach to create jobs directly benefiting RHC. The project will finance a professional
certification training program in construction and drainage maintenance, enhancing job prospects beyond this project for
at least 2,500 refugees and 500 host community members, focusing on women and youth. Additionally, it will provide

58
   The proposed project was further informed by the Climate Risks and Resilience and Adaptation Options Appraisal Report funded by the Global Center on Adaptation to improve the climate resilience of road infrastructure
and one of the Global Facility for Decarbonization of Transport (GFDT) studies under TF0C0046 entitled Southern Niger Deep Dive, which included Maradi and Zinder Regions.
59
   See more details in Annex 2.
60
   This will further reduce climate change vulnerability on rural roads connecting areas with high agropastoral potential by following the recommendations of the GCA and GFDT climate vulnerability analysis and design
considerations to ultimately improve climate-adaptive rural accessibility in areas with a high concentration of RHC, which tend to be among the poorest and the most vulnerable to the pervasive effects of climate change.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Page 12
            The World Bank
            Southern Niger Connectivity and Integration Project (P179770)


direct employment within the project for approximately 400 refugees and 100 host community members, targeted among
the most vulnerable RHC. The HIMO approach will be applied during construction and for long-term community
maintenance. While job opportunities for this activity are limited, it will contribute to reducing flood risks in RHC areas.
The climate vulnerability–informed prioritization, as well as NMT, road safety, and climate-resilience design considerations
under subcomponent 1.1, will also apply under this subcomponent.
• Subcomponent 1.3: Climate-resilient road asset management strengthening and reform operationalization (US$17
million; US$10 million PBA IDA credit and US$7 million counterpart funding). This subcomponent will primarily support
improving governance and institutional mandates for climate-resilient road asset management. The component takes a
two-pronged approach by financing the following: (a) a technical assistance (TA) to maximize the effectiveness of the 2019
road sector reforms and institutional strengthening for road maintenance through activities to be identified during project
implementation;61 and (b) designing and implementing a multi-year contract for periodic and routine road maintenance
for a road section to be determined during implementation that meets certain eligibility criteria. The TA aims to facilitate
the transition to medium-term planning and multi-year contracting for routine and periodic road maintenance in Niger,
in alignment with the government priorities identified through the 2025 Niger InfraSAP. Key activities to be carried out
include enabling DGSR with adequate resources or delegating ARMP programming to AMODER, promoting institutional
collaboration for efficient planning, and revising the institutional architecture to support decentralization. Capacity
building will be achieved through training programs, strengthening financial and technical capacities, and improving GIS
skills. Financial and technical integration involves providing technical guidance for the modernization of the Road
Database, incorporating climate risks in maintenance programming, and diversifying maintenance financing sources.
Private sector participation will be promoted, and stakeholder engagement will align priorities for road infrastructure
development. Contracting and governance improvements include developing multi-year maintenance contract models,
and refining the M&E mechanism based on performance measures. This comprehensive approach aims to develop a
sustainable and efficient road maintenance system in Niger. Regarding the multi-year contract for periodic and routine
road maintenance program, FER will fully finance the routine maintenance and provide complementary funds for the
periodic maintenance under this contract. All support under component 1.3 will be provided with a focus on ensuring
long-term institutional sustainability. This includes the possibility of establishing the necessary capacity and framework
for future climate-resilient road asset management efficiency and programming.
• Subcomponent 1.4: Preparation of technical studies and environmental and social (E&S) instruments for priority
paved roads in southern Niger (US$1.5 million PBA IDA credit). This subcomponent will finance consultant services to
prepare technical studies and E&S instruments for the rehabilitation and upgrading of paved road sections to climate-
resilient standards, to be selected during implementation. The roads selection will prioritize RN1 basin climate-resilient
connectivity. Examples of these roads include the Zinder bypass road and the Maradi junction.
25. Component 2: Enabling environment for southern Niger basin logistics (US$4.1 million PBA IDA credit)
• Subcomponent 2.1: Design of value chains support program through rural logistics (US$2.1 million PBA IDA credit).
This subcomponent will finance consultant services to prepare studies and design a support program for agropastoral
value chains through logistics. This study will assess the feasibility of a broad range of financial instruments (e.g., blended
finance models, concessional credit lines, trade finance solutions) and may feature the use of financing mechanisms such
as credit enhancement grants that improve the credit for MSMEs, including women-led MSMEs, informal women's
groups/associations/cooperatives (including RHC informal women’s groups), and agropastoral associations; and partial
portfolio credit guarantee (PPCG). It will also cover necessary institutional arrangements and provide technical assistance
to participating financial institutions and logistics actors in southern Niger, tailored to their needs (e.g., preparing financial
documents and enhancing their capacity to manage businesses and improve returns on proposed investments).


Develop a predefined criteria in contracts of RAM; (xviii) identification of pilot projects for multi-year contracts; and (xx) refine the M&E mechanism based on performance measures and targets. .



                                                                                                                                                                                                       Page 13
             The World Bank
             Southern Niger Connectivity and Integration Project (P179770)


• Subcomponent 2.2: Support to multimodality and regional trade facilitation (US$2 million PBA IDA credit). The
subcomponent will finance consultant services to prepare technical studies and E&S instruments for: (i) a border post in
Magaria to facilitate exports; (ii) the establishment of small onion export counters in Maradi; and (iii) a dry port in Maradi.
The studies for the dry port of Maradi are expected to include a commercial feasibility assessment and a
management/operations modality.
26. Component 3: Institutional strengthening and project management (US$11 million; US$10.5 million PBA IDA credit,
US$0.5 WHR IDA credit)
• Subcomponent 3.1: Institutional strengthening (US$4 million; US$3.5 million PBA IDA credit, US$0.5 WHR IDA credit).
This subcomponent finances road safety motorization management through: (i) consultant services to conduct a vehicle
inspection system audit and to prepare the technical and E&S instrument for two modern vehicle inspection centers in
Maradi and Zinder; and (ii) the construction of such facilities. It will also support the MTE, the Ministry of Economy and
Finance (MEF), the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (MAE), the Ministry of Commerce and Industry (MCI), the Ministry
of Water, Sanitation, and Environment, and the Road Safety Agency of Niger (ANISER) to finance equipment, software,
consumables, and staff capacity building related to the integration of climate change considerations into the planning,
design and implementation of project activities. Lastly, the WHR credit will finance activities to strengthen the institutional
capacity of the ministries involved in the implementation of the project, including direct support to the MIPSTA’s DGECMR,
including: (i) strengthening the capacity of central and decentralized administration officials in the field of refugee
management and support to host populations; and (ii) specific long-term trainings in refugee management. The support
to MIPSTA’s DGECMR will result in better security measures and legal frameworks for refugees, which are essential for
their protection and integration. The Government of Niger, with support from the UNHCR, has implemented measures to
protect refugees and ease their integration, such as improving registration and revising national procedures for
determining refugee status, and this activity will further support these efforts.
• Subcomponent 3.2: Project management (US$7 million PBA IDA credit). This will finance costs associated with the
following: (i) provision of relevant technical assistance,62 training and equipment (including software), and financing of
Operating Costs; (ii) implementation of safeguard measures, including financing of resettlement compensation for the
rehabilitation of the Maradi–Zinder road section of the RN1; (iii) future Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for the feeder
and rural roads and drainage; and (iv) the provision of technical assistance and training for the implementation and close
monitoring of the environmental and social instruments and mitigation measures included in the ESCP, including the
preparation and implementation of the SEA/SH action plan(s); (v) the establishment and implementation of a grievance
redress mechanism for channeling and managing Project-related complaints, and the carrying out of communication
activities regarding the Project activities.
27. Component 4: Contingent emergency response component (CERC) (US$0.0 million). A Contingent Emergency
Response Component is included in the project in accordance with Investment Project Financing (IPF) Policy, paragraphs
12 and 13, for Situations of Urgent Need of Assistance and Capacity Constraints. This will allow for rapid reallocation of
IDA uncommitted funds in the event of an eligible emergency as defined in OP 8.00. A CERC Manual will guide the
activation and implementation of the CERC, and an Emergency Action Plan will be prepared to confirm activities and
financing for a specific event.
     @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate




62
 This includes consulting services for: (i) project fiduciary support, environmental and social monitoring, and project management assistance; and (ii) monitoring and evaluation (M&E) activities for data collection,
monitoring, and reporting related to the project indicators.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page 14
       The World Bank
       Southern Niger Connectivity and Integration Project (P179770)


 Legal Operational Policies                                                               Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                              No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                        No


Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts


The environmental and social risks and impacts of project activities are related to the rehabilitation of the road sections
and the proposed economic activities. The full extent of these risks and impacts are not known at this stage but a
comprehensive ESIA to assess the potential risks and impacts and identify mitigation measures and assess the
acceptability of any potential residual impacts will be carried out. On the environmental side, the potential risks and
negative impacts are related to: (i) Resource efficiency and pollution prevention and management (sourcing of raw
materials for civil works, water and energy use, GHG emissions, dust, noise, potential contamination of water sources
due to spills and run-off of petroleum products, infiltration into storage areas and improper disposal of fuels, (ii)
Occupational and Community health and safety (potential injuries to workers, spread of diseases from labor camps,
GBV); (iii) potential loss of vegetation and biodiversity during civil works and preparation of sites, quarries areas for
materials, and higher demand of fuelwood by workers; and (iv) potential impact of civil works and excavations on
cultural heritage. The full extent of the social risks is not yet known. An ESIA will be undertaken during preparation to
gather important information regarding demographics, economic activities, GBV/SEA risks and security concerns. The
results will be used to inform project design and the preparation of safeguard instruments. However, it should be noted
that the contextual risks in certain of the project area are quite high. This will impact both the ability of the Bank to visit
the project area and our capacity to provide implementation support and safeguard compliance verification. Alternative
ways to ensure that these risks are adequately mitigated and can be monitored are being explored. For example, the
feasibility of a TPM or hiring a local NGO to assist with community engagement are under consideration.

 E. Implementation
 Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
28. The project's institutional structure includes a Steering Committee, a Technical Committee, and a Project
Coordination Unit (UCP) under the MTE. The day-to-day implementation of activities is undertaken by participating
agencies. The MEF represents the government on financing issues and will guide the use of counterpart funds, particularly
to ease the mobilization and allocation of counterpart funds for sustainable road maintenance. Additional key ministries
include the MIPSTA, the MAE, the MCI, the Ministry of Public Health, Population, and Social Affairs (MSPPAS), and the
Ministry of Hydraulics, Sanitation, and the Environment (MHAE).
29. At the national level, the MTE oversees the project, with a Steering Committee that is chaired by the Minister. It
will provide general strategic direction and oversee project execution. It also approves the project’s annual work programs
and budgets. This committee will be established through a government act issued by the Prime Minister and will constitute
an effectiveness condition.
30. A Technical Committee, led by the Secretary General of the MTE, will monitor technical implementation, along
with technical experts from the MTE and other supervising ministries. It will be responsible for daily technical
supervision, annual work plan supervision, and the implementation of all project components and activities to ensure the


                                                                                                                          Page 15
            The World Bank
            Southern Niger Connectivity and Integration Project (P179770)


project achieves its objectives, outputs, and outcomes. This committee will be established through a government act
issued by the MTE within three months after effectiveness.
31. The project will be supported by sectoral ministries to ensure ownership, high quality engagements and build long-
term capacity. At the sectoral level, management committees will be established to coordinate activities through Project
Teams represented in the Technical Committee. The Project Teams will be formally constituted and operationalized before
project effectiveness and will be responsible for implementing the project activities according to Table 1.
Table 1 – Scope of the Project Teams
      Sector Activities                                                                                         Responsible Entities
       National and
                                            General Directorate of Public Works and Infrastructure (DGTPI), in coordination with the
      secondary road
                                            MIPSTA’s DGECMR, the National Environmental Assessment Office (BNEE), and other
     improvement and
      drainage works                        stakeholders
          Rural road                        General Directorate of Rural Roads, in coordination with the MIPSTA’s DGECMR, the BNEE, and
        rehabilitation                      other stakeholders
         Institutional
     support and pilot of
                                            DGTPI/DGSR, in coordination with collaboration with the AMODER, the FER, and the CACER
      road maintenance
          program63
        Value chain
       development                          UCP, in coordination with the Directorate of Agriculture, the Directorate of Animal Industry,
         (logistics,                        DGECMR, the Directorate of Railway, Maritime, and River Transport, customs authorities, the
     multimodality, and                     DTR, and other stakeholders
     trade facilitation)
32. The Project Coordination Unit attached to the Secretary General of the MTE through the Road Transport Directorate
(DTR) will oversee fiduciary aspects (procurement and financial management), environmental and social risk
management, security risk considerations, M&E, and coordination among stakeholders. It is already operational and
ensures project implementation coordination with the ongoing WB Lomé–Ouagadougou–Niamey Economic Corridor
Project (PCE-LON, P168386). The UCP will also supervise the technical aspects of the project for all components and ensure
the implementation of project activities within their respective institutional mandates, along with sectoral and regional
management committees to coordinate activities.
33. The existing Project Implementation Manual (PIM), M&E Manual, and Project Procedures Manual (setting out
guidelines and procedures for administrative tasks, financial management, grant disbursement, and other fiduciary
arrangements), currently used for the PCE-LON, have been satisfactorily updated. The implementation capacity of the UCP
is deemed as adequate to implement the PCE-LON and this Project; however, the UCP would benefit from the recruitment
a SEA/SH specialist proposed as an effectiveness condition, and of an additional accountant proposed as a dated covenant
(to be completed three months after effectiveness). The PIM directly designates this UCP for this operation.
     @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
     CONTACT POINT

     World Bank


63
   Considering the legal status of AMODER, FER and CACER and their critical role in the implementation of the pilot road maintenance program (including FER’s obligation to provide counterpart funding for the periodic and
routine maintenance activities), the government of Niger has agreed to adopt a quadripartite implementation/collaboration agreement between the MTE and these three agencies. This agreement needs to be adopted no
later than six months after the effective date. This agreement needs to capture their roles and responsibilities in the implementation of the Project activities, including compliance with relevant environmental and social
requirements under the ESCP.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Page 16
     The World Bank
     Southern Niger Connectivity and Integration Project (P179770)


 Guillermo Diaz Fanas
 Transport Specialist

 Aguiratou Savadogo-Tinto
 Senior Transport Specialist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 Republic of Niger
 Ali Mahaman LAMINE ZEINE
 Premier Ministre et Ministre de l'Economie et des Finances
 finances@finances.gov.ne

Implementing Agencies
 Ministère des Transports et de l'Equipement
 Salissou MAHAMAN SALISSOU
 Ministre des Transports et de l'Equipement
 MT@ne.gov

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                     Guillermo Diaz Fanas, Aguiratou Savadogo-Tinto

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:                Jean-Francois Marteau                 10-Mar-2025

Country Director:                        Han Fraeters                          04-Apr-2025




                                                                                             Page 17
