Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Balochistan Water Security And Productivity Improvement Project (P179227)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                            Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      ( ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 08/17/2023 | Report No: ESRSC03740




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Sep 05, 2023                                                                         Page 1 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Balochistan Water Security And Productivity Improvement Project (P179227)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                 Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P179227                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)      BWSPIP                      2024

                     Operation Name            Balochistan Water Security and Productivity Improvement Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries          Region                      Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Pakistan                  Pakistan                                SOUTH ASIA                  Water


                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Board Date

                     Ministry of Economic      Balochistan Irrigation Department       12-Feb-2024                 15-Apr-2024
                     Affairs

                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date




Public Disclosure
                     21-Jun-2023               100,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     increase access to water for productive use, improve efficiency of water use and improve water supply service delivery
                     in selected locations of Balochistan


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The project will be structured around the following key components: Component A – Improving water availability,
                     productivity, and efficiency in the Kachhi plains and in Pishin-Lora Basin Component B – Improving Water Supply Service
                     Delivery in Quetta Component C – Project management, technical assistance and capacity strengthening The project will
                     also include a CERC to be activated in case of emergency during project implementation


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings

                    Sep 05, 2023                                                                                                   Page 2 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Balochistan Water Security And Productivity Improvement Project (P179227)



                     Geographically, the project will be located in three distinct zones of Balochistan (i) upper high lands (ii) lower high lands
                     and (iii) plains. The project will intervene in the Kacchi plains, the canal areas and the Quetta sub-basin of Pishin-Lora,
                     Zhob and in Loralai. The upper highlands fall mainly in districts Zhob, Qila Saifullah, Pishin, Quetta, Ziarat and Kalat. The
                     lower high lands are located in the south-eastern Balochistan except eastern part of Kacchi, the southern end of Dera
                     Bugti and Nasirabad districts. Balochistan has relatively small area of plains as compared to its total area. They include
                     the Kacchi plain, situated to the south of Sibi and extending into the Nasirabad division, the southern part of Dera Bugti
                     district and narrow plain area along the Makran coast stretching from Kacchi to the Irananian border. Mountains
                     dominate the terrain and valley floors and piedmont plain make up only 15% of the landscape. Winters of the lower
                     highlands vary from extremely cold in the northern districts to mild conditions closer to the makran coast. Maximum
                     precipitation falls in the northeastern areas with annual average rainfall ranging from 200 to 500 mm. Evaporation rates
                     are higher than the precipitation and generally vary from 72 to 76 inches per annum. The Quetta region is known for its
                     extensive juniper forests. Juniperus excelsa and Juniperus macropoda are the dominant species found in the area.
                     Pistacia khinjuk, a species of pistachio tree, is native to the region. It is an important tree for local communities
                     providing edible nuts and valuable timber. The Kacchi plain is dominated by various species of thorny shrubs such as
                     acacia species, prosopis cineraria (known as kandi or khejri), and desert grasses like Cenchrus ciliaris commonly known
                     as buffel grass and tamarisk trees. Recurring droughts and destructive flash floods are expected to worsen with climate
                     change leading to devastating impact on people, properties and agricultural production.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     Balochistan Irrigation Department (BID), will be the lead implementation agency and currently implementing WB
                     financing (BIWRMDP, P154255 safeguards category A). BID will rely on the existing Project Management Unit (PMU) of




Public Disclosure
                     BIWRMDP and have dedicated Environmental and Social Development Specialists (ES &SD) with demonstrated
                     knowledge and experience of implementation of WB safeguard policies and instruments. However, BID has not
                     implemented any project under ESF. The ES & SD Specialists in PMU of BIWRMDP have received ESF training provided
                     by the WB under ESF capacity development program. The PMU will be supported by two additional PIUs created for
                     implementation. One PIU for component A, on flood protection, community-led irrigation and watershed management
                     will be established in Sibi and manage all project activities in Kacchi plains. Keeping in view the current staff strength in
                     PMU and project activities, and scale of project components to be implemented by BID, additional E&S staff would be
                     required. The second PIU will be created at WASA to implement all the activities under component B on improvement
                     of Quetta water supply and sanitation. It has been assessed that WASA does not have any E&S staff or existing capacity
                     to implement World Bank’s ESF. The current project mainly involves rehabilitation/restoration of existing water supply
                     infrastructure with possibility of provision of new connections to the disfavored communities and construction of new
                     water storage tanks in Quetta and infrastructure to harvest and store water storage tanks in Quetta and infrastructure
                     to harvest and store water associated with seasonal rainfall and floods. It is recommended that one Environmental
                     Officer and one Social Officer will be hired in each PIUs for Comp A & B. The E&S staff in PMU will provide trainings to
                     the E&S officers hired in both PIUs to build their capacity.


                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                           Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                    Substantial

                    Sep 05, 2023                                                                                                          Page 3 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Balochistan Water Security And Productivity Improvement Project (P179227)



                     The project will have overall positive impacts and will help to improve the water security and increase the economic
                     productivity of water use in the selected areas of Balochistan Province. Moderate to large scale civil works will be
                     involved. The anticipated environmental risks and impacts associated with project activities include generation of
                     spoil from excavation activities, dust generation caused by excavation and running of project vehicles on unpaved
                     roads/tracks, air emissions released by construction machinery and vehicles, soil and ground/surface water
                     contamination caused by release of contaminants at the worksites and discharge of domestic sewage and other
                     wastewaters from temporary facilities, solid waste generation, clearing of natural vegetation and trees, CHS risks
                     associated with movement of heavy machinery and dump trucks, OHS risks associated with the construction works,
                     security of workers and equipment, concerns related to river water quantity and quality. In case of the flood water
                     detention, water harvesting and ground water recharge, other than construction-related impacts described above,
                     the potentially adverse impacts include reduction of surface water flow during the rainy season for lower riparian
                     areas. Other than the impacts associated with civil works, it is anticipated that there will be a temporary impact on
                     supply and quantity of water to the communities during implementation of component-B. During the up gradation of
                     pumping stations and rehabilitation of pipeline systems under sub-component B2, it is anticipated that the water
                     quality may deteriorate, and health and safety risks may arise. The environmental risks anticipated from the project
                     interventions are considered substantial due to moderate to large scale civil works, reduction of water availability in
                     lower riparian area, multiple locations of project activities, overall security situation in the province, institutional
                     capacities, and general implementation challenges.
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating                                                                                            Substantial
                     Component A will support development of priority flood protection, flood water detention, dispersion structures,
                     leaky weirs and water harvesting structures requiring moderate civil works. Associated social risks with the civil works



Public Disclosure
                     may include impacts on land, labor management/labor influx, OHS and community health and safety. Further,
                     Balochistan is highly tribal (the term ‘tribal’ referring to ethnic groups living in Balochistan who have communal land
                     ownership, and collective code of living; however, none of these groups meet ESS7 criteria for IPs.) with FCV context,
                     affecting resource sharing decision making as experienced in the BIWRMDP. Decisions on water infrastructure are
                     usually taken through tribal engagement and consultations, with limited government control. Inter and intra tribal
                     conflicts also impact equity and targeting, which is the primary social risk associated with Component A. BIWRMDP
                     has focused extensively on this, and has made considerable headway in gaining trust, through constant engagement
                     with tribes of Nari and Porali basin. The project will capitalize on the same. Under Component B, interventions to
                     improve water supply in Quetta, may carry risks of equity in water supply, water quality, and ensuring access to
                     increased water. Other social risks include the risk of GBV/SEA/SH across project activities. The IA, while having
                     extensive experience with World Bank projects has not implemented a project under ESF. Given these, the social risk
                     rating is Substantial at the concept stage.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                      Relevant

                      ESS1 is relevant, environmental risks and impacts are mainly associated with the civil works. Most of the project
                      activities will be carried out in the built environment and is not likely to have a significant impact on the biodiversity.
                      Positive impacts include flood & erosion control, recharge of ground water and increase in water supply. Social risks

                    Sep 05, 2023                                                                                                          Page 4 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Balochistan Water Security And Productivity Improvement Project (P179227)



                      are those related to land, labor management and CHS, equity, targeting and violence including water supply and
                      quality. Component B, by design, is responsive to the social challenges of water scarcity, quality, maintenance and
                      inequity and has been incorporated to mitigate these circumstances. Other social risks include GBV/SEA/SH, and social
                      exclusion of the most vulnerable segments of society. a framework approach will be adopted & an ESMF will be
                      prepared followed by subproject ESMPs prepared by borrower, consulted on, reviewed and cleared by the Bank, and
                      publicly disclosed before appraisal.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                        Relevant

                      This standard is relevant. A Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) will be prepared by BID and WASA to provide a
                      framework for effective and inclusive engagement with stakeholders. Cultural context requires strategic and
                      continuous engagements with stakeholders especially tribes of Kacchi plains, and residents of low income, slum areas
                      of Quetta. The SEP will ensure proper consultations conducted throughout the project preparation to inform the
                      project design. The guidance provided in SEP will cover resource sharing formulae, awareness raising, mass
                      communications campaigns, and trainings for small and medium farmers/farming communities, watershed
                      communities etc. The SEP will also include a grievance redress mechanism (GRM) to receive and facilitate the
                      resolution of concerns and grievances. The GRM will be designed to receive and respond to SEA/SH incidences as per
                      the requirements detailed in the SEA/SH Action Plan to be developed by the project.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                              Relevant

                      This standard is relevant. Project involves direct workers, contracted workers, primary supply workers and community




Public Disclosure
                      workers. The main risks to labor are related to construction activities. These risks include unsafe and unhealthy
                      working conditions, risk of accidents and incidents at workplace, lack of compliance with local OHS rules and
                      regulations, exposure to hazardous materials, gender-based violence, sexual exploitation and abuse, sexual
                      harassment, child labor and forced labor. Labor management procedures (LMP) will be developed by the
                      implementing agency by project appraisal and will apply to all types of labor involved in implementing project
                      activities. The LMP will be prepared and disclosed, containing provisions on working conditions, code of conduct,
                      employment terms and agreements, compensation, grievance mechanism for project workers and other labor related
                      issues.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                               Relevant

                      ESS 3 is relevant. The project civil works will generate dust, air emissions, noise, solid and construction waste, and can
                      contaminate soil, ground and surface water. During the rehabilitation of water distribution pipelines, the quality of
                      water can deteriorate. Project will help to control floods and soil erosion, afforestation as part of rangeland
                      management which will help to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. Sub-component A3 will promote climate
                      smart agricultural techniques and will improve on-farm and field irrigation water efficiency and farm productivity. The
                      project is not anticipating procurement of pesticides but will focus on delivering targeted training on IPMP. Pest
                      Management Training plan will be made part of ESMPs. The ESMF/ESMPs will include provisions for proper
                      installation, operations, and maintenance (O&M) of solar panels along with measures for proper disposal of batteries
                      under Comp B.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                               Relevant


                    Sep 05, 2023                                                                                                        Page 5 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Balochistan Water Security And Productivity Improvement Project (P179227)



                      ESS4 is relevant. The Project is likely to involve significant contact between Project workers and beneficiary
                      communities, particularly in the case of agreeing on scheme designs, water sharing, inter and intra tribal shares, etc.
                      Such contact may result in the exploitation of economically disadvantaged, flood affected, or otherwise vulnerable
                      community members. Ill-planned community/tribal engagements can lead to conflicts which can be violent for the
                      communities and the Project workers. Project may also result in transmission of infectious diseases, GBV, SEA and SH
                      during civil works. Other risks include physical harm to communities due to accidents, traffic incidents and security. A
                      security management plan developed for Balochistan Integrated Water Resources Management and Development
                      Project (BIWRMDP) will be extended to the Project to deal with security risks. The security measures identified in this
                      plan will be part of work contracts in sensitive areas.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                   Relevant

                      ESS5 is relevant. Land acquisition maybe required for improving flood controls, improved drought resilience, etc. and
                      for improving water supply, sanitation and security. For Component B, specific attention needs to be given to
                      identifying and fencing Anti Encroachment Drives in Quetta city and to highlight areas with encroachments. Public
                      lands in Quetta city in particular and Balochistan as a whole are loosely documented, and hence heavily encroached.
                      An investigative study to ascertain these risks will be conducted during the project preparation phase, which will lead
                      into the preparation of a Resettlement Framework (RF).

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                    Relevant
                      Resources




Public Disclosure
                      Project is not likely to have a significant impact on the biodiversity and forests as most of the
                      construction/rehabilitation activities will be carried out in the built environment. Clearing of vegetation and cutting of
                      trees is expected for construction works. Furthermore, the project will not introduce any alien or non-native species of
                      flora or fauna in the project area and only selective native species of trees and shrubs will be planted as part of
                      rangeland management. The potential impacts on biodiversity due to water harvesting is not anticipated at this stage
                      as only part of seasonal flood water will be utilized in the project. The water will not be extracted from rivers and no
                      flow modification of perennial rivers is expected additional water will come from reductions in non-revenue water
                      (mainly leakages), rainwater harvesting and recharge of aquifers. Appropriate measures will be proposed in
                      ESMF/ESMPs. Hence ESS6 is relevant to the project at concept stage.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      This standard is not relevant. No indigenous people meeting the ESS7 criteria are present in the Balochistan province.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                         Relevant

                      ESS8 is relevant. Some of the districts included in Kacchi Plains and Quetta have culturally significant sites and
                      resources. However, the specific information on exact location and scale of project activities are not known at this
                      stage and it is unknown if there will be any impacts on these sites due to the project. The ESMF would, in any event,
                      evaluate any direct or indirect impacts of project activities on these cultural assets or determine the presence of any
                      others that may not be listed but could be of significance. Depending on the exact determination of the nature and
                      scale of the project risks and impacts, mitigation measures or a plan will be prepared as part of the ESMF/ESMP and

                    Sep 05, 2023                                                                                                       Page 6 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Balochistan Water Security And Productivity Improvement Project (P179227)



                      will be incorporated into the ESCP as required. Procedures for handling chance finds will be made part of the ESMF/Ps
                      to handle any such situations during project implementation.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                               Not Currently Relevant

                      Not relevant for this project as no FI are being considered in the project delivery.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                      No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                               No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                          No
                       Not considered at concept stage


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                             No
                       None yet.




Public Disclosure
                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     Prior to appraisal, the following documents need to be approved and disclosed:
                     i.       Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Framework (RF)
                     ii.      Labor Management Procedures (LMP)
                     iii.     Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)
                     iv.      Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)
                     v.       ESMPs/RPs for subprojects identified and with ready design under component A and B.

                     Possible issues to be addressed in the Borrower Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP):
                     •       Implementing the SEP during project implementation
                     •       Implementing the LMP that have been developed for the Project including a GRM for Project workers
                     •       Prepare RPs in accordance with RF if involuntary land acquisition will be needed.
                     •       Preparation of ESMPs and RPs for sub-projects for which details were not available during project preparation.
                     •       Implementation of ESMPs
                     •       Hiring of one Environmental Officer, one Social Officer in each PIU to support implementation of environmental
                     and social standards requirements.
                     •       Capacity building and strengthening of the PMU and PIUs
                     •       Provisions for managing unanticipated impacts.



                    Sep 05, 2023                                                                                                   Page 7 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Balochistan Water Security And Productivity Improvement Project (P179227)




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                     Task Team Leader:        Yoro Sidibe                          Title:         Senior Water Specialist

                     Email:                   ysidibe@worldbankgroup.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                   Yoro Sidibe

                     Practice Manager (ENR/Social)          Christophe Crepin Recommended on 17-Aug-2023 at 17:50:46 EDT



Public Disclosure
                     ADM Environmental Specialist:          Rahat Jabeen

                     ADM Social Specialist:                 Babar Naseem Khan




                    Sep 05, 2023                                                                                            Page 8 of 8
