Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Sustainable Power And Irrigation For Nigeria Project (P179684)




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review
                                                              Summary
                                                           Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                      (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


      For Official Use Only
                                                Date Prepared/Updated: 07/25/2024 | Report No: ESRSA03601




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Jul 26, 2024                                                                 Page 1 of 22
                                  The World Bank
                                  Sustainable Power And Irrigation For Nigeria Project (P179684)



                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                         A. Basic Operation Data

                         Operation ID           Product                              Operation Acronym    Approval Fiscal Year

                         P179684                Investment Project Financing         SPIN                 2025
                                                (IPF)

                         Operation Name         Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project

                         Country/Region         Beneficiary country/countries       Region                Practice Area (Lead)
                         Code                   (borrower, recipient)

                         Nigeria                Nigeria                             WESTERN AND           Water
                                                                                    CENTRAL AFRICA

                         Borrower(s)            Implementing Agency(ies)            Estimated Appraisal   Estimated Board
                                                                                    Date                  Date

                         FEDERAL               Federal Ministry of Water            25-Jul-2024           26-Sept-2024




For Official Use Only
                         GOVERNMENT            Resources and Sanitation
                         OF NIGERIA

                         Estimated             Total Project Cost
                         Decision Review
                         Date

                         31-May-2024           500,000,000.00


                         Proposed Development Objective

                         The Project Development Objective is to strengthen dam safety and improve management of
                         water resources for hydropower and irrigation in selected areas of Nigeria.


                         B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or
                         Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF Policy, para. 12?
                         No


                         C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                         [Description imported from the PAD Data Sheet in the Portal providing information about the key
                         aspects and components/sub-components of the project]
                         The proposed Sustainable Power and Irrigation in Nigeria (SPIN) project will address nexus of
                         water-food-energy challenges in Nigeria through investments in irrigation, dam safety, and

                        Jul 26, 2024                                                                                 Page 2 of 22
                                  The World Bank
                                  Sustainable Power And Irrigation For Nigeria Project (P179684)


                         hydropower planning. By mobilizing water for productive purposes, optimizing the use of existing
                         storage facilities, and enhancing hydropower planning capacity, the project will make integrated
                         management of water, energy and food more effective and resilient in Nigeria. It will do this by
                         investing in the management and resilience of multipurpose water infrastructure as well as
                         strengthening the policies, institutions, capacities, and inter-governmental cooperation required.
                         The proposed project includes four main components:1) Institutional strengthening and capacity
                         building for water resources management; 2) Irrigation Modernization; 3) Improvements in Dam
                         Operations and enhancing dam safety; and 4) Project Management.


                         D. Environmental and Social Overview
                         D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                         [Description of key features relevant to the operation’s environmental and social risks and
                         opportunities (e.g., whether the project is nationwide or regional in scope, urban/rural, in an FCV
                         context, presence of Indigenous Peoples or other minorities, involves associated facilities, high-
                         biodiversity settings, etc.) – Max. character limit 10,000]
                         The SPIN project will be implemented across Nigeria, focusing on rural agricultural areas. Nigeria
                         has the highest population in Africa, and the seventh highest in the world, with an estimated
                         population size of 211,639,374. The country is divided into six geopolitical zones, which include
                         36 states and a Federal Capital Territory (FCT). There are 774 local government areas (LGAs) in




For Official Use Only
                         Nigeria. Northern Nigeria is characterized by fragility, conflict, and violence, endemic poverty,
                         low literacy, degradation of natural resources, poor agricultural productivity, high increase of
                         climate change vulnerability, desertification, and weak institutional capacity. Southern Nigeria is
                         characterized by heavy rainfall, erosion, and flooding issues. The country has abundant human
                         and natural resources, significant arable landmass, and other endowments, including mineral
                         and natural resources.
                          The country is characterized by large patches of natural lowland and montane forests,
                         important freshwater wetlands, savannas, high-altitude plateaus, and mangroves. The diversity
                         of the country's natural ecosystems ranges from semi-arid savanna to mountain forests, rich
                         seasonal floodplain environments, and rainforests. The river Niger and river Benue are the major
                         rivers in Nigeria; the two rivers, with other tributaries, form a confluence in Lokoja.
                         There are diverse environmental health-related risks such as air pollution, water pollution, oil
                         spillage, urbanization deforestation, desertification, erosion, and flooding (due to inadequate
                         drainage systems) caused mostly by anthropogenic activities. These challenges pose a threat to
                         the lives and properties of Nigerians, and to a large extent, the biodiversity making up the
                         country’s ecosystem. At the top of local and global concerns is the pollution as a result of oil
                         spillage in the Niger Delta, prominently affected community area being Ogoniland.

                         Nigeria's economy is rapidly growing, leading to increased energy demand. Nigeria is a major oil
                         producer in Africa but faces challenges such as insufficient power generation and high energy
                         poverty. The Government is working to diversify the energy mix, improve infrastructure, and
                         invest in renewable energy. Nigeria relies on petroleum, natural gas, hydroelectricity, and solar
                         energy. Efforts are being made to expand access to rural areas and improve energy efficiency.
                         The Project will prepare a hydropower master plan to support the Government for a future
                         hydropower investment planning. A Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) will


                        Jul 26, 2024                                                                               Page 3 of 22
                                  The World Bank
                                  Sustainable Power And Irrigation For Nigeria Project (P179684)


                         be prepared in line with the hydropower master plan and Environmental and Social Impact
                         Assessment (ESIA) that assesses the risks and impacts of the sub-project.

                         Despite Nigeria’s agricultural potential, agriculture activities are mainly at a small to medium
                         scale. Agriculture has the potential to create jobs, improve standards of living, and restore
                         stability to the area. Agriculture is a crucial component of the Nigerian economy and the largest
                         employer, with a significant portion of the population involved in the industry. However, there is
                         still room for improvement in expanding the scale with the potential to compete in international
                         markets, particularly in major crop production. It is on this backdrop that the SPIN project is also
                         focused on agriculture development.

                         Insecurity remains a major concern, particularly in Northern Nigeria, due to ongoing incidents
                         involving Boko Haram, Islamic State West African Province (ISWAP), community rivalries and
                         Farmer-Herder conflicts. These attacks primarily occur in the Grain Belt and other regions that
                         could greatly benefit from the SPIN project. Southern Nigeria also experiences issues of farmer-
                         herder conflicts and uprising from secessionist groups in the Southeast and South-south regions
                         of the country.

                         Based on the current assessment of the project areas of intervention, there are no presence of
                         any known indigenous groups or other minority groups that meet the requirements of ESS7.




For Official Use Only
                         D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and
                         Social Risks and Impacts
                         [Description of Borrower’s capacity (i.e., prior performance under the Safeguard Policies or ESF,
                         experience applying E&S policies of IFIs, Environmental and social unit/staff already in place) and
                         willingness to manage risks and impacts and of provisions planned or required to have capabilities
                         in place, along with the needs for enhanced support to the Borrower – Max. character limit 10,000]
                         At the Federal level, both the Ministry of Water Resources and Sanitation and the Ministry of
                         Power have extensive experience implementing World Bank-supported Projects that have
                         applied both the Safeguard Policies and the ESF.

                         The SPIN project builds on the achievements, proof of concept and early lessons of the
                         Transforming Irrigation Management in Nigeria (TRIMING) Project (P123112) which it seeks to
                         scale up in other Federally-owned schemes as well as in State-owned schemes nationwide. The
                         TRIMING Project is however, implemented using the Safeguard Policies.

                         The TRIMING Project has in place Environmental, Social and Gender Officers who coordinate the
                         environmental and social (E&S) requirements at the Federal level and locally recruited
                         Environmental and Social Officers from within the catchment of the sub-project locations to
                         serve as the scheme level Safeguard officers. The River Basin Development Authorities (RBDAs)
                         are not well-staffed, even for key positions. The executive cadre of the Water User Associations
                         (WUAs) ensured compliance amongst their members with implementing pest management
                         procedures to avoid E&S impact.


                        Jul 26, 2024                                                                                Page 4 of 22
                                  The World Bank
                                  Sustainable Power And Irrigation For Nigeria Project (P179684)


                         In terms of developing E&S instruments, the TRIMING Project developed an Environmental and
                         Social Management Framework (ESMF), Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and Integrated
                         Pest Management Plan (IPMP) during the Project preparation in 2014. The TRIMING Project have
                         implemented several Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) and Resettlement
                         Action Plans (RAPs) for some of the largest irrigation schemes and dams in the country such as
                         the Bakolori Irrigation Scheme and dam, Goronyo Irrigation Scheme, and dam, ESIA with
                         Cumulative Impact for Kano River Irrigation Scheme and Tiga dam, Hadejia Barrage, Challawa
                         Gorge dam and Dadin kowa irrigation scheme and dam where they demonstrated good capacity
                         in managing E&S related issues in the project.

                         Under the SPIN Project, the Federal Ministry of Water Resources and Sanitation (FMWRS) will set
                         up a Federal Project Management Unit (FPMU) in collaboration with the Federal Ministry of Power
                         (FMP), specifically, the Dams Department and the Irrigation Department of the FMWRS and the
                         Hydropower Department of the FMP. Each representative will manage the components and sub-
                         components within their respective departments. Given the nature of the Project, there will be a
                         need for good synergy between the FWWR&S and FMP (including the Transmission Company of
                         Nigeria [TCN]), particularly in the identification/selection of dams to be included in the Project
                         and the nature of hydropower intervention and the National Environmental Standards and
                         Regulations Enforcement Agency (NESREA) because of the regulatory role they play in
                         controlling effects of dams and reservoirs in Nigeria. A similar structure will be set up at the




For Official Use Only
                         state level led by the Ministry of Water Resources in collaboration with the Ministry of
                         Agriculture, Ministry of Power, River Basin Development Agencies (RBDA) and other relevant
                         sector representatives to implement the Project.

                         The SPIN Project will be implemented through 2 models across the relevant departments of the
                         FMWRS and FMP, RBDAs and participating states. Model 1 will be implemented by the FPMU in
                         federal financed schemes that are under the RBDAs (this is similar to what is in operation by the
                         TRIMING Project). Model 2 will be implemented by the states through the SPIUs that will be
                         established. Regardless of the model employed, all SPIUs and RBDAs will engage qualified
                         Environmental, Social and Gender/GBV Officer. Security Focal Points shall be deployed from the
                         Office of the State Security Advisor to the SPIU Offices and at the FPMU.

                         The Project’s geographic coverage will be nationwide; however, states’ participation is subject to
                         expression of interest and compliance with the eligibility and readiness criteria agreed for the
                         project. To date, 31 states drawn from all the six geopolitical zones of Nigeria have submitted
                         documentation expressing interest to participate in the project. The FMWRS and World Bank will
                         use the documentation to jointly assess interested states and group them into category 1 and
                         category 2 states. Category 1 states would represent all states opting for SPIN Model 1 and
                         category 2 represents states opting for SPIN Model 2. For both categories, states would be
                         assessed against a set of demonstrated Commitment, Integrity and Capacity (CIC) criteria as set
                         out in the PAD.

                         The Project has proposed under Component 1, the development of Hydropower master plan
                         development, which will attract private sector investments. For dam safety, the National
                         Environmental (Dams and Reservoirs) Regulations, 2014, establishes the NESREA as the


                        Jul 26, 2024                                                                              Page 5 of 22
                                  The World Bank
                                  Sustainable Power And Irrigation For Nigeria Project (P179684)


                         regulator to control the effects of dams and reservoirs on the environment and human health in
                         Nigeria. However, there is need to strengthen the system by establishing a proper dam safety
                         program. The SPIN activities on dam safety are being designed to strengthen this system.
                         NESREA is also a member of the Project Steering Committee, and all dam safety activities will be
                         informed and consulted with NESREA as well. The project will not overhaul dam safety
                         legislation but will assist the government in preparing dam safety guidelines and technical
                         standards.

                         Since the Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) is utilized for the SPIN Project, capacity
                         needs to be built up for all the implementing agencies, with a specific focus on the FPMU,
                         relevant government departments, and the Irrigation schemes officers (Project Managers,
                         Engineers, Environment and Social Officers, etc.). On this premise, an ESF capacity-building
                         support activity was introduced into a Component 4 of the SPIN project. In addition, SPIN ESMF
                         suggests a detailed capacity building mechanism for all tiers in the implementing partners.




For Official Use Only
                         II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                         A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                      High


                         A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                               High
                         [Summary of key factors contributing to risk rating, in accordance with the ES Directive and
                         the Technical Note on Screening and Risk Classification under the ESF – Max. character limit
                         4,000]
                         The environmental risk rating at Appraisal stage is “High. , due to (1) rehabilitation works on
                         large dams (12 out 20) and (2) financing and preparation of feasibility and E&S studies for a
                         greenfield dam. h The project aims to increase the safety of selected dams in Nigeria with a
                         view to strengthen the dam safety management system in the country. The scope is to
                         improve the safety of dams and associated appurtenances of 10 to 20 prioritized dams. At
                         Appraisal the dams that will be under the project have not been selected and prioritization of
                         existing large dams are now conducted by the government and and there could be risk of of
                         dam failure.. However, based on the project scope and activities, three dams were selected at
                         random and Environmental and Social Due Diligences (ESDDs), were conducted in March and
                         April 2024, found that all such sub projects can be categorized to range from Low to
                         substantial risks activities and they indicated the activities will only involve brownfield
                         rehabilitation works of existing irrigation facilities and earth embankment dams. The project
                         will not cover any greenfield construction works of new dams; however, a greenfield dam may
                         be designed / studies prepared. A SESA will be conducted for the Hydropower Master Plan
                         (HMP) while at a later stage, ESIAs would be required to be conducted for individual projects


                        Jul 26, 2024                                                                             Page 6 of 22
                                  The World Bank
                                  Sustainable Power And Irrigation For Nigeria Project (P179684)


                         identified in the HMP such as the greenfield dam previously mentioned. The civil works to be
                         conducted under the dam safety (Component 3) will be rehabilitation works of the dam body
                         and/or rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage works (Component 2), t 2 will also be limited to
                         rehabilitation and expansion of already existing irrigation fields with a focus on rehabilitation of
                         canals, repairs of broken walls, desilting of blocked field channel for proper water
                         management, etc. The potential risks associated with the irrigation works are mainly
                         construction related, which include dust due to earth movement and construction activities, as
                         well as construction vehicle movement on unpaved access road; construction debris/waste,
                         wastewater discharges including stormwater runoff from disturbed areas, and effluents from
                         worker camp operations, siltation in the dam without effective sediment management
                         resulting into issue of dam safety, flooding and thus impacts at the downstream population.
                         Other risks are Occupational health and safety of workers which include physical hazards, slips
                         and falls, work at height and moving machinery. Since the rehabilitation activities proposed
                         will be carried out in areas of restricted access, therefore are not expected to have a direct
                         interface with the population around the dam sites except for impact on the community health
                         and safety from the vehicles and equipment and transportation of construction materials and
                         workers to the project sites. Although the project will not intervene in physical hydropower
                         infrastructural works, the project will support the preparation of hydropower studies for a
                         greenfield dam. The Client will be required to prepare an ESIA. upon completion of the
                         hydropower master plan, the ESIA will be used to address impacts associated with hydropower




For Official Use Only
                         master plan such as downstream water quality and flow, biodiversity loss, fish migrations and
                         community health and safety issues given the nature and scale of the identified risks and
                         impacts stated above, the spread of the project across geopolitical zones and areas with fragile
                         and climate vulnerable, the capacity and experience of TRIMING to implement ESF
                         requirements. The risks of the subproject activities are not yet fully known in the project.
                         Additionally, the capacity of the project proponents to undertake implementation of
                         environmental aspects assessed at this stage is weak given the fact that TRIMING was
                         implemented under the safeguards policies, hence the environmental risk of the project has
                         been kept “High” at the appraisal stage.
                         A.2 Social Risk Rating                                                                          High
                         [Summary of key factors contributing to risk rating, in accordance with the ES Directive and
                         the Technical Note on Screening and Risk Classification under the ESF – Max. character limit
                         4,000]
                         The social risk of the project is rated High due to the types and scale of the activities proposed,
                         which are mainly to strengthen the capacity and institutional framework of the federal, river
                         basin and state levels in Water Resources Management for dam safety, irrigation and
                         hydropower optimization, support to Water User Groups (WUGs). Most of the civil works are
                         linked to activities supporting the rehabilitation of existing dams and irrigation structures. The
                         specific dams and irrigation schemes are not yet known. However, the Project is envisaged to
                         be implemented nationwide with varied social sensitivities. The Client undertook an inspection
                         of 3 dams (Naka Dam in Benue State under the Lower Benue RBDA, Doma Dam located in
                         Nasarawa under the Lower Benue RBDA and the Wuro Keso situated in Taraba State under the
                         Upper Benue RBDA [Wuro Keso is a project of dikes built to retain River Taraba from the Tella
                         Barrage in Gasol] to understand more of the peculiarities of the dams. Major Social issues


                        Jul 26, 2024                                                                                 Page 7 of 22
                                  The World Bank
                                  Sustainable Power And Irrigation For Nigeria Project (P179684)


                         identified from the studies indicated possible legacy issues owing to incomplete compensation
                         from the Naka Dam construction, potential economic impact (about 10 burnt brick makers
                         whose livelihoods could be impacted as a result of displacement from the command area of
                         the dam downstream, about 20 fishermen whose livelihood could be disturbed if the Project is
                         carried out during the period when they are allowed to fish in the reservoir), security issues,
                         farmer-herder conflicts, labour influx risks (including sexual exploitation and abuse/sexual
                         harassment [SEA/SH]). For potential dams under SPIN, it is critical that screening and
                         consultation on legacy issues are carried out as part of the selection process. Impact on
                         downstream water users will be properly assessed with the preparation of Environmental and
                         Social Assessments, Emergency Action Plans, Livelihood Restoration Plans (LRPs) and
                         Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs). Land acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement is a potential
                         impact as the Project will expand irrigable area within the existing schemes to include new
                         areas and will require preparation and implementation of RAPs (including payment of
                         complementation, in cash or kind or provision of alternative livelihood). Besides, general
                         population, including vulnerable and disadvantage individuals (Women, Persons with
                         Disabilities, marginalized groups) could also be impacted if not well consulted and included as
                         Project beneficiaries. Other potential social risks identified include inadequate coordination
                         between concerned agencies; labour influx during the rehabilitation works which can lead to
                         potential SEA/SH issues; security risks since the project is implemented in areas of fragility,
                         conflict and volatile settings, which was also an issue under TRIMING Project; community




For Official Use Only
                         health and safety issues; grievance as result of poor implementation of the interventions and
                         compensation (where it becomes relevant). Poor stakeholder engagements can also impact
                         the project if stakeholders are not adequately consulted, this is also relevant in the
                         hydropower investments planning. Although the hydropower investment is focused only on the
                         planning (no funds will be allocated to construction of infrastructure associated with
                         hydropower investments), ESIA(s) (or potentially RAPs) will be developed which will assess the
                         social risks associated with the future investments. Other risks may potentially involve land
                         use issues, physical/economic displacements, downstream impact to water users, community
                         health and safety issues, and labour risks.
                         [Summary of key factors contributing to risk rating. This attribute is only for the internal
                         version of the download document and not a part of the disclosable version – Max. character
                         limit 8,000]



                         B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being
                         Considered
                         B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards
                          ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and                                 Relevant
                          Social Risks and Impacts

                          [Explanation - Max. character limit 10,000]




                        Jul 26, 2024                                                                             Page 8 of 22
                                  The World Bank
                                  Sustainable Power And Irrigation For Nigeria Project (P179684)


                          The Project Development Objective is to strengthen dam safety and improve management of
                          water resources for hydropower and irrigation in selected areas of Nigeria. The project will not
                          finance any new dam construction but focus only on rehabilitating existing dams and their
                          associated structures. Planned activities are neither intended to alter the original schemes,
                          change their nature, nor expand dam extents to make them appear as new or different
                          schemes. The main activities that will be done on the dam rehabilitations include measures for
                          seepage reduction, hydrological and structural safety measures, strengthening the main dam
                          body and foundation, improving basic dam facilities and dam safety instruments, and
                          preparing an Emergency Action Plan (EAP), an Operation and Maintenance manual including
                          operational protocols and dam health monitoring and reporting protocols and an
                          instrumentation plan for dam safety. The project will promote the inclusion of safety protocols
                          that address safety concerns specific to women and persons with disabilities in EAPs,
                          preparing and implementing sediment management plans through bathymetric surveys
                          feasibility studies, piloting of institutional models and plans for treatment of upstream
                          drainage catchments with the construction of sediment retaining check-dams and river bank
                          protection structures; and application of nature-based solutions to dam/reservoir operation
                          and management. Dam safety assessment, including adequate investigation, survey, and risk
                          analyses, as required under ESS4, will be undertaken at the early stages of project
                          implementation before dam rehabilitation/safety enhancement plans are prepared/finalized
                          along with the recommendations of the Client-led Dam Safety Review Panel of the respective




For Official Use Only
                          dams. Further details are provided in the World Bank Good Practice Note on Dam Safety.
                          Structural measures such as seepage reduction, hydrological and structural safety
                          enhancement measures (e.g., rehabilitation /installation of additional spillways,) rehabilitation
                          of foundation damages (cavities, piping, etc.), strengthening of concrete, masonry, and
                          embankment structures of dams, and improving associated facilities with dams (e.g. access
                          roads). The environmental risks anticipated under the project arise from the fact that the
                          project will be implemented across Nigeria, with erosion, and flooding issues but is clearly
                          focusing rehabilitation works of existing irrigation facilities and earth embankment dams. The
                          potential environmental risks associated with the project activities are mainly construction
                          related to construction debris/waste, wastewater discharges including stormwater runoff from
                          disturbed areas, siltation in the dam without effective sediment management resulting into
                          issue of dam safety, high risk of dam failure, flooding and thus impacts at the downstream
                          population. The other risks such as occupational Health and safety of workers, disposal of
                          construction wastes, air, noise and water quality, in case of most of the sub projects to be
                          anticipated. The irrigation intervention will focus on rehabilitating and upgrading water
                          distribution and conveyance systems aimed at increasing irrigation command area through the
                          construction and rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage civil works, expanding the irrigable
                          area within the existing schemes to include new areas. Other non-structural activities include
                          developing master plan for the hydropower sector, feasibility studies, ESF documents and
                          Institutional strengthening and capacity building for Water Resources Management and
                          Hydropower Planning. The Hydropower sub-component will involve preparing a Hydropower
                          master plan, with hydropower projects decided jointly by FMWRS and FMP. Candidate projects
                          proposed by the ministries will be assessed using selection criteria. The SPIN Project will
                          finance an international transaction adviser, with assistance from local consultants, to help
                          prepare the master plan. The plan will involve stakeholder engagement, characterization of


                        Jul 26, 2024                                                                               Page 9 of 22
                                  The World Bank
                                  Sustainable Power And Irrigation For Nigeria Project (P179684)


                          water resources, environmental and social conditions in the watersheds, identification of a
                          portfolio of hydropower projects, analysis of hydropower capacity and energy capabilities,
                          including potential for hybrid operation of solar energy resources with hydropower, and
                          strategic decision-making to rank hydropower and multipurpose projects. For the hydropower
                          master plan that will be financed by the Project, the Client will prepare due diligence
                          assessments including Aa Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) will be
                          conducted during the implementation phase to systematically examine the environmental and
                          social risks/impacts and issues associated with the government's policies, plans, or programs
                          in the water resources and power sector for now and in the future. Additionally, the Client
                          under the SPIN Project will conduct a feasibility study and at a later stages, individual projects
                          identified under the master plan would be subject to site-specific full assessments such as
                          ESIAs, or RAPs (where relevant) to assist in development planning, program identification for
                          PPP procurement, project design, construction tendering, construction, and operation. The
                          potential social risks and impacts include land take, physical and economic displacements,
                          legacy issues from poorly conducted compensations, impact on physical cultural heritage,
                          labour influx risks, complaints on the impact of works during farming season, farmer-herder
                          issues that may affect the level of work done, and insecurity issues that may be exacerbated
                          as a result of the project activities. To put these risks in context, the Client led the
                          development of ESDDs by assessing three dams across three different states. The ESDDs
                          indicated that the rehabilitation proposals primarily relate to minor/moderate civil works,




For Official Use Only
                          confined to the existing Dam body within the dam area, and impacts are also localized,
                          resulting in moderate to substantial risks. Major environmental and social risks identified
                          include construction-related risks, potential land take, economic displacements, and labour
                          influx risks. ESIAs and ESMPs were recommended for the dams with substantial to moderate
                          impacts, respectively. Specific studies such as EAPs were also recommended to address flood
                          warnings, downstream impacts, and Occupational Health and Safety Plans (OHSMP). RAPs and
                          LRP was also recommended. The Client has prepared an extensive Environmental and Social
                          Management Framework (ESMF) that outlines the procedures from the screening of activities
                          to the finalization of appropriate mitigation instruments for all types of impacts and risks. The
                          ESMF also incorporates preparation, approval, and monitoring protocols to track ESMPs and
                          provides institutional capacity-building approaches for the project staff to ensure effective
                          management of environmental and social implementation. As part of the SPIN project
                          procedure for E&S, all participating states will be required to conduct ESDD for all sub-project
                          dams to identify the risk category. For all low to moderate risks, a standard ESMP with relevant
                          guidelines will be prepared and implemented. However, large dams will require a full ESIA
                          regardless of the scope of rehabilitation works. For all sub-projects categorized as Substantial
                          to High Risk, a ESIA will be conducted. The SEA/SH Action Plan will outline preventive and
                          response measures for SEA/SH incidents. Insecurity is a critical challenge in the potential
                          locations. The SPIN Project will leverage on the already established security risk management
                          structures with the full participation of government partners. The Borrower will be required to
                          develop Security Management Plans (SMPs) for each state during Project implementation.

                          ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                Relevant

                          [Explanation - Max. character limit 10,000]


                        Jul 26, 2024                                                                               Page 10 of 22
                                  The World Bank
                                  Sustainable Power And Irrigation For Nigeria Project (P179684)


                          ESS10 is relevant to and will apply to all its components and subcomponents. Stakeholder
                          engagement is critical for social and environmental risk management, project sustainability,
                          and success. Key stakeholders under the project include: Affected/Interested parties: Host
                          Communities, Community members, landowners, tenants and leaseholders, landless or
                          squatters, farmers and livelihood-dependent households, reservoir fishers, Livestock owners,
                          including herders, wage laborers and workers, small-scale business owners, socially vulnerable
                          people, Farmers associations, Women farmer Groups, Community Associations and Interest
                          Groups, such as WUAs, fishermen, Academics/Think Tanks, Media. Other Interested
                          Parties/Influential Parties: The Federal Ministry of Water Resources and Sanitation (FMWRS),
                          the lead implementing ministry for the project, the Federal Ministry of Power (FMP) and
                          Participating State Governments (PSG). As well as Traditional leaders and NGOs/CSOs, Private
                          sector Investors, organizations, among others. Disadvantaged or vulnerable individuals or
                          groups, Elderly people above the age of 65, female-headed Households (widows), Persons with
                          disabilities, People living in extreme poverty, internally displaced persons and orphans. Other
                          affected persons who do not fit into the above categories may still experience adverse impacts
                          on their livelihoods, assets, or well-being due to the project. They may face disruptions in
                          access to essential services, changes in social dynamics, or loss of community cohesion,
                          requiring tailored support and assistance to mitigate negative consequences. The
                          Stakeholders Engagement Plan (SEP) incorporates views from all stakeholders through
                          meaningful consultations and feedback to improve the environmental and social sustainability




For Official Use Only
                          of the project and its activities, enhance its acceptance, and significantly contribute to
                          successful project design and implementation. The SEP is clear, concise, and focuses on the
                          project while identifying its stakeholders. Stakeholder engagement was held in languages
                          suitable for the beneficiaries to understand and explain the opportunities for public
                          consultation and provide a deadline for comment and feedback. The proposed project will
                          leverage and upgrade the existing TRIMING Grievance Mechanism (GM) (to reflect ESF
                          requirements) to address the concerns and needs of beneficiaries. Given that the GM was
                          prepared under the operational policy, it will be revised to reflect the provision of the ESF
                          before the implementation of project activities. Feedback from early engagement with
                          stakeholders informed the project design and preparation, and this will be an iterative process
                          throughout the project's life. Based on the engagement activities thus far and the profile of the
                          stakeholders identified, certain engagement activities have been planned for the project going
                          forward and are articulated in the SEP. The SEP will be updated periodically based on a
                          monitoring process and stakeholders' feedback throughout the project's life. The SEP will
                          continue to ascertain key project risks as the communities see them, ensure that the concerns
                          of communities are acknowledged and addressed, inform better designs for the project, and
                          identify the best monitoring mechanisms of activities. Furthermore, the SEP will be updated by
                          the Client to include awareness raising for communities regarding the risks associated with the
                          project activities, the use of security personnel should the project engage one (as it was with
                          TRIMING) and to inform them of grievance arrangements should they wish to raise grievances
                          related to security personnel. The project will have two main GMs: the project-level GM, which
                          will be managed by each participating State Project Implementation Unit (SPIU), and the
                          labour-specific GM for project workers (all direct workers, contracted workers and community
                          workers). The GMs will include SEA/SH protocols, including multiple channels to initiate a
                          complaint and specific procedures for SEA/SH, such as confidential and anonymous reporting


                        Jul 26, 2024                                                                              Page 11 of 22
                                  The World Bank
                                  Sustainable Power And Irrigation For Nigeria Project (P179684)


                          with safe and ethical documenting of SEA/SH cases to ensure responses to potential SEA/SH
                          incidents follow ethical standards and international best practice. GRM operators will be
                          trained on how to respond to SEA/SH-related reports.

                          ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                     Relevant

                          [Explanation - Max. character limit 10,000]

                          The SPIN project activities will include different categories of workers. Direct workers. This
                          category of workers will comprise a mix of civil servants from various relevant line ministries
                          who have been deployed or have a legal transfer of their employment or engagement to the
                          Project, full and part-time, under the Federal Project Management Unit (FPMU). Direct workers
                          will also comprise project staff hired as consultants. These workers make up the FPMU team,
                          consisting of the Federal Project Coordinator, Technical Officers, Procurement Officer, Internal
                          Auditor, Accountant, Financial Officer, Monitoring & Evaluation Officer, Gender Officer,
                          Environmental Safeguard Officer, Social Safeguard Officers, and Communications Officer,
                          among others. The specific project activities and their locations have yet to be decided, and
                          thus, the exact personnel load for each project activity and staffing level could not be
                          determined at the time this A Labour Management Procedure (LMP) was prepared. However,
                          based on the experience of the TRIMING project, upon which the SPIN project will be scaled up,
                          the Direct worker will record an estimate of 110 Direct workers. Contracted workers. The




For Official Use Only
                          categories of contract workers to be involved in the Project will be consultant service providers
                          who will provide implementation support services to the FPMU in preparation of documents
                          and support, and the staff of contractors, suppliers, and contractors to be subcontracted to
                          arrange for design and civil works, and for construction and supervision activities which the
                          SPIN project may implement. Preference will be given to local workers, including those who
                          may come from host communities to work as unskilled labours. Learning from the experience
                          of the TRIMING project, it is estimated that between 300 to 500 contracted workers will be
                          engaged under the SPIN project. Community Workers. This category of workers is made up of
                          labourers sourced from communities where projects are meant for community development,
                          and the labour is a contribution by the community. For the SPIN project, this category of
                          workers may include community members, members of the producer organisations, farmers,
                          women-led farmers, Water Users Association, and/or Project beneficiaries who are mobilised
                          by the local contractors for community works, whether paid or unpaid. While applying ESS 2
                          provisions for community workers, the Project will pay specific attention to sensitisation and
                          training of community workers on OHS risks, as well as the technical knowledge and
                          behavioural awareness to minimize the risks. Primary Supply Workers. A primary supply
                          worker is a worker employed or engaged by a primary supplier, providing goods and materials
                          to the Project, over whom a primary supplier exercises control for the work, working
                          conditions, and treatment of the person. It can only be anticipated that the SPIN project will
                          have such employees, as this cannot be stated precisely. If the Project has such workers, they
                          shall be treated as the other workers in the sense that they shall be required to observe all
                          necessary regulations, i.e., signing a Code of Conduct. Timing of Labour Requirement The
                          direct workers at FPMU will generally be required to work full-time and around the year for the
                          project duration. Other experts/consultants will be hired on demand throughout the project
                          period. The timing for the involvement of contracted workers will be known at later stages;

                        Jul 26, 2024                                                                              Page 12 of 22
                                  The World Bank
                                  Sustainable Power And Irrigation For Nigeria Project (P179684)


                          however, they will be engaged depending on the implementation of various project
                          interventions. Based on available information. The key labour risks that may be associated
                          with the Project: These include, for example: • The conduct of hazardous work, such as
                          working at heights or in confined spaces, use of heavy machinery, or use of hazardous
                          materials • Likely incidents of child labour or forced labour, concerning the sector or locality •
                          Likely presence of migrants or seasonal workers • Risks of labour influx or gender-based
                          violence • Risk of SEA/SH • Possible accidents or emergencies, concerning the sector or
                          locality • General understanding and implementation of occupational health and safety
                          requirements • Security risk. The management of workers' vulnerability threats and identified
                          labour risks for the SPIN project will be governed by the ESS2, ILO standards, Labor Act, and
                          other national regulations. The policies include: - Non-discrimination and equal opportunity for
                          all workers. - Clear terms and fair employment conditions. - Safe working conditions and
                          standard facilities for all workers. - Conducting job hazard and risk assessments. - Providing
                          adequate work tools and protective equipment. - No child or forced labour. - Free of Sexual
                          Harassment, Sexual Exploitation, and Gender-Based Violence. - Grievance redress mechanisms
                          for workers. - Right of association and collective bargaining. - Proper documentation of
                          management in line with OHS requirements. - Reasonable termination procedures. -
                          Continuous consultation with workers for the improvement of labor management procedures
                          will be ensured. Grievance Mechanism for Workers This LMP recognizes the significance of
                          having a structured process for managing complaints and has established a grievance redress




For Official Use Only
                          mechanism for workers. Thus, a GM will be implemented to ensure that all workers' complaints
                          are dealt with appropriately, corrective actions are implemented, and the complainant is
                          informed of the outcome. Contractor Management The LMP will form an integral part of the
                          bidding documents to be issued to consultants/contractors and shall form part of the awarded
                          contracts to all consultants/contractors. Selection of consultant/contractors shall be made
                          according to the World Bank procurement procedures and occupational health and safety as
                          provided in the World Bank standard procurement documents and applicable Nigerian laws.

                          ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and                                 Relevant
                          Management

                          [Explanation - Max. character limit 10,000]

                          Natural resources such as water, sand, gravels, earth, and chemical compounds are required
                          to rehabilitate and upgrade the irrigation and drainage infrastructure and rehabilitate and
                          improve hydropower and storage works. Commitment to adoption of guidelines for optimal use
                          of required resources following the 3R (recycle, recovery, reuse) principle of pollution
                          prevention will be taken by the borrower. The use of technicality and financially feasible and
                          cost-effective options will be promoted as part of mitigation measures to avoid or minimize
                          impacts related to poor soil conservation and management, nutrient management, solid waste
                          management, water management, pesticides and fertilizers management, and air quality.
                          These risks are construction stage and can be handled as per standard practices of camp site
                          management and appropriately planned Muck and Debris Disposal. Going forward it has been
                          recommended to have Resource conservation Plan and Muck Disposal Plan under the ESMP.
                          Construction Management guidelines for material handling and spills into the water especially
                          paint etc. will be incorporated in the ESMP/ ESMF. The WBG Environmental Health & Safety

                        Jul 26, 2024                                                                              Page 13 of 22
                                  The World Bank
                                  Sustainable Power And Irrigation For Nigeria Project (P179684)


                          Guidelines and Good Practice Note on Environmental Health & Safety Approach for
                          Hydropower Project will also be considered in the project, including a Water Resources
                          Management Plan as part of the ESIAs to assess impact on water use. Notwithstanding that
                          cleaner alternatives would be sought for energy generation, the project will also estimate GHG
                          emission, also, the project could have an impact on the water availability during construction
                          and/or operation, and for that a water management plan will also be prepared. The project has
                          also prepared a Pest management plan to manage the risk of pesticide used resulting from the
                          activities supported by the project. Construction Management guidelines for material handling
                          and spills into the water especially paint etc. will be incorporated in the ESMP/ ESMF.

                          ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                       Relevant

                          [Explanation - Max. character limit 10,000]

                          Dam safety assessments of all dams are required as per ESS4 and would come early in the
                          project implementation as the basis for the dam rehabilitation plans. Nigeria has over 600
                          dams that were constructed for irrigation and hydropower purposes. Under the SPIN Project,
                          the Government has indicated the rehabilitation of about 10 –20 dams (categorized as medium
                          to large dams, earth filled with multipurpose use) that will potentially be rehabilitated, but the
                          exact dams are not yet known. The dam safety status of these dams are also not yet known.
                          The SPIN Project will strengthen the capacity and improve the management framework for




For Official Use Only
                          dam owners, operators, and agencies overseeing dam safety to help address dam safety risks.
                          The project will help develop comprehensive dam safety guidelines consisting of standards,
                          operational manuals, and rules to help dam owners and operators comply with dam safety
                          requirements. The Government will conduct a Dam Safety Portfolio Risk Analysis to rank the
                          dams according to the safety risks they impose on the public and environment. This will
                          further identify and prioritize the preliminary order of the rehabilitation program accounting for
                          the dams that present the most significant dam safety risks. Within the portfolio of proposed
                          dams to be supported under the SPIN project, the Government conducted Dam Panel of
                          Experts (DPOE) reports of 3 dams (Doma Dam in Nasarawa State, Naka Dam in Benue State
                          and Wuro Keso retention pond (also known as Gassol) in Taraba State) to inspect the status of
                          the dams. Project Screening Templates were also developed which indicated potential
                          activities to be conducted to rehabilitate the dams. To understand the potential environmental
                          and social risks and impacts of the 3 dams, the client prepared Environmental and Social Due
                          Diligence (ESDD). The ESDD rated the dam sub-project activities from low to substantial risks
                          based on the level of proposed work to be carried out and the impact on environmental and
                          social sensitivities, which are mainly localized. Potential impacts include Occupational health
                          and safety and community health and safety. None of the dams investigated appeared to be
                          near any protected area. However, settlements located downstream of the dams, and
                          members of the communities should be well-consulted if the dam is supported under SPIN. The
                          ESDD for the Naka dam revealed some existing legacy issues and the presence of burnt brick
                          in the command area of the dam, whose livelihood could be potentially impacted if SPIN
                          selects the dam for rehabilitation. The ESDD recommended preparing a detailed ESIA and
                          Livelihood Restoration Plan/Resettlement Action Plan. Furthermore, if these dams are selected
                          under the SPIN Project, additional assessments will be carried out to include dam safety
                          assessments, site-specific environmental and social assessments, and other specific plans,

                        Jul 26, 2024                                                                               Page 14 of 22
                                  The World Bank
                                  Sustainable Power And Irrigation For Nigeria Project (P179684)


                          including EAPs. As part of the SPIN project procedure for E&S, all participating states will be
                          required to conduct ESDD or environmental and social audit for all sub-project dams to identify
                          any liability, legacy issues, how cumulative impacts were considered for the dam construction
                          and operation model, environmental flow and the risk category. The studies will be done using
                          the dam safety plans that will be developed under SPIN Project. The Bank will clear all ESDD
                          and the assessment of the risk profile. Wherein it has been described as low to moderate risks,
                          a standard Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) with relevant guidelines will be
                          prepared and implemented; however, all large dams will require a full ESIA regardless of scope
                          of civil works at those specific sites. For all sub-projects categorized as Substantial to High risk
                          will undergo a detailed ESIA. During the implementation of the project, dam rehabilitation
                          plans will be developed to include structural and non-structural measures identified through
                          investigative studies, including systematic hydrological assessment, stability analysis,
                          geotechnical studies, and geophysical and bathymetric surveys. The dam safety plans will also
                          include dam safety instrumentation plans, emergency action plans, operation and
                          maintenance plana Flood Forecasting and Warning System for Dam Operations (FFWSDO), and
                          integrated reservoir operations, including streamflow forecasting for climate-resilient dam
                          management, as well as an operation and maintenance plan. The dam operators will ensure
                          the security and safety of personnel. As security has been indicated as a pertinent risk, each
                          State PIU will develop Security Management Plans (SMPs) before carrying out the respective
                          sub-project activities. Furthermore, Security Focal Points shall be deployed from the Office of




For Official Use Only
                          the State Security Advisor to the SPIU Offices. This method is in place in other Bank supported
                          Project such as Agro-Climatic Resilience in Semi-Arid Landscapes (ACRESAL) P175237. If the
                          security personnel are engaged and armed, no proceeds of the Project will be used to support
                          the procurement of firearms. In addition, their deployment will follow the requirements of ESS4
                          and adopt the World Bank’s Guidelines of the Good Practice Note on “Assessing and Managing
                          the Risks and Impacts of the Use of Security Personnel.” Overall, before deploying security
                          personnel, the SPIU shall take measures to ensure that security personnel are: 1. Screened to
                          confirm that they have not engaged in past unlawful or abusive behaviour, including sexual
                          exploitation and abuse (SEA), sexual harassment (SH) or excessive use of force. 2. Adequately
                          instructed and trained regularly on the use of force and appropriate behaviour and conduct
                          (including in relation to SEA and SH) and will adopt the Voluntary Principles on Security and
                          Human Rights as the relevant good international industry practice to meet the requirements of
                          ESS4. 3. Deployed in a manner consistent with applicable national law. The SPIU shall promptly
                          review all allegations of unlawful or abusive acts of any security personnel, take action (or
                          request appropriate parties to take action) to prevent recurrence and, where necessary, report
                          unlawful and abusive acts to the relevant authorities. In addition, accessible grievance
                          arrangements shall be made publicly available to receive and facilitate resolution of concerns
                          and grievances about the Project, consistent with ESS10 and described in the SEP. The project
                          activities pose potential community health and safety risks, such as accidents during structural
                          interventions, theft of equipment, and SEA/SH due to the influx of workers. The Project will
                          prepare a SEA/SH Action Plan.

                          ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and                                     Relevant
                          Involuntary Resettlement



                        Jul 26, 2024                                                                                Page 15 of 22
                                  The World Bank
                                  Sustainable Power And Irrigation For Nigeria Project (P179684)


                          [Explanation - Max. character limit 10,000]

                          The activities under the project will support the rehabilitation and revitalization of 40,000 ha of
                          irrigated command area across all geopolitical zones. The Federal and state schemes which
                          will be supported by the SPIN Project will be determined based on technical and
                          implementation readiness criteria agreed with the FMWRS. Given that the locations of
                          subprojects are not yet known at this stage of the project preparation, the project prepared a
                          RPF to be disclosed by Appraisal. The RPF will facilitate ESS5 requirements under the project
                          activities. The RPF aims to clarify resettlement principles, organizational arrangements, and
                          design criteria to be applied to subprojects or project components to be prepared during
                          project implementation. Once the specific locations of the subproject are identified and the
                          necessary planning information becomes available, the framework will be expanded into a RAP
                          or LRP proportionate to the potential risks and impacts of the project. While the project is not
                          expected to entail significant land acquisition and displacement, its activities that will cause
                          physical and economic displacement, if any, will not commence until such specific plans have
                          been finalized, approved by the Bank and prompt compensation and resettlement assistance
                          payments are made to Project Affected Persons (PAPs). The participating States shall cover the
                          cost associated with compensation and resettlement assistance. The SPIN Project will not
                          allocate funds for the construction of infrastructure associated with hydropower investment. It
                          is important to emphasize that the selected investment will undergo a comprehensive




For Official Use Only
                          screening process to assess potential impact on land use. In cases where it is relevant, the
                          Client will be required to develop a RAP in conjunction with the completion of ESIA.

                          ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management                               Relevant
                          of Living Natural Resources

                          [Explanation - Max. character limit 10,000]

                          Depending on the location of the proposed sites for irrigated command areas and the scale of
                          hydropower and storage works, habitat degradation and conversion may cause significant
                          threats to aquatic and terrestrial biodiversity. Construction of larger structures like spillway
                          may lead to cutting of larger number of fully grown trees and/or diversion of forest area and
                          changes in water flow may have impacts on aquatic ecosystems, meaning it may have high
                          risk to ecosystem service and needs to be adequately address through appropriate avoidance,
                          minimization or mitigation and compensatory measures. During the implementation of the
                          proposed hydropower master plan, Habitat degradation and conversion may occur due to
                          changes in hydrologic flow regime, dewatering river reaches, development of access routes
                          and transportation corridors, and construction material extraction. These activities may
                          adversely impact downstream water quality, like dissolved oxygen, turbidity levels, irreversible
                          biodiversity loss, fish migrations; flooding of biomass (especially forests) and resulting
                          underwater decay, and/or reservoir stratification. Desktop reviews/literatures suggests the
                          following risks attributed to dam rehabilitation - risks of habitat destruction and fragmentation,
                          loss of biodiversity, and alterations to the natural flow regimes of rivers, which can have far-
                          reaching consequences on the ecological balance were identified. The risks can be mitigated
                          using construction stage Bio-diversity Management guidelines. All the risks and impacts
                          relevant to ESS6 will be assessed as part the procedures laid down in the ESMF of the Project.


                        Jul 26, 2024                                                                                Page 16 of 22
                                  The World Bank
                                  Sustainable Power And Irrigation For Nigeria Project (P179684)


                          Early screening can improve macro-level project site selection to avoid selecting areas with
                          high biodiversity values, such as critical or natural habitat, areas with high conservation
                          values, those modified habitats that contain significant biodiversity value or provisioning or
                          regulating ecosystem services. Risks and impacts relevant to ESS6 will be assessed as part of
                          the ESAs. If required, a separate Biodiversity Action Plan will be prepared.

                          ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically                         Not Currently
                          Underserved Traditional Local Communities                                              Relevant

                          [Explanation - Max. character limit 10,000]

                          Not relevant

                          ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                Relevant

                          [Explanation - Max. character limit 10,000]

                          This standard is relevant to the project associated with chance finds of tangible and intangible
                          cultural resources. The project will not finance activities affecting cultural heritage resource
                          sites. The Borrower shall avoid impacts on cultural heritage. When avoidance of impacts is not
                          possible, the Borrower will identify and implement measures to address impacts on cultural




For Official Use Only
                          heritage in accordance with the mitigation hierarchy. Where appropriate, the client shall
                          develop a cultural heritage management plan. An environmental and social screening
                          procedure has been developed in the ESMF to identify cultural heritage and assess tangible
                          and intangible heritage in consultation with affected stakeholders. In line with national laws
                          and regulations, a chance-find procedure is articulated in the ESMF if contractors stumble upon
                          such chance-finds during project implementation.

                          ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                    Not Currently
                                                                                                                 Relevant

                          [Explanation - Max. character limit 10,000]

                          Not relevant



                         B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply
                           OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                  Yes
                           A notification to all riparian states has been sent out in April 2024 from Government of Nigeria
                           to all riparian countries through the basin commissions (Niger Basin Authority and Lake Chad
                           Basin Commission). Both NBA and LCBC have replied with No Objection.
                           OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                            No


                         B.3 Other Salient Features


                        Jul 26, 2024                                                                              Page 17 of 22
                                  The World Bank
                                  Sustainable Power And Irrigation For Nigeria Project (P179684)


                           Use of Borrower Framework                                                                           No
                           [Explanation including areas where “Use of Borrower Framework” is being considered - Max.
                           character limit 10,000]
                           This project will adopt the Environmental and Social Framework and its Environmental and
                           Social Standards rather than the borrower’s E&S framework. The required steps will be detailed
                           out in the ESCP. The Project, however, is subject to the national, state laws and approval
                           clearances (riparian notifications) as per the existing legal-institutional framework. These laws
                           will be respected, and clearances and approvals will be obtained prior to approval.




                           Use of Common Approach                                                                              No
                           [Explanation including list of possible financing partners – Max. character limit 4,000]
                           Common Approach may be considered; however, it is not clear at this stage. This will be
                           assessed further during Project Implementation.

                         B.4 Summary of Assessment of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                         [Description provided will not be disclosed but will flow as a one time flow to the Appraisal Stage




For Official Use Only
                         PID and PAD – Max. character limit 10,000]
                         The project involves the rehabilitation of existing dams and their associated structures, technical
                         studies for potential hydropower investments, sedimentation management, underutilized
                         irrigation schemes, and expansion to irrigable areas within the existing schemes. The project
                         spans various states with varying geographical conditions and environmental and social
                         sensitivities, making environmental and social considerations a high risk. The FMWRS has
                         proposed about 10 to 20 dams (categorized as medium to large dams, eathfilled with
                         multipurpose use) that will potentially be rehabilitated, but the exact dams are not fully known.
                         The dam safety status of these dams are not yet known. The SPIN Project will strengthen the
                         capacity and improve the management framework for dam owners, operators, and agencies
                         overseeing dam safety to help address dam safety risks. The project will help develop
                         comprehensive dam safety guidelines consisting of standards, operational manuals, and rules to
                         help dam owners and operators comply with dam safety requirements. Other interventions will
                         include measures for seepage reduction, hydrological and structural safety, strengthening the
                         main dam body and foundation, and improving basic dam facilities and safety instruments for
                         storing water for potable supply, irrigation, and power generation. Additionally, the project will
                         involve assessing water resources and irrigation schemes, designing and retrofitting
                         infrastructure for efficient water use, modernizing gravity systems, installing canal monitoring
                         tools, developing new conveyance infrastructures.
                         Potential environmental and social risks associated with the rehabilitation of dam and irrigation
                         schemes include dam failure, issues related to occupational health and safety of workers,
                         community health and safety issues, grievance as a result of poor implementation of the
                         interventions, compensation (where it becomes relevant), weak dam operation and maintenance,
                         emergency preparedness and potential dam failure. Poor stakeholder engagements can also
                         impact the project if stakeholders are not adequately consulted. The project is implemented in

                        Jul 26, 2024                                                                                  Page 18 of 22
                                  The World Bank
                                  Sustainable Power And Irrigation For Nigeria Project (P179684)


                         fragile, conflict-affected and volatile settings, making security risk levels equally high. The
                         capacity of staff to implement E&S measures at the state levels will vary across states and will be
                         strengthened through the ESF technical support that will be provided under Component 4.
                         Other social issues may include minor land acquisition and temporary loss of livelihood during the
                         rehabilitation of the irrigation schemes. Since the specific sub-project are not yet known, a
                         Resettlement Policy Framework was prepared by the Client. This document spells out the key
                         objectives and principles of the policy and will give guidance to the preparation of subsequent
                         resettlement action plans (RAPs). Specific attention will be given to payment of appropriate
                         compensation to affected persons as indicated in the RAPs and the development of grievance
                         redress mechanism at the community level that will be accessible to all stakeholders as well as
                         arrangements for monitoring the implementation of RAPs. In addition, robust assessments of other
                         potential social impacts related to land tenure and use will be conducted as part of the ESIA
                         process at each of the project sites.
                         The Government conducted Dam Panel of Experts (DPOE) reports of 3 dams (Doma Dam in
                         Nasarawa State, Naka Dam in Benue State and Wuro Keso retention pond (also known as Gassol)
                         in Taraba State) to inspect the status of the dams. Project Screening Templates were also
                         developed which indicated potential activities to be conducted to rehabiliate the dams .To
                         understand the potential environmental and social risks and impacts of the 3 dams, the client
                         prepared Environmental and Social Due Diligence (ESDD). The ESDD rated the dam sub-project
                         activities from low to substantial risks based on the level of proposed work to be carried out and




For Official Use Only
                         the impact on environmental and social sensitivities, which are mainly localized. Potential impacts
                         include Occupational health and safety and community health and safety. None of the dams
                         investigated appeared to be near any protected area. However, settlements located downstream
                         of the dams, and members of the communities should be well-consulted if the dam is supported
                         under SPIN. The ESDD for the Naka dam revealed some existing legacy issues and the presence
                         of burnt brick in the command area of the dam, whose livelihood could be potentially impacted if
                         SPIN selects the dam for rehabilitation. The ESDD recommended preparing a detailed ESIA and
                         Livelihood Restoration Plan/Resettlement Action Plan. Furthermore, if these dams are selected
                         under the SPIN Project, additional assessments will be carried out to include dam safety
                         assessments, site-specific environmental and social assessments, and other specific plans,
                         including EAPs.
                         As part of the SPIN project procedure for E&S, all participating states will be required to conduct
                         ESDD or environmental and social audit for all sub-project dams to identify any liability, legacy
                         issues, how cumulative impacts were considered for the dam construction and operation model,
                         environmental flow and the risk category. The studies will be done using the dam safety plans
                         that will be developed under the SPIN Project. The Bank will clear all ESDD and the assessment of
                         the risk profile. Wherein it has been described as low to moderate risks, a standard Environmental
                         and Social Management Plan (ESMP) with relevant guidelines will be prepared and implemented;
                         however, all large dams will require a full ESIA regardless of scope of civil works at those specific
                         sites. For all sub-projects categorized as Substantial to High risk will undergo a detailed ESIA.
                         During the implementation of the project, dam rehabilitation plans will be developed to include
                         structural and non-structural measures identified through investigative studies, including
                         systematic hydrological assessment, stability analysis, geotechnical studies, and geophysical and
                         bathymetric surveys. The dam safety plans will also include dam safety instrumentation plans,
                         emergency action plans, a Flood Forecasting and Warning System for Dam Operations (FFWSDO),


                        Jul 26, 2024                                                                               Page 19 of 22
                                  The World Bank
                                  Sustainable Power And Irrigation For Nigeria Project (P179684)


                         and integrated reservoir operations, including streamflow forecasting for climate-resilient dam
                         management, as well as an operation and maintenance plan. The dam sites will ensure the
                         security and safety of personnel.
                         As the precise scope and design of proposed activities are not known at appraisal, the project
                         employed a framework approach and has prepared an Environmental and Social Management
                         Framework (ESMF) that provides, among others, the detailed procedures for E&S screening of
                         proposed activities/ subprojects and suggests generic mitigation measures. The ESMF further lays
                         down the procedures for screening to that will lead to the preparation of further E&S instruments
                         for addressing the identified impacts and risks, i.e. standard ESMP with appropriate guidelines
                         and environmental code of practices for low to moderate-risk sub-projects and detailed ESIA for
                         substantial to high-risk sub-projects. ESMF also includes preparation, approval and monitoring
                         protocols to track ESMPs and provides institutional capacity-building approaches for the project
                         staff to effectively manage the requirements of environmental and social implementation as set
                         out in the ESMF/ESMPs.
                         Other documents have been prepared by the Borrower, such as the Resettlement Policy
                         Framework, Labor Management Procedure, and Pest Management Procedure, which will guide the
                         preparation of site-specific documents. The prepared Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) will
                         support and guide effective stakeholder engagement. The strategy outlines systems and
                         processes to ensure stakeholders and the public participate actively in all project design and
                         implementation aspects.




For Official Use Only
                         The ESMPs/ESIAs will specify the types of plans that need to be prepared as required under each
                         applicable ESS. These may include Biodiversity Management Plans, Waste Management Plans,
                         Cultural Heritage Management Plans, Labor Management Procedures, and Occupational Health
                         and Safety Measures. In addition to these plans, Environmental, Social, Health and Safety (ESHS)
                         and SEA/SH-related provisions will be included in the bid documents. Environmental and Social
                         Commitment Plan, Security Management Plans (SMPs) and Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual
                         Harassment (SEA/SH) Action Plans will also be prepared.
                         For the hydropower master plan that will be financed by the Project, the Client will prepare due
                         diligence assessments including a
                         Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) during the implementation phase to
                         systematically examine the environmental and social risks/impacts and issues associated with the
                         government's policies, plans, or programs in the water resources and power sector for now and
                         in the future. The SESA will cover the Hydropower Master Plan. At a later stage, individual projects
                         identified under the master plan would be subject to site-specific full assessments such as ESIAs
                         or RAPs (where relevant). The ESIA will be used to address impacts associated with hydropower
                         master plan such as downstream water quality, biodiversity loss and fish migrations.
                         Implementation of E&S requirements. The SPIN Project will be implemented through 2 models,
                         with Model 1 implemented by the FPMU in federal financed schemes that are under the RBDAs,
                         and Model 2 implemented by the states through the SPIUs. Regardless of the model employed, all
                         SPIUs and RBDAs will engage qualified Environmental, Social and Gender/GBV Officer, and
                         Security Focal Points from the State Ministry of Environment, Department of Lands, State Ministry
                         of Women Affairs and the State Security Advisors respectively. Through its Component 4, the
                         Project will provide ESF training to officers, including leveraging training provided through the
                         SPESSE Program.



                        Jul 26, 2024                                                                              Page 20 of 22
                                  The World Bank
                                  Sustainable Power And Irrigation For Nigeria Project (P179684)


                         C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities
                         C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or
                         frameworks are planned or required by implementation?
                         [Description of expectations in terms of documents to be prepared to assess and manage the
                         project’s environmental and social risks and by when (i.e., prior to Effectiveness, or during
                         implementation), highlighted features of ESA documents, other project documents where
                         environmental and social measures are to be included, and the related due diligence process
                         planned to be carried out by the World Bank, including sources of information for the due diligence
                         - Max. character limit 10,000]
                         - ESMF, RPF, LMP, SEP, IPMP to be disclosed before Appraisal
                         - Dam Safety Assessments and Audits prepared during implementation
                         - Environmental and Social Due Diligences of any known dams prior to effectiveness.
                         Corresponding Environmental and Social Assessments (e.g. Environmental and Social Impact
                         Assessment, Environmental and Social Management Plan, Environmental and Social Audit,
                         based on the recommendation from the ESDD and/or outcomes of E&S screening). ESIAs on
                         existing dam/irrigation sites will incorporate an audit/assessment of possible legacy
                         issues/liabilities that need to be addressed.

                         -      Resettlement Action Plans or livelihood restoration plan that details out the extent of land




For Official Use Only
                         acquisition / restriction, measures to limit impact and appropriate mitigation plans including
                         compensation where necessary.
                         -      Security Management Plan with appropriate measures to mitigate project risk and risk to
                         communities / beneficiaries.
                         -      Revision of the Grievance Mechanism that details out available channels and procedures
                         for beneficiaries to lodge in complaint.
                         -      SEA/SH Action Plan and Accountability Framework
                         - ESIAs/ESMPs or stand-alone ESMPs once specific sites are identified
                         -      Site specific Plans such as OHSMP, Waste Management Plan, CHSMPs as part of the ESIAs
                         or ESMPs
                         - Biodiversity Management Plans (BMPs) or Action Plans (BAP) as relevant based on screening of
                         specific sites
                         -      Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) will be conducted during the
                         implementation phase.
                         At a later stage, individual projects identified under the Hydropower master plan would be
                         subject to site-specific full assessments such as ESIAs or RAPs (where relevant).
                         -      Dam Safety Plans in line with ESS4




                         III. CONTACT POINT

                         World Bank




                        Jul 26, 2024                                                                              Page 21 of 22
                                   The World Bank
                                   Sustainable Power And Irrigation For Nigeria Project (P179684)



                          Task Team             Jun Matsumoto                        Title:         Senior Water Resources
                          Leader:                                                                   Management Specialist

                          Email:                jmatsumoto@worldbank.org

                          TTL Contact:          Pravin Karki                         Job Title:     Senior Hydropower Specialist

                          Email:                pkarki@worldbank.org

                          TTL Contact:          Emmanuel Chinedu Umolu               Job Title:     Senior Water Resources
                                                                                                    Management Specialist

                          Email:                eumolu@worldbank.org



                         IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                         The World Bank
                         1818 H Street, NW
                         Washington, D.C. 20433
                         Telephone: (202) 473-1000




For Official Use Only
                         Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                         V. APPROVAL

                         Task Team Leader(s):                     Jun Matsumoto, Pravin Karki, Emmanuel Chinedu Umolu

                         ADM Environmental Specialist:            Lucky Erhaze

                         ADM Social Specialist:                   Cindy Ijeoma Ikeaka




                        Jul 26, 2024                                                                                     Page 22 of 22
