Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Southern Niger Connectivity and Integration Project (P179770)




Public Disclosure Authorized

                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                             Concept Stage


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                       (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 09/20/2023 | Report No: ESRSC03636




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Sep 20, 2023                                                                         Page 1 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Southern Niger Connectivity and Integration Project (P179770)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION

                     A. Basic Project Data

                     Country                       Region                           Project ID                     Parent Project ID (if any)

                     Western and Central           WESTERN AND CENTRAL              P179770
                     Africa                        AFRICA

                     Project Name                  Southern Niger Connectivity And Integration Project

                     Practice Area (Lead)          Financing Instrument             Estimated Appraisal Date       Estimated Board Date

                     Transport                     Investment Project               5/9/2024                       7/1/2024
                                                   Financing

                     Borrower(s)                   Implementing Agency(ies)




                     Proposed Development Objective
                     The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve transport connectivity and logistics services along the NNC in



Public Disclosure
                     Niger to support agricultural value chains and trade within the NNC basin.


                     Financing (in USD Million)                                                                                          Amount

                      Total Project Cost                                                                                                     600.00



                     B. Is the project being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The proposed project is being processed as a Series of Projects (SOP). This approach will allow for a programmatic-
                     phased engagement according to the country’s needs, program readiness and availability of resources. This approach
                     will also contribute to lower the interdependency between projects at implementation, hence the associated
                     corollary risks. The first phase comprises two SOPs that we will be prepared and delivered in parallel, in Chad and
                     Niger. Finally, the SOP approach will allow the participation of potential additional countries in the future such as
                     Nigeria and expansion to other sectors.

                     The proposed overarching development objective for the NNC Basin of Integration Program is the following: to
                     improve regional integration and socioeconomic and climate resilience of communities in the NNC Basin.

                    Sep 20, 2023                                                                                                        Page 2 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Southern Niger Connectivity and Integration Project (P179770)




                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The Niamey-Ndjamena Corridor (NNC), which connects Niamey to Ndjamena crosses through southern Niger and the
                     northern area of Lake Chad is a strategic backbone for both countries. It hosts an estimated population of 22 million
                     inhabitants who are primarily involved in agriculture and fisheries activities. The main corridor of Niger, the National
                     Road 1 (RN1), serves as the main artery for about 70 percent of the population in this region (18.5 million in 2020),
                     connecting the border of Mali with the border of Chad. This corridor plays an important role for agriculture and intra-
                     regional trade. Similar to the Chad project, the project would finance the rehabilitation of priority road sections (an
                     expected 640 km) on the RN1 section, secondary roads and rural roads that connect the adjacent rural areas to the
                     RN1, which are inaccessible during the rainy season and are highly vulnerable to climate change. The proposed
                     sections are: Dosso – Dogondoutchi; Guidan Roumdji – Tchadoua; Guidimouni – Gouré; Djadjiri – Diffa and Diffa. In
                     addition, the proposed project would finance the development of transport and logistics services along the corridor to
                     support priority agricultural value chains and to increase sub-regional trade (particularly with Chad and Nigeria). The
                     NNC, including the proposed locations that this project would target, is characterized by persistent and widespread
                     fragility and insecurity. The NNC cuts across areas with high security threats which have led to humanitarian crisis,
                     and contain 255,526 refugees and 361,593 IDPs according to the United Nations Agency for Refugees (UNHCR) as of
                     February 28, 2023. Lack of decent community infrastructure such as roads, schools and health centers are part of the
                     root causes of conflict in these regions and the influx of IDPs and refugees has put additional pressure on the host
                     communities. The region crossed by the NNC is also facing a climate change crisis that directly impacts livelihoods,



Public Disclosure
                     food security and fragility.
                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     It is expected that the project will be co-managed by the two main line ministries, namely the Ministry of Transport
                     and the Ministry of Equipment. These ministries have some experience in the implementation of regional and
                     national projects financed by the World Bank including the Enhancing Niger Northeastern Connectivity (P171793),
                     Rural Mobility and Connectivity Project (P164498) andLome-Ouagadougou-Niamey Economic Corridor (P168386). The
                     overall environmental and social risk management performance of these projects has been satisfactory so far,
                     although some weaknesses have been noted, particularly with regard to local monitoring and supervision in remote
                     areas.

                     Based on overall prior experience with transport projects in the country, national capacity to prepare and properly
                     implement safeguard instruments has been challenging, with particular capacity constraints regarding community
                     health and safety aspects (i.e. including labor management procedures, insecurity, SEA/SH risks and incidence
                     monitoring, reporting and follow-ups) and operationalizing the Grievance Mechanism (GM). Niger's legislative
                     framework includes an environmental code and a law on environmental assessments that guarantees the integration
                     of environmental and social considerations at the level of projects and programs. At the institutional level, the
                     National Environmental Assessment Office (BNEE) in the Ministry of the Environment and Fisheries, ensures that the
                     environmental and social dimensions are taken into account at all stages, from preparation to implementation. At the
                     sectoral level, the Ministry of Equipment, which is expected to co-supervise the project, also has an environmental
                     unit for the monitoring and supervision of projects in the sector. However, the country's legislative framework and
                     the capacity of these structures remain limited and strengthening is necessary for greater effectiveness. Financing for

                    Sep 20, 2023                                                                                                     Page 3 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Southern Niger Connectivity and Integration Project (P179770)



                     activities intended to address some of these gaps will be provided under Component 3 - Project Management and
                     Monitoring. Further E&S capacity assessments will be conducted during preparation, and corrective measures,
                     including a timeline, will be proposed and implemented in terms of personnel reinforcement and training. These
                     activities will also be reflected in the ESCP.


                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                                 High


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                          High
                     Environmental risk is assessed as High at PCN. This is due to multiple risks associated with the planned activities under
                     Component 1 – Improvement of Infrastructure along the NNC and its feeder roads where the project will rehabilitate
                     priority road sections on the RN1, secondary roads and rural roads that connect the adjacent rural areas to the RN1.
                     Most of these roads are currently in bad repair and are inaccessible during the rainy season. The road rehabilitation
                     will enhance access to areas with high agricultural and commercial potential and connect Niger to Chad and Nigeria
                     and make these roads sections more climate resilient. However, the planned civil works are also likely to generate
                     some limited adverse environmental risks and impacts. Potential risks and impacts that have been identified so far
                     relate to: (i) Resource efficiency and pollution prevention and management (sourcing of raw materials for civil works,
                     water and energy use, GHG emissions, dust, noise, potential contamination of water sources due to spills and run-off
                     of petroleum products, infiltration into storage areas and improper disposal of fuels; (ii) occupational and community



Public Disclosure
                     health and safety; (iii) potential loss of vegetation and biodiversity during civil works and preparation of sites, quarries
                     areas for materials and higher demand of fuelwood by workers; and (iv) potential impact of civil works and
                     excavations on cultural heritage.
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating                                                                                                 High
                     The social risk has been determined to be High at PCN. Niger faces a range of significant social challenges, including
                     access to land for women, high population mobility (refugees and internal displaced people), high levels of poverty
                     and illiteracy, especially in rural areas and high risks for child labor. In addition, the security situation in Niger is
                     challenging and has been adversely affected by the activities of violent extremist groups, criminality and illicit
                     trafficking. Given that this project will be implemented in some of these conflict affected areas and areas with high
                     numbers of forcibly displaced where it will be difficult to monitor implementation, the most significant social risks
                     foreseen are related to the adequate management of the involuntary resettlement process. Land acquisition is
                     expected to be limited given that there is an existing road platform but it is likely that there will be some negative
                     impacts on private property including crops and small businesses; all efforts will be made to avoid these impacts. As
                     indicated above, the NNC, including the parts that this project would target, cuts across areas with high security
                     threats which have led to humanitarian crisis. The corridor is also a major transportation route for long haul trucking
                     as it connects the border of Mali with the border of Chad and improving these roads may increase the risks of road
                     related accidents, SEA/SH risks and threats to the local communities and access to rural areas in general. The situation
                     is compounded by the fact that implementation support by the Bank to ensure compliance is likely to be restricted by
                     insecurity along the road, especially in the Diffa region and other areas close to the Chadian border. Alternatives
                     including local community based monitoring, satellite imagery and an active GRM implemented by a local NGO will be
                     further explored during preparation and integrated into the final project design and implementation plan.

                    Sep 20, 2023                                                                                                         Page 4 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Southern Niger Connectivity and Integration Project (P179770)




                     B. RELEVANCE OF STANDARDS AND POLICIES AT CONCEPT STAGE

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                     ESS1 Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts

                     The proposed project is expected to generate positive environmental and social impacts by improving transport
                     connectivity and logistics services along the NNC in Niger to support agricultural value chains and intra-regional trade
                     (including a focus on vulnerable populations, refugees and IDPs). Some road sections have already been identified
                     under Component 1 and for these sections, an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and a
                     Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared during project preparation (confirmation of these sections will,
                     however, also be based on E+S assessments and security risk analysis undertaken during preparation). For the
                     sections which have not yet been clearly identified under Component 1 and for the activities under Component 2, an
                     Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be
                     prepared during project preparation. The various E&S assessments and security risk analysis will provide valuable
                     inputs for the selection of the various road sections that this project would finance. Relevant “chance find”
                     procedures will be included in the ESMF. As part of the environmental and social assessment, a Stakeholder
                     Engagement Plan (SEP) will also be prepared, consulted upon and disclosed prior to Appraisal. The project will apply
                     the relevant requirements of the Environmental Health and Safety Guidelines (EHSGs) for civil works and
                     rehabilitation of infrastructure. The Borrower will monitor the environmental and social performances in accordance
                     with the legal agreement. All other relevant actions related to this ESS will be captured in the ESCP. The project will


Public Disclosure
                     also have a Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC). The Project’s ESMF will contain in an annex a CERC
                     section, that includes the CERC triggers and a positive list of activities that are eligible.
                     Areas where “Use of Borrower Framework” is being considered:
                     The project will not use the Borrower’s E&S Framework but will be consistent with relevant national legal
                     requirements.


                     ESS10 Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure

                     A Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) will be prepared, validated and disclosed prior to Appraisal. It will clearly
                     describe the key stakeholders and establish an accessible and transparent strategy for ongoing information sharing
                     and communication especially in the challenging FCV context. The SEP will also include the principles for the
                     establishment of an accessible, transparent and confidential grievance redress mechanism (GRM) for the project.
                     Conflict sensitive approaches that might include hiring a local NGO to undertake the communication campaign,
                     alternatives to community consultation that will protect local communities such as phone surveys etc and strong
                     collaboration with local authorities will all be considered, explored and potentially incorporated into the project
                     design and implementation plan.


                     ESS2 Labor and Working Conditions




                    Sep 20, 2023                                                                                                     Page 5 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Southern Niger Connectivity and Integration Project (P179770)



                     The project is likely to include direct workers and contract workers. A Labor Management Procedure (LMP) that
                     specifies the terms and conditions of employment, non-discrimination and equal opportunities, workers'
                     organizations, measures against child and forced labor, grievance redress mechanism for labor disputes, occupational
                     safety and health measures for the workers (direct and contract) and provisions to prevent and manage SEA/SH will
                     be prepared prior to project approval based on a version that has already been approved for another project. To
                     ensure the health and safety of workers during the construction and operational phases of the project, the Borrower
                     will develop and implement a Health, Safety and Environmental (HSE) plan consistent with World Bank Group's
                     Environment, Health and Safety Guidelines (EHSG) for construction activities. The plan will include procedures for
                     incident investigation and reporting, recording and reporting of any non-compliance, emergency preparedness and
                     response procedures and continuous training and awareness to workers that will be proportionate with the project
                     scope. The Borrower will ensure that the ESS2 requirements are incorporated into: (a) the contracts between the
                     Borrower and the Contractor and any entity supervising the Project’s civil works; and (b) the contracts between the
                     Contractor and any Contractors’ subcontractors. All workers will be required to sign a Code of Conduct that will be
                     enforced by the supervising entities. These elements will be clearly outlined in the ESMF, C-ESMP and the ESCP.


                     ESS3 Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management

                     The rehabilitation of the road section will likely impact Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and
                     Management due to the consumption of energy, water and raw material. As part of the ESIA, the Borrower will
                     identify relevant measures for improving the efficient consumption of energy, water and raw materials, as well as
                     other resources. It is anticipated that emissions will be generated by construction vehicles and dust will be generated



Public Disclosure
                     by digging activities during project implementation/construction. Those most likely to be affected are workers and
                     people living within the proximity of construction/rehabilitation sites. The implementation of mitigation measures
                     such as dust suppression and vehicle maintenance will be incorporated into the contractor's ESMP. Noise may be
                     generated from the use of construction machinery and vehicle movements. The relatively short-term and nature of
                     the works suggest that noise levels will not be excessive or cause long-term nuisances. The construction works will
                     however, present short-term nuisance to the neighbors to some of the project sites. The Environmental and Social
                     Management instruments to be prepared will include mitigation measures to minimize and manage the noise levels
                     such by applying standard restrictions to hours of site work where appropriate. Construction/ rehabilitation activities
                     will generate solid waste which will primarily include excavated soil and solid wastes. The waste generated by the
                     construction/rehabilitation works will largely be disposed of at approved sites according with national laws and
                     regulations. In addition to applying the resource efficiency requirements of this ESS, the Borrower will adopt
                     measures specified in the EHSGs and other GIIP to support efficient use of raw materials, to the extent technically
                     and financially feasible.

                     ESS4 Community Health and Safety

                     The Project will finance: (a) the rehabilitation of an estimated 640 km on the RN1 section, secondary roads and rural
                     roads that connect the adjacent rural areas to the RN1; and (b) the development of transport and logistics services
                     along the corridor to support priority agricultural value chains and to increase sub-regional trade, particularly with
                     Chad and Nigeria (activities will for example include electric two- and three-wheelers and financing of markets,
                     storage, and distribution centers). The influx of workers into a project area (this will be confirmed during preparation


                    Sep 20, 2023                                                                                                      Page 6 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Southern Niger Connectivity and Integration Project (P179770)



                     of the project) can lead to adverse social impacts, such as SEA/SH, sexually transmitted and communicable diseases,
                     especially in rural areas and in a region with complex compounded challenges. An ESIA will be undertaken for the
                     identified locations under Component 1 to provide some critical background information. The ESMPs will also include
                     labor related clauses and ensuring compliance will be the responsibility of the contractors. As SEA/SH risks are rated
                     as High for the project (see the above), an SEA/SH risk assessment will be conducted during the project preparation
                     as part of the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and Environmental and Social Management
                     Framework (ESMF). An SEA/SH Prevention and Response Action Plan will be prepared with mitigation measures
                     based on the plan of another project. These measures may include (will be confirmed during project preparation): i) a
                     code of conduct (CoC) outlining prohibited SEA/SH behaviors and applicable sanctions; ii) accountability and response
                     framework within the project's Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) with specific procedures to manage SEA/SH
                     complaints safely and confidentially, including a referral protocol to ensure the timely referral of survivors to a
                     holistic package of GBV support services; iii) regular trainings for workers; iv) regular consultations with women and
                     girls conducted in safe places in small, separate groups led by a woman animator; and v) awareness raising activities
                     to inform communities about GBV risks, prohibited behaviors within CoC and reporting procedures for SEA/SH
                     incidents. Regarding security risks, a detailed Security Risk Analysis (SRA) will be undertaken during preparation to
                     provide more information regarding the security context and whether any mitigation measures can be incorporated
                     into the project design and/or alternatives to direct supervision during implementation could be adopted. A Security
                     Risk Management Plan (SRM) will be prepared by the Borrower. The contractor’s ESMP will also include the security
                     plan for the project sites.

                     ESS5 Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement



Public Disclosure
                     Land acquisition is expected to be limited given that there is an existing road platform but it is likely that there will be
                     some negative impacts on private property including crops and small businesses. While all efforts will be made to
                     minimize the impacts, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared for the road sections that have already been
                     identified under Component 1. The ToRS for the RAP will be submitted to the Bank for clearance. The RAP will
                     identify any permanent and temporary impacts as well as any negative impacts on livelihoods. For impacts relating to
                     the activities to be financed under Component 2, an RPF (which may be updated from another Transport project) will
                     be used to provide guidance for screening and addressing impacts related to the small economic support
                     infrastructure that will be financed (e.g., markets, storage and distribution centers). Given the high level of insecurity
                     in the project area, the Bank team will also explore with the Borrower whether elements of conflict sensitive design
                     such as reducing the right of way or avoiding/protecting any sacred sites could be integrated in order to reduce these
                     impacts. In addition, during preparation, the Bank team will also explore alternative ways to supervise the
                     implementation of the RAP process with the Borrower given that travel to the project sites might be restricted.


                     ESS6 Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources

                     The proposed activities (construction and rehabilitation) could involve potential loss of vegetation and biodiversity
                     during civil works and site preparation, quarrying areas for materials and increased demand for firewood by workers.
                     Impacts or damage on biodiversity or other resources, will be assessed before the start of the works and relevant
                     instruments such as a Biodiversity management Plan (BMP) will be prepared as needed. This assessment should
                     consider real threats to biodiversity, for example, habitat loss, degradation and fragmentation, overexploitation,


                    Sep 20, 2023                                                                                                         Page 7 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Southern Niger Connectivity and Integration Project (P179770)



                     uprooting of trees and cutting of shrubs, hydrological changes, pollution and incidental take, as well as projected
                     climate change impacts. It will determine the significance of biodiversity or habitats based on their vulnerability and/
                     or sensibility at local or national levels and will also take into account the differing values attached to biodiversity and
                     habitats by project-affected parties and other interested parties.


                     ESS7 Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional Local Communities

                     This standard is not considered relevant as there are no Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically
                     Underserved Traditional Local Communities currently identified in the project area. Should the presence of
                     indigenous communities be confirmed through further screening during implementation, the necessary assessments,
                     consultations and instruments will be undertaken per the requirements of this standard.


                     ESS8 Cultural Heritage

                     While the project will mostly finance rehabilitation of existing road platforms and therefore the need for new
                     construction will be minimal, the ESIA will confirm, through consultation with the communities and national heritage
                     institution, whether there is any tangible or intangible cultural heritage in project areas. Based on these
                     consultations, mitigation measures to protect this cultural heritage will be reflected in the ESMF. Site specific ESIAs
                     for the road sections that have not yet been identified will also include an assessment of the potential existence of
                     cultural heritage. These mitigation measures will also be reflected in the contracts for the contractors. If needed,



Public Disclosure
                     training will be also be provided to them.


                     ESS9 Financial Intermediaries

                     This standard is not considered relevant at PCN. The project will not use a financial intermediary.


                     C. Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                     OP 7.50 Projects on International Waterways                                                                              No


                     OP 7.60 Projects in Disputed Areas                                                                                       No



                     III. World Bank Environmental and Social Due Diligence

                     A. Use of Common Approach                                                                                                No

                     Financing Partners
                     Not applicable.


                    Sep 20, 2023                                                                                                         Page 8 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Southern Niger Connectivity and Integration Project (P179770)



                     B. Proposed Measures, Actions and Timing (Borrower’s commitments)
                     Actions to be completed prior to Bank Board Approval:
                     Instruments to be elaborated by the Borrower by project Appraisal:
                     - Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) for each section identified under Component 1;
                     - Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for the sections not yet clearly identified under
                     Component 1 and for the activities under Component 2
                     - Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for the sections that are already identified under Component 1
                     - Update existing Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) for the sections not yet clearly identified under Component 1
                     and for the activities under Component 2
                     - Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)
                     - Draft of the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)
                     - Labor Management Procedure (LMP) based on another project’s recent instrument
                     - SEA/SH Action Plan included in ESMF
                     - Security Risk Assessment (SRA) and Security Risk Management Plan (SMP)

                     Possible issues to be addressed in the Borrower Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP):
                     - PIU composition. structure and timeline
                     - Preparation of ESIAs/RAPs (for the activities that are not yet defined and where framework documents are
                     prepared, accordingly)
                     - Operationalization of GRMs




Public Disclosure
                     - CERC requirements

                     C. Timing
                     Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage ESRS                                           13-Oct-2023

                     IV. CONTACT POINTS

                     World Bank
                     Task Team Leader: Anne Cecile Sophie Souhaid                   Title:           Lead Transport Specialist

                     Email:              asouhaid@worldbank.org



                     V. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT




                    Sep 20, 2023                                                                                                  Page 9 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Southern Niger Connectivity and Integration Project (P179770)



                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                     VI. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                 Guillermo Diaz Fanas, Anne Cecile Sophie Souhaid

                     Practice Manager (ENR/Social)        Pia Peeters Recommended on 27-Jun-2023 at 16:18:3 EDT

                     Safeguards Advisor ESSA              Nathalie S. Munzberg (SAESSA) Cleared on 20-Sep-2023 at 08:22:8 EDT




Public Disclosure




                    Sep 20, 2023                                                                                                Page 10 of 10
