Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP) (P179643)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                            Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      ( ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 06/11/2023 | Report No: ESRSC03624




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Jul 14, 2023                                                                               Page 1 of 18
                               The World Bank
                               Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP) (P179643)




                       BASIC INFORMATION
                       A. Basic Operation Data

                       Operation ID              Product                                   Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year


                       P179643                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)        ABSPIP                       2024

                       Operation Name            Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP)

                       Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries             Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                                 (borrower, recipient)


                       Gabon                     Gabon                                     WESTERN AND CENTRAL          Energy & Extractives
                                                                                           AFRICA

                       Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                  Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                       Gabonese Republic         CNTIPPEE, Ministry of Economy and         25-Sep-2023                  15-Mar-2024
                                                 Recovery



Public Disclosure

                     Proposed Development Objective
                     The proposed PDO is to increase access to electricity, water supply and sanitation services in targeted areas, and
                     reduce SEEG's water and electricity losses.


                     Financing (in USD Million)                                                                                         Amount

                       Total Operation Cost                                                                                               105.00



                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Operation [including overview of Country, Sectoral & Institutional Contexts and
                     Relationship to CPF]
                     The project aims to improve access to electricity, drinking water and sanitation in targeted areas of Gabon, as well as
                     improve the operational performance of the national utility SEEG. The Government of Gabon requested the project as

                    Jul 14, 2023                                                                                                       Page 2 of 18
                               The World Bank
                               Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP) (P179643)



                     a follow on of the PASBMIR project (closing on June 30, 2023), which has benefited impoverished segments of the
                     population in rural and peri-urban areas. The project will focus on (1) extending the electricity and water distribution
                     networks to provide increased access to basic services, (2) developing solar photovoltaic to replace thermal
                     generation and protect the environment, (3) reducing electricity and water network losses to increase operational
                     efficiency of the SEEG and improve the financial sustainability of the sectors, (4) pioneering sanitation works in the
                     country to reduce water pollution and improve health outcomes, and (5) providing capacity building for local
                     authorities and other actors involved in the two sectors.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1. Detailed operation location(s) and salient physical characteristics relevant to the E&S assessment [geographic,
                     environmental, social]
                     Located along the Atlantic coast in Central Africa, the Gabonese Republic is bordered by the Republic of Congo,
                     Cameroon and Equatorial Guinea. The country is relatively small, with a total area of 270,000 km2, an estimated
                     population of 2.2 million (sparsely populated), and forests covering 81% of its territory. Gabon’s 22.5 million hectares
                     of tropical rainforests, virtually untouched coastline, and tremendous biodiversity are endowments that could
                     position Gabon as a world-class ecotourism destination. Gabon's great forest wealth has enabled it to establish
                     several Parks and Nature Reserves that characterize their settlement areas. Gabon has a total of 13 parks. Among the
                     main protected areas are the national parks of WAKA, LOPE and IVINDO, MOKALABA DOUDOU and LOANGO,
                     MINKEBE and PLATEAUX BATEKE. Congo Basin rainforest covers 88% of the country, which has a uniquely rich
                     ecosystem with thriving wildlife populations and extensive endowments of fertile land, extensive water sources, and
                     well-stocked marine fisheries. Gabon in general, is dominated by the climate Equatorial. Overall, rainfall is regular,



Public Disclosure
                     abundant with a bimodal regime. The pluviometry varies from 1500 to 3000 mm per year, with a distribution varying
                     according to the seasons. Average temperatures in Gabon are between 22 and 26°C. They decrease with altitude and
                     have a maximum from February to April and a minimum in July-August.
                     Though Gabon is one of the least densely populated countries in the world with a mere 8 persons/km2, the country
                     has one of Africa's highest urbanization rates :more than four out of five Gabonese citizens live in cities. The rate of
                     urbanization has increased from 20% in the early 1960s to 89% in 2017 and is expected to reach 92% and 95% by 2030
                     and 2050, respectively. Libreville, the political capital, and Port Gentil, the Country's economic capital, are home to
                     59% of the population. The project is nationwide and will take place in all 9 regions or provinces of the Country.
                     Names of these provinces (with respective capital cities in parenthesis) are Estuaire (Akanda) ), Haut-Ogooué
                     (Franceville), Moyen-Ogooué (Lamberené); Woleu-Ntem (Oyem), Ngounié (Mouila), Nyanga (Tchibanga), Ogooué-
                     Ivindo (Makoukou), Ogoue Maritime (Port-Gentil) and Ogooué-Lolo (Kolamoutou). The names of these provinces
                     match the names of the Country's main rivers. Gabon is at significant risk from sea level rise, and coastal, urban, and
                     riverine flooding. They pose a particularly high risk for some regions such as Lambarené and Kolamoutou. Potentially
                     damaging and life-threatening river floods are expected to occur at least once every ten years.

                     Despite substantial progress in SDGs, reaching major challenges remain, particularly in health, the fight against
                     HIV/AIDS, education, sanitation, and social protection. Added to this are strong inequalities between provinces. The
                     Common Country Assessment (2018/2022) has confirmed these challenges. Their importance underscores the need
                     to pursue the effort to invest in inclusive human development, emphasizing the reduction of inequalities and the
                     promotion of gender equality. The immediate causes of this situation are the low level of development of basic social
                     services, the low level of the financial capacity of the populations to access them, and the dysfunctions of the existing
                     structures.

                    Jul 14, 2023                                                                                                      Page 3 of 18
                               The World Bank
                               Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP) (P179643)



                     Although Gabon's HDI (0.706) places the Country in the high human development category, the current poverty rate
                     of 33% remains a major concern for the government[ii]. The difference between its economic and social development
                     rankings indicates significant social inequalities and multidimensional poverty. The access rate to sanitation services
                     in urban areas is estimated at 45.70%. These disparities are also observed in the health, water, electricity, and
                     education sectors. For instance, only about 25% of rural areas have reliable access to electricity compared to over
                     90% in urban areas despite a 92% nationwide access.
                     D. 2. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity
                     The Government of Gabon has environmental laws, regulations, and policies that guide the protection of the
                     environment. Over the past decade, the authorities have made some progress in mainstreaming environmental
                     sustainability into their decision-making processes, starting first with Law No 007/2014 pertaining to environmental
                     protection and Decree 000539/PR/MEFEPEPN of 15 July 2005 regulating Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
                     (ESIA) calling for environmental and social due diligence. ESIA is part of the feasibility studies, and detailed risk
                     assessments and public consultations are required as part of the process. The General Directorate of the Environment
                     and Nature Protection (DGEPN), under the Ministry of Water, Forestry, the Environment, and Sustainable
                     Development, is responsible for national and provincial ESIA. DGEPN’s capacity and track record for managing
                     environmental risks associated with development initiatives and overseeing and ensuring environmental compliance
                     monitoring are in place but need to be strengthened. Decentralized units are in charge of the environment for each
                     province and municipality covered by the project, which may be involved during consultations and project monitoring
                     phases.

                     The same institutional structure of the predecessor PASBMIR (closing date: 30 June 2023) will be used to implement




Public Disclosure
                     the proposed project. The project will be implemented by the Ministry of Economy and the Ministry of Energy and
                     Hydraulic Resources (MEHR).

                     The MERH will chair the Steering Committee (SC), which will provide strategic guidance and approve the annual work
                     plan and budget for the project. The SC will be co-chaired by the Minister of Economy and Recovery (MER). The
                     Director Generals of the MEHR (electricity and water), Ministry of Finance (public debt), and SEEG, among others, will
                     be members. The SC will meet quarterly or on a need basis. The MERH is responsible for conducting government
                     policy in terms of energy and drinking water production through the General Directorate of Energy and the General
                     Directorate of Hydraulic Resources, both under the MERH. Institutional and implementation arrangements will
                     involve municipalities as beneficiaries of the project.

                     The Project Coordination Unit (PCU) under the Ministry of Economy and Recovery will be hosted at the CNTIPPEE
                     (National Commission for Works of Public Interest for the Promotion of Entrepreneurship and Employment). The
                     CNTIPPEE will be strengthened with more full-time staff for the project and adequate office space. Thus, the PASBMIR
                     II PCU will have full-time staff for its core team, including senior specialists for financial management, procurement,
                     environmental standards, social standards, and gender-based violence. PASBMIR counted on part-time specialists also
                     working on other Bank-funded projects hosted by the CNTIPPEE. Despite the staff cost-savings achieved, this
                     arrangement affected daily PCU operations leading to project implementation delays.
                     The CN-TIPPEE PCU has experience with projects under Bank operational policies and has just begun implementing
                     other Bank operations under the ESF requirements. Although CN-TIPPEE implemented the predecessor PASBMIR
                     which was under operational policies, the ABSPIP project is one of the first ESF projects the PCU would implement.
                     During preparation, the Bank team would perform an institutional capacity assessment of CN-TIPEE to identify specific
                     gaps in implementing ESF projects. The assessment would also confirm the proposed ESF PCU personnel and inform
                    Jul 14, 2023                                                                                                    Page 4 of 18
                               The World Bank
                               Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP) (P179643)



                     on the need for a dedicated specialist for Issues related to indigenous people. The World Bank will provide guidance
                     on preparing and implementing a capacity-building and training plan to help the Borrower manage environmental and
                     social risks throughout the project cycle.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                        Substantial


                     Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                     Substantial
                     The environmental risk is rated as Substantial at the concept stage because constructions activities under
                     components A, B in energy, water and sanitation sectors, can generate adverse impacts from activities with different
                     level or magnitude in rural or urban areas. In fact, under component A, the Project is aimed at extending electricity
                     distribution for about 700 km in peri-urban and rural zones (7 provinces), and construction of hybrid solar/thermal
                     power plants (9 provinces). Under component B the Project will undertake construction and rehabilitation of mini
                     water supply systems (using groundwater from open wells or borewells) in rural localities and schools (9 provinces),
                     upgrading sanitation infrastructures in schools (9 provinces), and will build a fecal sludge treatment plant (FSTP) in the
                     country’s main urban area, the capacity city of Libreville. Other components include policy and regulatory actions,
                     implementation support and capacity building, and a contingency emergency response component. Experience
                     acquired with the previous PASBMIR reveal that grid extension and water supply and sanitation services are small to
                     medium scale activities. In fact, based on access constraints into different localities, these works are mostly taking
                     place alongside existing roads or near houses where the vegetation is not dense, and biodiversity less exposed.



Public Disclosure
                     Impacts related to grid extension are mostly link to occupational health and safety, community health and safety such
                     as electrocution from fallen eclectic poles, fall from height. Construction and upgrading of water and sanitation
                     systems include pipeline trench excavation, transport and deposit of excess materials, new pipe and connection laying
                     and joining, trench backfilling, and roadway reinstatement, groundwater wells construction (well borehole
                     excavation). Upgrading sanitation in schools may involve waste management and other impacts yet to be determined
                     given the limited information available to date. Operations of hybrid solar/thermal power plants will be punctually
                     the source of primary emissions to air from the combustion of fossil fuels, and greenhouse gases. The FSTP is the only
                     the large scale activity of the project. Although its construction aims to reduce the harmful health impacts and
                     environmental pollution of uncontrolled dumping of fecal sludge, this activity can also presents particular
                     environmental, social and health risks including foul odors and potential groundwater and water bodies pollution,
                     which may deter project community acceptance in addition to the loss of lands. The biodiversity may also be affected.
                     The risk level of this activity is rated substantial because this FSTP is located within the urban areas of Libreville and
                     conceived as an innovative and environmental-friendly infrastructure combining at the end of the chain either the
                     production of inputs for agriculture (excreta as hygiene fertilizer) or outright for an even more integrated approach,
                     the production and injection of electricity into the grid. The project has budget for feasibility studies including ESIA
                     assessments to avoid any significant impacts on the biodiversity. In addition, the low density of population in peri-
                     urban zone around Libreville can offer adequate spaces far from urban zone, to implement the project. The AfDB and
                     the Gates Foundation are also supporting this project to be realize in sustainable manner. The project location in
                     several regions reveals a dispersed spatial organization to well monitor E&S aspects of the sub-project intervention
                     areas. The PCU has acquired some experience on implementing the previous project PASBMIR I and managing E&S
                     issues relating to such activities. It is also agreed to strengthen their team by a dedicated full time staff. The PCU
                     should also assess opportunity to rely on some decentralized institutions such as municipalities and to support.

                    Jul 14, 2023                                                                                                      Page 5 of 18
                               The World Bank
                               Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP) (P179643)



                     Social Risk Rating                                                                                             Substantial
                     The project social risk classification is rated substantial at this stage of project preparation, given that preliminary
                     screening of the project shows that it does not include activities associated with potentially significant and
                     irreversible negative social impacts. Project activities with potential social risks and impacts center on a) increasing
                     electricity access through the construction of Medium-Voltage (MV) and Low-Voltage (LV) grid extension across 436
                     km for the MV network and 197 km for the LV network in 14 sites and the construction of 132substations and the
                     installation of Hybrid Solar PV mini-grids in 21 villages; b) increasing access to water and sanitation through the
                     construction, and or rehabilitation and optimization of mini water supply systems in 31 rural localities in nine
                     provinces; the construction works for water access and sanitation in 35 schools; and a fecal sludge treatment plant in
                     Libreville. Project interventions target peri-urban and rural areas in the country’s nine provinces. The project poses
                     potential social risks and associated impacts on project communities, including women and children. The
                     implementation of project activities could lead to: i) physical and/or economic involuntary displacement from loss of
                     lands and assets as well as temporary and permanent displacement of livelihoods and restrictions on land use; ii) the
                     potential exclusion of women and other vulnerable groups from access to employment opportunities related to the
                     project; iii) of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH), Violence Against Children (VAC) and
                     child labor which could be aggravated during construction works as job seekers stream into rural communities in
                     search of employment; iv) labor influx in rural areas could also put pressure on existing but limited social services
                     including health services as well as aggravate the incidence of sexually transmittable diseases in project communities;
                     v) land conversion for the installation of project construction sites the loss/disruption of ecosystem services,
                     particularly provisioning and cultural services; vi) the construction of a fecal sludge treatment plant, in addition to
                     impacts from the loss of land or livelihoods, may increase incidences of water-borne diseases in project communities



Public Disclosure
                     in the event of the overflowing of untreated sludge into agricultural fields, nearby water sources or roads. Moreover,
                     the construction of the fecal sludge treatment plant also presents particular environmental and social risks, including
                     foul odors and the potential groundwater pollution, which may deter project community project acceptance in
                     addition to the loss of lands and livelihoods; vii) risks of exclusion or marginalized and indigenous people leaving in
                     rural and peri-urban project zones; viii) given the plethora of social risks, the project may be unable to properly
                     ensure the participation of citizens and beneficiaries in project activities, including studies required to develop project
                     plans; ix) labor risks, including child/forced labor; and x) and risks related to the procurement of solar PV materials.
                     Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) Risk Rating                                            Moderate
                     The project SEA/SH risk level is rated Moderate. This risk level was determined using the World Bank SEA/SH
                     screening tool developed for projects with major civil works. The project-specific risks include labor influx and
                     proximity of project workers to women and girls in communities with significant poverty levels and pre-existing
                     gender-based violence, including SEA/SH. Project activities in rural and peri-urban s would lead to labor influx. With
                     works within proximity to communities, there is a significant risk of SEA/SH on women and girls. Also, construction
                     works will be conducted in schools, exacerbating the risks of SEA/SH on children. Moreover, the project has yet to
                     consult with women and girls regarding SEA/SH risks, and the project has yet to recruit the PIU team that will assess
                     and monitor SEA/SH risks throughout the project life.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESSs) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1. General Assessment



                    Jul 14, 2023                                                                                                        Page 6 of 18
                               The World Bank
                               Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP) (P179643)



                     ESS1 Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     Overview of the relevance of the Standard for the Operation:
                     This standard is relevant because investments are likely to result in loss of vegetation, soil erosion and degradation,
                     soil and surface water pollution, dust and noise emissions, air emissions, impact on water use and quality,
                     generation, and disposal of construction waste, wastewater and sludge, occupational health and safety concerns,
                     community health and safety risks caused by public nuisances, such as foul odors and the potential groundwater and
                     waterbodies pollution (in the case of the operation of the fecal sludge treatment plant), which may deter project
                     community project acceptance. Increased road traffic, and potentially biodiversity risks and impacts are among the
                     other E&S issues to consider. Lack of maintenance and malfunctioning of water infrastructure and sludge can lead to
                     community health and safety issues, such as illnesses caused by standing water.

                     On the social side, the project is nationwide, and its activities may affect large vulnerable communities, including
                     women, children, and indigenous populations. Workers recruited under the project can also face issues related to
                     labor works conditions. The implementation of project activities could lead to: i) physical and/or economic
                     involuntary displacement from loss of lands and assets as well as temporary and permanent displacement of
                     livelihoods and restrictions on land use; ii) the potential exclusion of women and other vulnerable groups from access
                     to employment opportunities related to the project; iii) of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment
                     (SEA/SH), Violence Against Children (VAC) and child labor which could be aggravated during construction works as job
                     seekers stream into rural communities in search of employment; iv) labor influx in rural areas could also put pressure
                     on existing but limited social services including health services as well as aggravate the incidence of sexually
                     transmittable diseases in project communities; v) land conversion for the installation of project construction sites



Public Disclosure
                     could lead to loss of livelihoods as well as the loss/disruption of ecosystem services, particularly provisioning and
                     cultural services; vi) the construction of a fecal sludge treatment plant, in addition to impacts from the loss of land or
                     livelihoods, may increase incidences of water-borne diseases in project communities in the event of the overflowing
                     of untreated sludge into agricultural fields, nearby water sources or roads. Moreover, foul odors and the potential
                     groundwater pollution may lead to the reticence of people living in communities where the fecal sludge treatment
                     plant would be constructed to accept the presence of the plant in their neighborhood; vii) the project footprint will
                     cut across zones with the presence of indigenous people who may disproportionately bear the negative social
                     impacts of the project or may be excluded from project benefits; and viii) given the plethora of social risks, the
                     project may be unable to properly ensure the participation of citizens and beneficiaries in project activities, including
                     studies required to develop project plans.

                     There is a high expectation that lessons learned from previous PASBMIR will be strongly capitalized to prepared and
                     anticipate the management of the risks and impacts expected from the project. Because the project will finance
                     different activities and locations at this stage that are non-well known (except for sanitation in schools) in each of the
                     nine provinces, the Borrower will develop an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) during the
                     project preparation phase and will disclose it before project appraisal. The ESMF will provide an overview of the
                     project and its components, the applicable legislative and regulatory frameworks and policies, the baseline
                     conditions, and a summary of the main anticipated environmental and social impacts, in accordance with the relevant
                     standards, including a GBV/SEA/SH assessment and GBV/SEA/SH action plan. It will provide mitigation and
                     monitoring measures with their associated implementation costs, and a screening tool to assess and rank impacts at
                     the sub-project level. It will also provide guidance for the preparation of environmental and social assessments
                     (ESIAs) specific to sub-projects including, Management plans (ESMPs), occupational health and safety (OHS) for

                    Jul 14, 2023                                                                                                       Page 7 of 18
                               The World Bank
                               Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP) (P179643)



                     workers and community health and Safety plans, traffic management plan. In addition to ESMF the borrower will
                     prepared as standalone documents ; a Resettlement Framework (RF); Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework
                     (IPPF) , a Labor Management Procedures (LMP); Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) including a Grievance Redress
                     Mechanism for the project and a budget for the required training program.

                     The borrower will prepare an Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) to set out the measures and actions
                     taken by the Government to manage the risks and impacts of the project.

                     Eight Environmental and Social Standards (ESSs), are currently relevant for the project: EES1, ESS2; ESS3, ESS4; ESS5;
                     ESS6; ESS7 and ESS10. As per the identified environmental and social risks of project activities, three groups of
                     measures to address them will be developed during the project's preparation, suitable E&S management instruments
                     (ESMF with GBV/SEA/SH assessment, RF, LMP, SEP with GRM, IPPF) , institutional arrangements, and capacity
                     building and training.

                     During project implementation, once subproject locations are known, the borrower will carry out screening for
                     potential E&S risks, including potential risks on critical endangered flora and fuana from proposed subproject
                     activities and prepare site-specific plans (ESIAs specific to sub-projects and corresponding ESMPs, Occupational
                     health and safety (OHS) and community Health and Safety plans, traffic management plan, RP, and IPP before any
                     request for call for proposals for are issued for any project activities that include in part or full civil works. Moreover,
                     a Social Assessment will precede the preparation the IPP.




Public Disclosure
                     The ESMF will contain capacity-building measures, including a suitable training program and its budget. The project
                     ESCP, will present a set of measures and actions to fill the project capacity gaps, including targeted training and
                     support to the environmental and social specialists and project stakeholders.

                     Salient issues related to the environmental and social risks and impacts assessment for the ESMF that will be
                     approached during project preparation will cover points such as:
                     •        The E&S baseline with regards to component A and B for the cities to be supported by the project.
                     •        Identification of groups or individuals affected by the project that may be disadvantaged or vulnerable,
                     including disability and discrimination;
                     •        The identification of specific country locations with indigenous people and elaboration of issues parenting to
                     them with regards to the project as well as measures to enhance project appropriation by this group.
                     •        The development of a screening tool as there would be a requirement to screen all sites/facilities to assess
                     the potential for project activities to cause economic or physical displacement.
                     •        Screening for biodiversity risks including possible destruction of critical and natural habitats, and other
                     significant biodiversity values as defined by ESS 6 due to land clearance, water pollution, poaching and other causes.
                     • Social trends with regards to community perceptions on access to electricity, water, and sanitation facilities ; what
                     is needed to allow for community building including a feeling of belonging; how is the interaction among strangers of
                     different social and ethnic backgrounds and how to counteract social and spatial exclusion; what are the trends on
                     violence, conflict, and safety and issues of universal access to the project's services.


                     ESS10 Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure


                    Jul 14, 2023                                                                                                         Page 8 of 18
                               The World Bank
                               Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP) (P179643)



                     ESS10 is relevant. The Borrower will develop a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) consistent with ESS 10. The SEP
                     will: (i) provide an overview of project stakeholders; (ii) establish a systematic approach for consultation and their
                     engagement in the project’s preparation and implementation; (iii) provide guidelines regarding the maintenance of a
                     constructive relationship with them through a participatory approach that takes into account their concerns and
                     views; iv) indicate the budget required to implement these measures The SEP will also develop specific measures so
                     that engagement activities align with gender and social inclusion objectives and that the project benefits target all
                     beneficiaries, including vulnerable populations. The World Bank will review and clear the SEP, which will be disclosed
                     both in-country and on the World Bank’s website before the appraisal.

                     Key stakeholders of this project at this stage include:
                     Affected parties: (i) Government agencies: Ministry of Public Works; Ministry of Economy and Recovery (MER);
                     Ministry of Budget, Ministry of Cities Planning, Ministry of Environment, Ministry of Interior; Ministry of
                     Decentralization and Regional Planning; The Presidency of the Republic; Association of Mayors of Gabon; the
                     CNTIPPEE; Governorates, Prefectures, Ministry of Energy and Hydraulic Resources (MEHR), Ministry of Finance (public
                     debt) and SEEG (ii) Project communities/beneficiaries: include communities getting electric connections and proper
                     sanitation facilities schools benefiting from the WASH program as well as the most disadvantageous and vulnerable
                     individuals and groups (young people, women, migrants, disabled people, etc.), and iii) vulnerable and marginalised
                     groups affected by project activities including women, children, the elderly, indigenous populations, female-headed
                     households or single mothers with minor children, people belonging to ethnic or religious minorities, and other
                     minorities living within the wider community.
                     Other interested parties: (i) the private sector, (ii) Civil Society Organizations, (iii) Non-governmental organizations,




Public Disclosure
                     (iv) universities, (v) the press, etc.

                     The GoG will prepare a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) to be disclosed before project appraisal and include
                     consultation with stakeholders. Based on the Bank's feedback, the SEP will be updated, adopted by the GoG, and
                     redisclosed within 30 days of the project's effective date.

                     The SEP will be updated, not later than one year after the Effective Date of the Project, to take account of potential
                     project stakeholder changes and on a regular basis during project implementation to provide the means for the
                     effective and inclusive engagement of project stakeholders throughout the project life-cycle and to ensure that
                     appropriate project’s information is disclosed to stakeholders in a timely, understandable, accessible and appropriate
                     manner. The SEP will address specific project stakeholder engagement risks and be a living document to be updated
                     throughout the project's life.

                     Regarding COVID-19, the SEP will outline the precautions for public consultations. These will include the measures
                     outlined in the World Bank’s 2020 technical note on how to hold public consultations under such constraints. Finally,
                     the SEP will include measures to ensure broad consultation and stakeholder participation activities, with special
                     consideration on engaging women and vulnerable or marginalized groups so that their input is included in the project
                     preparation, implementation, and operation phases. The SEP will include the project grievance mechanism (GM),
                     developed based on an inclusive and participatory approach that will be used to deal with complaints related to the
                     implementation of project activities. The project's GM will be designed to receive and register general, project-
                     related complaints. The GM will also include guidance regarding addressing and properly documenting SEA/SH-
                     related complaints during project implementation.


                    Jul 14, 2023                                                                                                      Page 9 of 18
                               The World Bank
                               Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP) (P179643)




                     Indigenous People's views and inputs will be sought and outlined in the SEP. The approach to stakeholder
                     engagement should be based on the principles of meaningful consultation and disclosure of appropriate information.
                     The Borrower will undertake meaningful consultation to provide an opportunity for IPs to provide input on the
                     project's risks, impacts, and mitigation measures and for the Borrower to consider and respond to them in a culturally
                     sensitive manner. These consultations will be carried out continuously as issues, impacts, and opportunities evolve. If
                     potential adverse effects on IPs are identified, those adverse effects will be avoided, minimized, mitigated, or
                     compensated. IPs’ Free, Prior, and Informed Consent (FPIC) will be required if the project will have adverse impacts
                     on IP land and natural resources subject to traditional ownership or under customary use or occupation; cause
                     relocation of Indigenous Peoples from land and natural resources subject to traditional ownership or under
                     customary use or occupation; or have significant impacts on Indigenous Peoples that is material to the identity and or
                     cultural, ceremonial, or spiritual aspects of the affected Indigenous People’s lives as stated in ESS7. In this case, FPIC
                     will build on meaningful consultation carried out by the project on the principle of good faith negotiation between
                     the project and affected Indigenous Peoples. The project IPPF/IPP will document: (i) the mutually accepted process to
                     carry out good faith negotiations that the project and Indigenous Peoples have agreed on and (ii) the outcome of the
                     good faith negotiations between the project and Indigenous Peoples, including all agreements reached as well as
                     dissenting views.


                     B.2. Specific Risks and Impacts

                     A brief description of the potential environmental and social risks and impacts relevant to the Operation.



Public Disclosure
                     ESS2 Labor and Working Conditions
                       The project workforce will consist of
                       (i) direct workers for the PCU, all staff (consultants); (ii) Contracted workers: people employed or engaged through
                     third parties such as contractors and subcontractors for the construction of electrical, water supply, and sanitation
                     facilities; and (iii) primary supply workers for the provision of goods and services as well as solar PV.
                     The project is expected to recruit both skilled and unskilled workers for project activities pertaining to both
                     Components A and B. The majority of unskilled workers would likely come from project communities or surrounding
                     areas. Labor influx will thus result from the migration of both skilled and unskilled workers. Labor-related social risks
                     linked to labor influx include SEA/SH, child and forced labor, and increased community incidences of communicable
                     diseases, including STI and HIV/AIDS. In sum, a considerable workforce will be required, and the project will face
                     difficulties in promoting sound worker-management relationships and guaranteeing safe and healthy working
                     conditions.

                     There may be a potential risk of child labor and forced labor. This is a significant risk, particularly in the global supply
                     chain for solar panels and solar components. To support forced labor risk mitigation, the Bank requires the Borrower
                     to strengthen solar-related procurement processes by including forced labor bidder declarations, qualification
                     requirements, and strengthened contractual provisions in procurements involving financing of solar panels/solar
                     components by the WBG.
                     The project shall prepare Labor Management Procedures (LMP) according to ESS2 and relevant ESHS guidelines, as
                     well as the provisions of the ILO. This LMP will be applied to all project workers.



                    Jul 14, 2023                                                                                                         Page 10 of 18
                               The World Bank
                               Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP) (P179643)



                     More specifically, the LMP will contain (i) provisions and measures to ensure equal treatment in recruitment, working
                     conditions, promotion, payment, and no child or forced labor use for any category of project workers and suppliers;
                     (ii) a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) for all direct workers and contracted workers (and, where relevant, their
                     organizations) to raise workplace concerns (This GRM will be provided separately from the GRM required under
                     ESS10) and will foresee a tailored window for Gender-Based Violence issues (GBV), particularly Sexual Exploitation
                     and Abuse/sexual harassment and (SEA)/SH claims; (iii) measures relating to occupational health and safety (OHS)
                     and traffic risks that will be applied to the project that will include as relevant the requirements of paragraphs 24 -33
                     of the ESS2, and will take into account the General EHSGs and, as appropriate, the industry-specific EHSGs and other
                     GIIP. These OHS measures will also be set out in the legal agreement and the ESCP; and (iv) Code of Conduct to
                     adequately manage risks related to GBV, particularly SEA/SH, in the workplace and the community and any other
                     risks from labor influx. Given the identified risk of the potential exclusion of women and other vulnerable groups
                     from access to employment opportunities related to the project, the LMP would include measures for the inclusion of
                     women and vulnerable groups in project work opportunities.

                     The project worker's grievance mechanism will be proportionate to the nature and scale of the proposed IPF
                     activities and accessible for all project workers to raise workplace concerns. This grievance mechanism will be
                     provided separately from the Grievance Mechanisms required under ESS10. The grievance mechanism will not
                     impede access to other judicial or administrative remedies available under the law or through existing arbitration
                     procedures or substitute for grievance mechanisms provided through collective agreements.
                     The LMP will also contain the provision on which functions of the project will be executed by government civil
                     servants that will remain subject to the terms and conditions of their existing public sector employment agreement




Public Disclosure
                     and, therefore, ESS 2 will not apply to them, except as set out in ESS2 para 8.


                     ESS3 Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management
                     ESS3 is relevant as it will involve the construction of water systems and wells and the operation and maintenance of
                     sanitation infrastructures that would increase water use, generating wastes and sludge. Construction activities
                     related to electricity distribution in peri-urban and rural zones and the construction of hybrid solar/thermal power
                     plants and the fecal sludge treatment plant may result in noise and vibration, soil erosion, sedimentation of
                     waterbodies, air emissions, solid waste, and hazardous materials. In addition, operations of hybrid solar/thermal
                     power plants will be punctually the source of primary emissions to air from the combustion of fossil fuels, and
                     greenhouse gases. The wastewater dishcarges from the hybrid solar/thermal power plants might be contaminated
                     with heavy oil. Hazardous materials stored at the fecal sludge plant will need to be managed in line with good
                     international industry practice. The operation of sanitation facilities in schools will generate minimal impacts as it
                     mainly involves constructing latrines with septic tanks. The cleaning and disinfecting of the groundwater wells will
                     generate hazardous wastes, which will be used during the construction phase, and liquid chlorine, which will be used
                     as part of the planned works for the disinfection of extracted water from the well before pumping into the existing
                     bulk water system.

                     A waste management plan will be prepared under each subproject specific ESMP/ESIA. Best practices recommended
                     in the World Bank EHS General Guidelines, the specific EHS Guidelines for Water and Sanitation, and the EHS
                     Guidelines for Electric Power Transmission and Distribution shall be reflected in the ESMF and subproject-specific
                     ESIA/ESMP. The design of FTSP will consider environmental-friendly technologies that minimise the generation of


                    Jul 14, 2023                                                                                                     Page 11 of 18
                               The World Bank
                               Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP) (P179643)



                     GHG emissions and production of inputs for agriculture (excreta as hygiene fertilizer) or the production and injection
                     of electricity into the grid.



                     ESS4 Community Health and Safety
                      This standard is relevant. The project is national in scope and will involve many local communities. Under
                     components A and B of the project, members of these communities will be subject to noise and dust pollution
                     related to the construction of water and sanitation infrastructure, disruptions in their daily lives, and insecurity,
                     potentially increased due to increased activity and availability of materials and fuel. If small water retention
                     structures are financed, it is necessary to ensure that these systems are designed by competent engineers, as
                     required by ESS4. Civil works such as the construction of water supply and sewerage systems can generate traffic and
                     road safety hazards associated with obstructions, diversions, or closures of roads to give rise to works with a
                     concomitant increase in the volume of traffic on public roads and the risk of accidents. Civil works can also generate
                     dust, noise, vibration, waste, soil, and water pollution, which will impact surrounding communities, and
                     communicable diseases such as HIV/AIDS, which may be exacerbated by labor influx. To address these risks, site-
                     specific ESMPs will outline detailed management and mitigation measures for community health and safety
                     management (including a waste management plan , traffic management plan, and road safety) during operations and
                     civil works to rehabilitate and renovate social infrastructure. The potential leaks from the collection and transport of
                     sludge may have potential impacts on the health of the local community and operating personnel. Propoer sludge
                     empyting and transport trucks (vaccum truck and vacutug).




Public Disclosure
                     Likely negative impacts include accidents, labor influx, and associate impacts such as SEA/SH allegations/incidents,
                     pressure on limited socio-economic infrastructures in rural areas, frustrations due to restrictions of access to homes
                     or offices/ locations of economic activities' during construction, community reticence to endorse project activities
                     linked to the fecal sludge treatment plan due potential foul smells, soil, and water pollution. Mitigation measures will
                     be identified in the ESMF and subproject ESIA/ ESMP.

                     The site-specific ESIAs will determine whether a specific labor influx management plan is required (in the case of
                     significant impacts) or whether (in a low-risk scenario) the ESMP can include labor-related clauses.
                     For all civil works, the sub-project ESIA/ESMPs will include a Community Health and Safety (CHS) plan, including
                     prevention of STI/HIV-AIDS and COVID-19 spread for the project sites and a Code of Conduct that will be signed by all
                     workers and enforced by the contractors. The Community Health and Safety (CHS) plan could include measures such
                     as fences and security guards intended to secure equipment and vehicles/engines at the construction base camp to
                     protect community and worker safety. It will also include procedures to use in case of incidents. It will include
                     guidance for preparing an incident report consistent with the Bank’s Environmental and Social Incident Report Tool
                     (ESIRT).

                      Adverse community health and safety impacts may be especially significant for project sites close to communities
                     and in peri-urban areas. A preliminary assessment of SEA/SH risk has been conducted using the World Bank SEA/SH
                     screening tool indicating moderate risk rating at this stage of the project. A SEA/SH and violence against children
                     (VAC) risk assessment will be undertaken as part of the ESMF to assess the SEA/SH risks associated with the project’s
                     activities and an associated plan will be developed and implemented throughout the project life. The project ESMF



                    Jul 14, 2023                                                                                                    Page 12 of 18
                               The World Bank
                               Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP) (P179643)



                     will detail a workers’ Code of Conduct for the prevention of SEA/SH and VAC, to be included in the contractors’
                     bidding documents and the C-ESMP.
                     The ESMF will also incorporate the general and sector-specific EHSGs for the identified sub-projects in relation to
                     community health and safety. Appropriate and proportional mitigation and monitoring measures related to relevant
                     community health and safety risks will also be included in the ESMF.


                     ESS5 Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement
                     ESS5 is relevant.
                     The project will finance i) electricity extension activities requiring the installation of install Medium-Voltage (MV) and
                     Low-Voltage (LV) grid extension across 496 km for MV network and 197 km for LV network in 14 sites and the
                     construction of 132 substations as well as Hybrid Solar PV mini-grids in 21 villages; ii) Water supply activities requiring
                     the construction and or rehabilitation and optimization of mini water supply systems in 31 rural localities in nine
                     provinces; iii) WASH in schools through the construction of water access and sanitation facilities in 35 schools. More
                     precisely, the WASH program in schools will scale up the pilot interventions under the PASBMIR project and would
                     involve the construction of boreholes, construction/rehabilitation activities for school connection water networks,
                     access to water points, and sanitation facilities in schools; iv) and Urban sanitation through the construction of a fecal
                     sludge treatment plant in Libreville.

                     The electricity extension activities are expected to lead to mainly temporary restrictions on land use, although there
                     may be some permanent restrictions along the project's right of way as well as on land marked for the installation of




Public Disclosure
                     substations and Hybrid Solar PV mini-grids. Water supply activities may also lead to permanent land loss in rural areas
                     where land would be acquired for the construction of mini-water supply systems. , There may be temporary
                     restrictions on land required to establish water connection networks. Permanent land restrictions are expected for
                     the construction of the fecal sludge treatment plant of Libreville. Thus, project land acquisition would likely lead to
                     the loss or disruption of income or livelihood activities and physical and/or economic displacement for individuals or
                     groups of people, particularly those occupying the existing rights of way for the LV and MV networks and marked
                     project sites for the Hybrid Solar PV mini-grid, water supply facilities, and the fecal sludge treatment plant sites. It is
                     also likely that the area marked for the Transmission-line would require the cutting of trees. In rural areas, the project
                     entails engaging communities towards voluntary land donations for small plots of land required for the construction
                     of mini-water supply systems.

                     The exact locations of the marked activities are not yet known. Therefore, a Resettlement Framework (RF) compliant
                     with the national legal and regulatory framework and ESS 5 will be developed for the project. The RF will cover all the
                     above-listed activities to be performed under Components A and B of the project. The RF will detail the principles
                     that will be used during the implementation phase of the project, where individual Resettlement Plans (RP) will be
                     prepared for each component of the civil works of the project, including the fecal sludge treatment plant. The RF will
                     be reviewed, consulted upon, and disclosed in the country and on the World Bank’s website before Board approval.
                     In addition, the RF and/or RP will also include ESS5 requirements, as relevant:
                     A. General: eligibility classification, project design, compensation and benefits for affected persons, community
                     engagement, grievance mechanism, planning, and implementation;
                     B. displacement: physical displacement, economic displacement;
                     C. Collaboration with other responsible agencies or subnational jurisdictions;


                    Jul 14, 2023                                                                                                       Page 13 of 18
                               The World Bank
                               Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP) (P179643)



                     D. Technical and financial assistance.; and Elements of the involuntary resettlement instruments: A. Resettlement
                     plan; and B. Resettlement framework

                     In addition, a screening tool would be developed as part of the ESMF, and there will be a requirement to screen all
                     sites/facilities to assess the potential for project activities to cause economic or physical displacement.
                     Some voluntary donation of land is foreseen in rural areas for small infrastructures for water supply and Hybrid Solar
                     PV mini-grids. However, the project will avoid any land taking in areas inhabited by indigenous people. All project
                     voluntary land donations would be done following the World Bank ESF guidance note for borrowers on land
                     acquisition, restrictions on land use, and involuntary resettlement. The RF will include a section on voluntary land
                     donation, including relevant forms and a database of concerned persons. After screening specific intervention sites (if
                     occupied), the possibilities for resettlement or compensation will be analyzed and determined. In all cases, the basic
                     principle will always be to avoid resettlement (both physical and economic resettlement).


                     ESS6 Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources
                     Most of the project sites are in rural and peri-urban areas with high biodiversity conservation value and/or ecosystem
                     services that the project may impact. However, given that site locations for electric distribution and hybrid
                     solar/thermal power plants are yet unknown, additional information will be obtained during preparation and
                     revisited prior to appraisal. Moreover, the ESMF/ESIA site-specific once further information becomes available, will
                     contain a chapter containing as assessment of the level of risk on biodiversity conservation and sustainable natural
                     resource management, mitigating measures to assess and manage risks, including inter alia:i) Procedures to assess




Public Disclosure
                     biodiversity and natural habitats and services that Project activities could impact; ii) A screening mechanism to avoid
                     any high-risk ecological areas; iii) Guidance to Site-Specific Biodiversity Action Plan (SS-BAP) including mitigation
                     measures in line with the mitigation hierarchy.

                     The site-specific ESIAs or ESMPs will assess the impacts on habitats of importance, if any are within the impact area,
                     and will propose alternative routes for the infrastructures. Adequate mitigation measures in line with the ESS6 will be
                     proposed as necessary. Additional information will be obtained and assessed on impacts on natural/critical habitats
                     once the exact project location and final project design are known.


                     ESS7 Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional Local Communities
                     This Standard is relevant as the project is nationwide, covering activities in all nine provinces of the country, and the
                     likely to be implemented in areas where Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan Historically Underserved Traditional Local
                     Communities (IPs) are present or in areas which they have a collective attachment, or within very close proximity to
                     their settlements. IPs are present across the country in the North, East (Zadié department and Haut-Ogooué), Central
                     (Lopé department), South-central/South (Ngounié), North (Woleu Ntem), Babongo (Ogooué Lolo) and Akoa (Port
                     Gentil). IPs are mostly hunger-gatherers, although some may live partly in towns/villages and partly in the forest.
                     However, since Indigenous Peoples will not be the sole or overwhelming majority of direct beneficiaries, the project
                     will be designed and implemented in a manner that provides Indigenous Peoples with the opportunity to culturally
                     adequate participate of the consultations and planning processes and design and implementation arrangements of
                     the project and access to project benefits. The project will conduct a Social Assessment, which will examine potential
                     risks, impacts, and potential project benefits for the IPs. Using a consultative approach, the Social Assessment will


                    Jul 14, 2023                                                                                                     Page 14 of 18
                               The World Bank
                               Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP) (P179643)



                     identify measures to mitigate risks and ensure culturally acceptable benefits to IPs. The Social Assessment will also
                     explore the appropriate consultation methods for the different IP groups and examine culturally appropriate
                     grievance mechanisms. These measures will be detailed in an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) and will be incorporated
                     into the project design, including, but not limited to, the Stakeholder Engagement Plan and the grievance mechanism.

                     The potential social impacts can be adequately managed/ mitigated through developing, implementing, and
                     monitoring appropriate measures. The borrower would proactively engage with the IPs to ensure their ownership
                     and participation in project design, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation. In addition, measures would be
                     provided in the Social Assessment to ensure that IPs and other vulnerable groups can share in project benefits.
                     Consultations and how issues have been addressed in project design will be duly documented, together with ongoing
                     consultation and monitoring arrangements. The Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) and the Grievance Redress
                     Mechanism that will be developed under the project will be tailored to be culturally appropriate and accessible to
                     Indigenous Peoples. The Stakeholder Engagement plan will include outreach programs to ensure indigenous
                     communities, especially those living in remote areas, are informed of project activities and associated benefits.

                     An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) will be prepared. The IPPF will cover specific measures to ensure
                     that IPs in project zones receive culturally appropriate social and economic benefits, ensure that project activities do
                     not adversely impact Indigenous peoples, and estimate the costs of such measures. For instance, the IPPF would
                     contain arrangements for IP water access and maintenance of water supply facilities for semi-sedentary IP
                     communities.




Public Disclosure
                     Once specific project sites are identified, if needed, the PIU will prepare an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) depending
                     on locations and timing, acceptable to the Bank that sets out specific actions through which the project will ensure
                     that: (i) IPs affected by the project receive culturally appropriate social and economic benefits; and (ii) if potential
                     adverse effects on IPs are identified, those adverse effects are avoided, minimized, mitigated or compensated. IPP
                     will be prepared before the implementation of any activities in areas where IPs are present. Project activities that
                     could potentially lead to adverse impacts on a) IP land and natural resources subject to traditional ownership or
                     under customary use or occupation, b) cause relocation of Indigenous Peoples from land and natural resources
                     subject to traditional ownership or under customary use or occupation; c) or have significant impacts on Indigenous
                     Peoples that is material to the identity and or cultural, ceremonial, or spiritual aspects of the affected Indigenous
                     People’s lives will not be implemented in IP zones. Thus, Free, Prior, and Informed Consent (FPIC) of IPs will not be
                     required.


                     ESS8 Cultural Heritage
                     The presence of culturally significant sites associated with the project cannot be determined at this stage of project
                     preparation. Activities relating to the construction and rehabilitation of water and sanitation infrastructure will likely
                     require small-scale excavation works. These activities can lead to the discovery of cultural heritage. The ESMF will
                     contain a chance find procedure which will also be included in the tender documents. This procedure will determine
                     the methods of management of any fortuitous discovery made within the framework of the project. The ESMF will
                     identify the protected areas affected by the project that are home to classified cultural heritage. Measures will be
                     recommended in site-specific ESMPs to avoid harm to identified cultural heritage in accordance with national and
                     international requirements.


                    Jul 14, 2023                                                                                                      Page 15 of 18
                               The World Bank
                               Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP) (P179643)




                     ESS9 Financial Intermediaries
                     The standard is not currently relevant because the project does not include financial intermediaries.


                     C. Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                     OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                        No


                     OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                 No



                     III. WORLD BANK ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL DUE DILIGENCE

                     A. Is a common approach being considered?                                                                            Yes
                     Financing Partners
                     AfDB and Bill Gates Foundation are supporting the innovative first fecal sludge Treatment plant to be constructed
                     around Libreville. AfDB is financing prefeasibility studies. The use of World Bank ESF for managing the E&S risks of the
                     facility will be discussed and agreed upon with the partners during the appraisal.




Public Disclosure
                     B. Proposed Measures, Actions and Timing (Borrower’s commitments)
                     Actions to be completed prior to Bank Board Approval:
                     1 – Preparation of Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) in line with project interventions whose
                     technical details and designs are not known at appraisal. ESMF to be consulted on, reviewed and cleared by the Bank
                     and disclosed;
                     2 – Preparation of site-specific Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs)/Environmental and Social
                     Management Plans (ESMPs) for sites whose technical details and locations are known at appraisal. ESMPs will
                     included Community Health and Safety Management Plan (CHSMP) as a section. Both will be consulted on, reviewed
                     and cleared by the Bank, and disclosed;
                     3 – Preparation of Resettlement Framework (RF) to include interventions whose design and locations/alignment are
                     not known. The RF will be consulted on, reviewed and cleared by the Bank, and disclosed;
                     4 – Preparation of site-specific RPs whose technical designs and locations/alignments are available at appraisal. RPs to
                     be consulted on, reviewed and cleared by the Bank and disclosed;
                     5 – Preparation of Labor Management Procedure (LMP) to include project labor management requirements. The LMP
                     will be consulted on, reviewed and cleared by the Bank and disclosed;
                     6 – Preparation of the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) to include stakeholder engagement requirements and
                     corresponding Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM). The SEP will be consulted on, reviewed and cleared by the Bank
                     and disclosed;
                     7 – Preparation of IPPF (as relevant) will be prepared, consulted upon and disclosed upon;



                    Jul 14, 2023                                                                                                    Page 16 of 18
                               The World Bank
                               Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP) (P179643)



                     8 – Preparation of the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) for the project. The ESCP will be reviewed
                     and cleared by the Bank and disclosed.
                     Possible issues to be addressed in the Borrower Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP):
                     1– Implementation of the project ESMF, ESMPs, RF, RPs, IPP, LMP and SEP;

                     2 – Preparation of site-specific ESMPs for different interventions, to be cleared and disclosed before the
                     commencement of civil works.
                     3 – Preparation of site-specific RPs once technical designs and locations/alignments of interventions are available and
                     prior to the bidding of such works. RPs to be consulted on, reviewed and cleared by the Bank and disclosed. RPs to be
                     implemented before commencement of construction.
                     4- Preparation of Social Assessment related to project IPs.
                     5- Preparation of IPP, once technical designs and locations/alignments of interventions are available. IPP is to be
                     consulted on, reviewed and cleared by the Bank and disclosed.
                     6- Timeline and responsibilities of the E&S instruments, including SEP's scoping in terms of coverage .
                     7- Training component to strengthen capacity of PIU, Consultant firms and others stakeholders.


                     C. Timing
                     Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage ESRS                                               25-Sep-2023

                     IV. CONTACT POINTS



Public Disclosure
                     World Bank
                     Contact:             Roger Coma Cunill                   Title:            Senior Energy Specialist

                     Telephone No:        +1-202-473-2962                     Email:            rcomacunill@worldbank.org

                     Contact:             Ousmane Yida Yaya Bocoum            Title:            Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                Specialist

                     Telephone No:        5338+6321 / 226-25-496321           Email:            oyayabocoum@worldbank.org

                     Borrower/Client/Recipient
                     Borrower:         Gabonese Republic

                     Contact:          Aristide Ngari                                         Title:         General Director

                     Telephone No: ..                                                         Email:         arisngari@yahoo.fr

                     Implementing Agency(ies)
                     Implementing
                                        CNTIPPEE
                     Agency:



                    Jul 14, 2023                                                                                                   Page 17 of 18
                               The World Bank
                               Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP) (P179643)



                     Contact:           Jean Pierre BOUSSOUGOU                           Title:       SECRETAIRE PERMANENT

                     Telephone No:      24111731963                                      Email:       contact@cntippee-gabon.org

                     Implementing
                                        Ministry of Economy and Recovery
                     Agency:

                     Contact:           Nicole Jeanine Lydie ROBOTY ep. MBOU             Title:       Minister of Economy and
                                                                                                      Recovery

                     Telephone No:      241011795527                                     Email:       cabmer1220@outlook.fr



                     V. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     VI. APPROVAL




Public Disclosure
                     Task Team Leader(s):               Roger Coma Cunill, Ousmane Yida Yaya Bocoum

                     Practice Manager (ENR/Social)      Maged Mahmoud Hamed Recommended on 11-Jun-2023 at 03:35:22 EDT




                    Jul 14, 2023                                                                                            Page 18 of 18
