Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Guinea Water And Sanitation Project (P179017)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                           Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                     (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                       Date Prepared/Updated: 02/14/2025 | Report No: ESRSA03937




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Feb 14, 2025                                                                        Page 1 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              Guinea Water And Sanitation Project (P179017)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                   Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P179017                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)        PEAG                         2025

                     Operation Name            Guinea Water and Sanitation Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries             Region                      Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Guinea                    Guinea                                    WESTERN AND CENTRAL          Water
                                                                                         AFRICA

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                  Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     Ministy of Economy        Ministere de l'Energie, de l'Eau et des   29-Jan-2025                  31-Mar-2025
                     and Finance (MEF)         Hydrocarbures (MEHH)

                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost
                     Review Date



Public Disclosure
                     18-Dec-2024               499,092,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The project development objective is to increase access to safely managed water services in Greater Conakry and to
                     strengthen the operational and organizational performance of water and sanitation institutions in Guinea.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     Guinea is a water rich country, endowed with 1,165 rivers spread over 23 watersheds, 14 of which are shared with its
                     neighbouring countries, including the Niger, Senegal and Gambia rivers (respectively the first, second and fourth largest
                     rivers in West Africa). Guinea is a member of the associated regional river basin authorities, including NBA (9 countries),
                     OMVS (4 countries) and OMVG (3 countries). These activities are still at a nascent stage and need substantial support to
                     scale them up. There is also a need to improve Guinea’s participation in transboundary platforms, to enable the country
                     to benefit fully from its position as an upstream riparian and mobilize its surface water resources for multiple uses.
                     There are also significant groundwater resources but they have not been well managed, with some gaps in knowledge

                    Feb 14, 2025                                                                                                      Page 2 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              Guinea Water And Sanitation Project (P179017)



                     about the state of the resource, and weak institutional capacity to monitor and exploit groundwater in a sustainable
                     manner. While some groundwater modeling studies have been undertaken, there is little understanding of the
                     proliferation of boreholes in major urban areas and the potential impact on water resources. Guinea has a population of
                     13.1 million and is experiencing a strong demographic growth of more than 2.84%. Although two thirds of the
                     population of Guinea is still rural , the country is undergoing a strong urbanisation process. Only 64% of the national
                     population has access to improved water supply and 30% to safely managed sanitation. Water services are provided by
                     the national water utility, SEG, but it has been undermined by weak financial and operational capacity for several years.
                     In the face of rapid population growth (3.5% a year in Greater Conakry), there is currently a water production deficit of
                     180,000 m3/day, equivalent to 120% of current production. While there is existing water production infrastructure such
                     as dams, reservoirs and boreholes, these assets suffer from poor operational functionality and are in need of repair. The
                     distribution network is also dilapidated with an estimated 60% of non—revenue water (physical and commercial losses)
                     in SEG’s network. A Water Masterplan for Greater Conakry was developed in 2019 and a similar study is currently
                     underway for secondary towns and cities. With an estimated 1.345 billion € needed for water infrastructure until 2040
                     for Greater Conakry alone, the investment needs are significant and mobilizing funding and financing is an urgent task.
                     Sanitation has been a long-neglected part of the country’s overall development. Sanitation, covering sewerage, onsite,
                     rainwater evacuation and solid waste, is managed under the Ministry of Housing, Urbanism and Territorial Development
                     (MINHUT) with local communes responsible for services, but formal network services are available to only a small part
                     of the capital city, with the rest of the country making do with rudimentary sanitation facilities and informal services
                     such as for pit emptying. Several development partners are already starting to invest in wastewater infrastructure to
                     start addressing the gap in services but more needs to be done to improve sanitation service delivery. As the Guinea
                     national sanitation strategy (2022) noted, the institutional arrangements are inadequate given the growing population,




Public Disclosure
                     significant backlog in investments and the poor quality of services – with knock-on impacts on human health and the
                     environment. A Master Plan has been developed and several recommendations submitted to the government for
                     addressing this serious crisis. To address the most pressing water and sanitation challenges, the Guinea Water and
                     Sanitation Project (PEAG) will focus on investments to increase water production, water supply and water services to
                     boost access to water for unconnected people in Greater Conakry. At the same time, these investments will enhance
                     the reliability and quality of water services for people who are already connected to SEG's water services but only
                     receive water intermittentl. A major non-revenue water reduction component will address leakages and dysfunction in
                     the current distribution network, which will also improve SEG's operational efficiency and enhance services for current
                     and future customers. To ensure the sustainability of investments, the project will support institutional reforms,
                     particularly as regards the urban water utility, SEG, and the sanitation sector whose institutional and regulatory
                     arrangements require massive reinforcement. In parallel, an the Guinea Fiscal Sustainability and Efficiency Reforms
                     Development Policy Financing (P501272) is currently being prepared and includes prior actions related to the revision of
                     the water policy based on tariff methodology that aims at operational cost recovery for SEG over time. to the
                     Government of Guinea will inIn addition, the project will support the GoG to implement tariff reforms, updates to sector
                     regulations and policies, and other measures needed to strengthen the capacity of sector institutions to achieve
                     universal access to water and sanitation services. The project will be implemented using the IPF with PBC instrument to
                     ensure adequate incentives for achieving investments and reforms.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings




                    Feb 14, 2025                                                                                                    Page 3 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              Guinea Water And Sanitation Project (P179017)



                     The proposed project (PEAG) aims to close the water deficit facing the Greater Conakry area. Since 2001, the city of
                     Conakry has been facing a recurrent shortage of drinking water supply due to increasing demand from a growing
                     population and insufficient investments in water production.

                     Communes around Conakry have also been growing and some do not have any water services, forcing residents to
                     resort to drilling private boreholes and purchasing costly water from tanker trucks. Most of the production facilities are
                     located at the Yessoulou complex, near the commune of Maneah, and consist of three treatment plants (Yessoulou 1, 2
                     and 3) that were constructed in 1964, 1994 and 2009 respectively. These plants, which receive raw water from the
                     Grandes Chutes dam, together produce 83% of the water supplied to Conakry. However, due to a growing population in
                     the Greater Conakry area and lack of investment to increase water supply, the overall access rate of urban populations
                     to drinking water through the SEG networks is around 31% with intermittent service.

                     The current drinking water supply in the city of Conakry is 85% dependent on surface water resources taken from the
                     Samou River at the level of the Grandes Chutes dam (with Baneah and Kale dams upstream). The project will invest
                     $153 million in this infrastructure but attention should also be paid to the need of strong knowledge production and
                     capacity-building efforts on water resources management (groundwater and surface water for multiple use) as
                     described under component 3.

                     The Grandes Chutes Dam is located in a rich biodiversity area which includes the Grandes Chutes classified Forest
                     situated in the southern Fouta Djalon immediately north of the town of Mambiya, beside the Conakry–Kindia road. The
                     habitat is wooded savanna and grassland and, along the northern boundary of the reserve, a tributary of the River Badi




Public Disclosure
                     is lined by gallery forest. The terrain is hilly, with some steep slopes and sheer rock-faces. It was classified by Birdlife
                     International as an Important Bird Areas (IBA) in 2001, and listed as a Key Biodiversity Area on IBAT web site which
                     reports the presence of the bird Picathartes gymnocephalus (VU) in the area, More recently the Grandes Chutes
                     classified forest was identified as a Tropical Important Plant Area (TIPA) by a consortium of entities comprising RBG
                     Kew, the National Herbarium and Guinee Ecologie.

                     Another key aspect is the challenge of providing more water to the population of the Greater Conakry, that will lead to
                     generating more wastewater, while the sanitation infrastructure and systems are limited. These, among others, could
                     be conditions or limitations for environmental and social sustainability of the proposed operation linked to the small
                     and big water cycles issues.

                     The human capital needs in Guinea are substantial but current efforts are not enough to meet the needs of the most
                     vulnerable people, particularly for women. Marginalized groups such as the urban youth and women are some of the
                     most vulnerable groups in Guinea. Guinea ranks near the bottom of the list of countries on the gender equality index
                     (118 on 146 countries in 2022). Women require targeted engagement to ensure their priorities and voices are heard,
                     and community-level mechanisms to monitor and mitigate local tensions and conflicts.

                     Guinea has adopted several legal instruments and has ratified the majority of international legal instruments that
                     integrate dimensions related to gender and Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH). However,
                     gender inequality is still pronounced in Guinea across a range of socioeconomic, health, and education outcomes. All of
                     these outcomes are aggravated by water-related challenges and will have to be closely analyzed and considered in the
                     preparation and implementation of the proposed project E&S instruments and activities.


                    Feb 14, 2025                                                                                                       Page 4 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              Guinea Water And Sanitation Project (P179017)




                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Ministry of Energy, Hydraulics and Hydrocarbons (MEHH) and the Ministry of Urban Planning and habitat and
                     territorial Development (MINUHAT), will be involved in the implementation of the project with two implementing
                     agencies: Société des Eaux de Guinée (SEG) and Direction Nationale de l’Aménagement du Territoire et de l’Urbanisme
                     (DATU). The two ministries and the implementing agencies have limited internal resources and only limited experience
                     in environmental and social risk management. They have struggled to retain the dedicated environmental and social
                     staff required by the project and at times the project has been without these two key positions altogether. The activities
                     financed by IDA and EIB/EU will be implemented by the PCU in an integrated manner to minimize inconsistencies in the
                     approach to environmental and social management. The EBI component will be managed, supervised, and coordinated
                     by a separate unit within SEG (PRES AEP-GC). This unit is currently undergoing restructuring to strengthen its capacity in
                     terms of staffing and will collaborate closely with SEG’s environmental specialists and social safeguards officers. Among
                     the members of SEG’s Executing Agency is a focal point for the Indian Exim Bank, who can facilitate coordination on
                     project management, including compliance with the ESF, through this channel.


                     Also, problems were encountered with the preparation and implementation of the safeguard’s instruments of the
                     project. At the national level, projects implemented based on the ESF are limited and are mainly in the moderate
                     environment and social risk category. Regarding social and environmental risk management policies, although Guinea
                     has ratified 9/10 of the ILO’s fundamental conventions and the most recent labor law was adopted in January 2014 (Law




Public Disclosure
                     No. L12014/-072-CNT), the system in place in Guinea fails to fully implement these regulations. Therefore, violations of
                     wage, overtime, and health and safety standards were common in all sectors. Not to mention the prevalence of forced
                     and child labor in agriculture, services, and industry (including construction). On land expropriation and compensation,
                     Guinea's current regulations differ significantly from the ESS5 regulations, particularly on issues such as compensation
                     modalities, resettlement support, livelihood restoration, and vulnerable groups. Other ESF requirements (such as
                     stakeholder engagement) are generally quite new to Guinea, and without proper management, local communities are
                     likely to be marginalized and not benefit from the project.

                     Based on lessons learned from the PUEG , the proposed project (PEAG) will be implemented by a project coordination
                     unit (PCU), which will be established under the supervision of the Ministry of Energy, Hydraulics and Hydrocarbons
                     (MEHH) prior to project effectiveness. The PCU will hire qualified regional or international staff to support management
                     of Environmental, Social and OHS risks and impacts of the Project including: i) an environmental specialist, and ii) a
                     social specialist (including gender and SEA/SH aspects), In addition SEG and DATU will create dedicated project teams
                     from their own staff to accompany the implementation of the planned activities and safeguards instruments. With
                     respect to environment and social safeguards, SEG has already designated two staff members to accompany the
                     preparation of safeguards instruments and later on to oversea implementation of these safeguards instruments.
                     In addition to managing the environmental and social risks and impacts of the project under the ESF. The PCU will be
                     responsible for providing capacity building and support to the dedicated teams of the relevant government
                     implementing agencies on preparing, implementing and monitoring environmental and social requirements throughout
                     the project cycle. Training was organized by the Bank's specialists for the implementing agencies during project
                     preparation and will continue during implementation as needed. To this end, strengthening measures regarding the



                    Feb 14, 2025                                                                                                     Page 5 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              Guinea Water And Sanitation Project (P179017)



                     implementation of the ESF requirements have been adequately captured in the Environmental and Social Commitment
                     Plan (ESCP).


                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                                   High


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                            High
                     The project design is aimed at implementing activities that have environmental benefits by improving access to water
                     supply in Greater Conakry. The project will support the the construction of a 200,000 cubic meter treatment plant,
                     storage reservoirs, transmission, and distribution networks. These investments can however generate risks that
                     emanate from construction related activities and during operation and maintenance. Potential environmental risks
                     and adverse impacts associated with project activities are likely to be substantial and affect a wide geographic area.
                     They are mainly linked to water, soil, waste, disruptions of natural habitats, occupational health, and safety (OHS),
                     and community health and safety due to increase circulation, noise and air pollution. These may include: (i) alteration
                     of air quality by dust flights during development, foundation, earthworks, rehabilitation of existing water facilities; (ii)
                     degradation of the sound climate due to excavation work, noise and vibration from moving of construction vehicles
                     and machinery; (iii) contamination of surface water by residues of hydrocarbons, lubricants, oils and suspended
                     solids; (iv) risk of accidents and incidents (including injury and drowning) due to the supply of construction materials
                     to the sites, the transport of equipment and the transportation of personnel during construction works; (v) odor



Public Disclosure
                     nuisance due to poorly designed, misused or badly maintained latrines ; (vi) wastewater and fecal sludge generation
                     (from sanitation facilities); (vii) risk associated with the lost of biodiversity. An important impact associated with the
                     operation of the project is the generation of additional wastewater volumes that will be discharged. Considering the
                     nature and scale of the project’s activities and the limited capacity and experience with ESF of the Implementing
                     agency, the project’s environmental risks and impacts are classified as high at this stage.
                                                                                                                                       Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The project's social risks (mainly related to labor standards violations, resettlement, restrictions on access to national
                     parks, occupational health and safety, community health, and risks associated with the project support to operations
                     of the rangers of the national parks office (OGPNRF) remain Substantial. While the magnitude of these impacts ranges
                     from moderate to substantial, limited implementation capacity and policy gaps may hinder compliance with World
                     Bank policies and ultimately project development objectives. On labor management, Guinea has ratified 9/10 of the
                     ILO’s fundamental conventions and the most recent labor law was adopted in January 2014 (Law No. L12014/-072-
                     CNT). However, the system in place in Guinea fails to fully implement these regulations. Therefore, violations of wage,
                     overtime, and health and safety standards were common in all sectors. Not to mention the prevalence of forced and
                     child labor in agriculture, services, and industry (including construction). On land expropriation and compensation,
                     Guinea's current regulations differ significantly from the ESS5 regulations, particularly on issues such as compensation
                     modalities, resettlement support, livelihood restoration, and vulnerable groups. Other ESF requirements (such as
                     stakeholder engagement) are generally quite new to Guinea, and without proper management, local communities are
                     likely to be marginalized and not benefit from the project. Finally, it is impossible not to mention GBV/SEA/SH risks,
                     especially during the construction phase, as activities will involve workers working in close proximity to the local


                    Feb 14, 2025                                                                                                         Page 6 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              Guinea Water And Sanitation Project (P179017)



                     population. Implementation and monitoring of mitigation measures may be more challenging for project-related
                     activities (such as those funded by the Export-Import Bank of India or the BEI/EU).


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                  Relevant

                      The Project aims to address safe access to drinking water by financing the extension and rehabilitation of water
                      infrastructure including water reservoirs, treatment plants as well as transmission and distribution networks in order
                      to increase access to water in greater Conakry. The activities to be financed by the project are expected to improve
                      the quality of life of populations living in Conakry and support social and human development. However, the planned
                      activities present important environmental and social risks associated with large infrastructures, including
                      construction of 200,000 cubic meter treatment plant including a 20,000 cubic meter reservoir, around 80 km of
                      transmission and distribution pipelines, as well as two storage reservoirs. The risks associated with project activities,
                      such as construction and rehabilitation of infrastructure, during the construction and operation phase are mainly
                      linked to occupational health and safety (OHS), community health and safety, water, soil, and air pollution, risk of
                      wastewater pollution associated with insufficient wastewater facilities to cater for the increased wastewater
                      production as a result of additional water consumption, risks of spreading sexually transmitted diseases such as
                      STIs/HIV/AIDS as well as COVID-19 contamination. The main social risks include labor standards violations,
                      resettlement, restrictions on access to national parks, occupational health and safety, community health, and risks



Public Disclosure
                      associated with the project support to operations of the rangers of the national parks office (OGPNRF). There will be
                      no impact on the forest as the works in Grandes chutes are restricted to the implementation of works within the dam
                      premise. Furthermore, there are potential risks of social conflicts in the event of non-local employment, health
                      vulnerability due to poor hygiene, insecurity and risk of incidents in the event of dam or pipe burst, Sexual
                      Exploitation and Abuse / Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) that may arise from power relationships (hierarchy, positioning,
                      economic benefits, etc.) in the context of the proximity of female and male workers as well as workers and
                      neighboring communities and potential child labor risks on worksite. At this stage the location and details of project
                      activities under component 1 are known and specific environmental and social impacts assessments (ESIAs) for: (i)
                      Improving operations and safety of water reservoirs, (ii) Yessoulou treatment plant, and (iii) storage reservoirs and
                      distribution networks are being developed. The ESIAs will be reviewed, approved by the Bank and disclosed prior to
                      the start of the activities. These site specific ESIAs will propose mitigation measures and include reference to
                      management plans such as dam safety management/disaster preparedness plans and waste management plans. The
                      ESIAs will also cover activities relating to capacity building with trainings that will involve all project stakeholders.
                      Each ESIA will include an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) with clearly defined mitigation
                      measures for construction and operational phases, roles and responsibilities, general and sector-specific,
                      Environmental Health and Safety Guidelines in relation to occupational and community health and safety, measures
                      for monitoring, time plans, environmental and social requirements to be included in bidding documents, costs and
                      implementation producers for each mitigation measures recommended. The ESIAs will also include an assessment of
                      risks related to Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Harassment (SEA/SH), and proposed mitigation measures. The project
                      includes associated facilities to be funded by other donors including the raw water intake and the transmission lines.
                      This issue has been investigated during the preparation of the ESIAs and the required safeguards due diligence have


                    Feb 14, 2025                                                                                                      Page 7 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              Guinea Water And Sanitation Project (P179017)



                      been addressed and developed as part of the project ESIAs. Construction Contractors will be contractually required to
                      implement and comply with the project’s ESMP, including preparing contractors Environmental and Social
                      Management Plans (C-ESMP) that include all necessary specific management plans and procedures provided in the
                      ESMP. Once the CERC component is triggered, the CERC Manual will include a description of the E&S assessment and
                      management arrangements for the implementation of CERC component, in accordance with the ESSs. In addition to
                      the ESIAs that are being developed, the Client has prepared the following environmental and social instruments:
                      Environment and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP),a Labor Management
                      Procedure (LMP) and Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for the transmission and distribution pipelines . For activities
                      under component 3, in addition to various E&S instrument, the work of the Office and its rangers in the national park
                      will be conducted as per World Bank guidance on protected areas. A Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the
                      Guinean Office of National Parks and Wildlife Reserves or “OGPNRF” (Office Guinéen des Parcs Nationaux et Réserves
                      de Faune) for the implementation of Part 3 of the Project. The MOU will adequately allocate the roles and
                      responsibilities between the two entities and clarify that MEHH will be leading the supervision of the work of the
                      office under the Project. All E&S instruments will be reviewed, cleared and dislcosed per ESF requirements. The ESCP
                      will be disclosed prior to project appraisal.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                         Relevant

                      Stakeholder engagement is a fundamental aspect of the project. The project will involve and engage local
                      populations, dedicated institutions, administrative and local authorities, civil society, in order to be able to succeed in
                      securing water resources, implement the E&S instruments and finalize the various construction activities. The key
                      stakeholders of the project include government employees employed by the Ministry of Energy, Water and



Public Disclosure
                      Hydrocarbons (MEHH) and the Ministry of Urban Planning and habitat and territorial Development (MINUHAT) as
                      well as all other ministries involved in the implementation of water infrastructure (like Environment, Health etc.),
                      SEG, DATU, Guinea Agency for environment Evaluation (AGEE), NGOs, Civil Society Organizations (CSOs), consumers,
                      potential contractors, the media and project beneficiaries, including all Project Affected Persons (PAPs). During
                      project preparation, stakeholder consultation missions were conducted in Conakry (06/2021, 12/2023, April-August
                      2024) and in Kindia, Kouria, Coyah, Maneah and Kagbelen (July 2024) by the government counterpart in order to
                      present the project to the communities and discuss with them to identify the problems related to water, their
                      expectations in terms of drinking water supply as well as the environmental and social issues that would be
                      encountered as part of this project. The Borrower will engage in meaningful consultations with all stakeholders
                      throughout the project life cycle, paying particular attention to the inclusion of vulnerable and disadvantaged groups
                      (including the elderly, persons with disabilities, female-headed households, youth and orphans). Thus, specific
                      consultations adapted to the needs of vulnerable groups will be held in order to highlight and address their needs
                      throughout the project cycle. The Borrower will maintain and disclose a documented record of any stakeholder
                      engagement, including a description of the stakeholders consulted, a summary of the feedback received and a brief
                      explanation of how the feedback was taken (or not) into consideration. The Borrower has developed a Stakeholder
                      Engagement Plan (SEP) that outlines potential sakeholders, engagement/communication modalities, monitoring and
                      reporting, institutional arrangement, and timeline and cost. The SEP also included a Grievance Mechanism (GM) for
                      the project that is known by and made accessible to all stakeholders and allow them to voice their concerns and
                      request information about the project. The operation of this GM mechanism will be based on a number of factors
                      that have proved effective in the PUEG project and others elements in the nationally adopted GM. The GM will also




                    Feb 14, 2025                                                                                                        Page 8 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              Guinea Water And Sanitation Project (P179017)



                      be SEA/SH sensitive. These provisions are contained in the SEP and the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan
                      (ESCP).

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                              Relevant

                      The standard is relevant. The project could include the following categories of workers: direct workers, contract
                      workers, community workers and primary supply workers. The project will support the establishment of the Project
                      Coordination Unit (PCU), which is comprised of government civil servants, external experts, consultants, and
                      administrative staff. Direct workers will be officials from the different implementing agencies or technical consultants
                      of the project. Most of the workforce is expected to be hired locally except for a few skilled workers. The Borrower
                      has prepared an LMP in accordance with the national regulations and ESS2. It specifies: (i) terms and conditions of
                      employment; (ii) Non-discrimination and equal opportunity; (iii) code of conduct to be signed by all project workers;
                      (iv) freedom of association with worker’s organizations; (v) child labor and minimum age; (vi) forced labor; (vii)
                      occupational health and safety; (viii) Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) measures; and (ix) labor management
                      influx. The LMP will also include a grievance mechanism for project workers (contractors and subcontractors). The
                      LMP applies to all workers on the project and is based on national regulations and international good practice guides
                      to maintain the principle of equality and inclusion of all vulnerable groups, including women and persons with
                      disabilities. The project will require contractors/operators (both local and international) to integrate this LMP in their
                      own labor management regulations, ensuring that all workers are fully aware of the terms of employment,
                      remuneration, grievances and other relevant factors, as per the ESS2 and relevant national laws. In addition to
                      ensuring health and safety of workers during the construction and operational phases of the project, a Health, Safety
                      and Environmental (HSE) plan will be developed as part of the ESMP that will be consistent with World Bank Group’s



Public Disclosure
                      Environmental, Health and Safety (EHS) Guidelines. The HSE plan will include procedures for incident investigation
                      and reporting of any non-compliances, emergency preparedness and response procedures and continuous training
                      and awareness to workers as required. The Borrower is responsible for incorporating LMP provisions contracts for
                      contractors, subcontractors, supervising engineers, consultants, and other workers, as per ESS2.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                               Relevant

                      Raw Materials: The required construction material will potentially include stones, sand, and concrete. These materials
                      are expected to be obtained from sources localized to project areas, such as quarries in the implementation zones, or
                      in clear agreement with owners. ESIAs will recommend appropriate measures for improving the efficient use of raw
                      materials. Soil erosion and runoff: Excavation works may entail vegetation and soil loss which could result in erosion
                      and runoff, that could adversely impact surface waters. The scope of vegetation loss will be assessed as part of each
                      ESIA. Mitigation measures would also be expected to be proposed in the ESMP to avoid, reduce or mitigate runoff
                      from project sites during construction activities. Air pollution: During the construction phase, air emissions will
                      include exhaust from heavy vehicles and machinery, and fugitive dust generated by construction activities. Those
                      most likely to be affected are workers and people living within the proximity of the work sites. The implementation of
                      mitigation measures such as dust suppression and vehicle maintenance, regulation of car speed will be applied to
                      minimize the impact of air emissions during construction, and transportation of material. Noise: During the
                      construction phase, noise is likely be generated from the use of construction machinery and vehicle movements. that
                      is expected to present short-term nuisance to the public and to owners adjacent to some of the project sites. The
                      ESIAs will identify and assess impacts to nearest sensitive receptors and propose mitigation measures to minimize
                      and manage the noise levels such by applying standard restrictions to hours of site work. The Project will ensure that


                    Feb 14, 2025                                                                                                       Page 9 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              Guinea Water And Sanitation Project (P179017)



                      work is conducted in a way that noise levels will not be excessive or cause long-term nuisances. Management of
                      hazardous and non-hazardous wastes: The ESIAs will identify all sources of hazardous and nonhazardous waste and
                      propose mitigation measures proportional to the level of risk. The ESIAs will also identify the presence and locations
                      of licensed facilities for the transport, treatment and disposal of solid and hazardous wastes in the vicinity of project
                      sites. The Contractor will be responsible of developing and implementing a waste management plan during project
                      implementation. Water use efficiency and conservation: Water withdrawals and consumption during construction
                      and exploitation of infrastructure need to be rationalized. Also, water quality should be protected against pollution
                      and degradation. To ensure efficient water use, rationalization measures will need to be determined and
                      implemented throughout the project. The Client will ensure that resource efficiency and pollution prevention and
                      management measures will be incorporated in the ESIAs under preparation.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                               Relevant

                      The proposed project will finance construction and rehabilitation of water infrastructures, which could negatively
                      affect the health, safety and security of community members, including the risk of sexual exploitation, abuse, and
                      harassment of the neighboring communities, sensitive rights of vulnerable groups and inappropriate worker-
                      community interactions. There will, traffic and road safety risks due to increased vehicle and heavy machinery
                      circulation, increased air emissions (dust, odor) and noise, exposure to hazardous waste and waterborne disease
                      vectors, as well as the potential transmission of infectious diseases including COVID19 and HIV/AIDS. While most of
                      the workers for the civil works are likely to be from the local communities, experience has shown that influx of
                      workers into a project area can lead to adverse social impacts (SEA/SH, sexually transmitted and communicable
                      diseases). The ESIAs will make use of the general and sector-specific EHSGs for the identified subprojects, in relation



Public Disclosure
                      to the community health and safety. The ESIAs will also determine the appropriate mitigation measures, including
                      training and a code of conduct for workers, to support implementation and close monitoring. The ESIAs will assess
                      and include mitigation measures for sexual harassment, HIV and COVID-19 prevention measures, and propose clear
                      incident response procedures. The increase in water production and distribution would lead to an increase in
                      wastewater production including fecal sludge. These additional wastewater volumes could have negative impacts on
                      community health, if not properly managed. Safety assessment was conducted by independent experts for the dams
                      of Grandes Chutes and Baneah and a written report was provided with findings and recommendations for remedial
                      work and safety related measures necessary for the upgrade of these dams to an acceptable standard of safety. The
                      project will ensure that this report is consistent with the dam safety reports as required by the Annex 1, C of the ESS4.
                      For activities under component 3, in addition to various E&S instrument, the work of the Office and its rangers in the
                      national park will be conducted as per World Bank guidance on protected areas. Since the project will support the law
                      enforcement agency (rangers), the Borrower will conduct assessment of the capacity and law enforcement functions
                      of the agencies involved in protected area management under Part 3 of the Project in accordance with TORs
                      acceptable to the Association. They will adopt gap filling measures for any gaps identified in the assessment in a
                      manner acceptable to the Association. The assessment will include, inter alia, (i) functions concerning community
                      outreach, law enforcement, incident management and collaboration with any other agencies in enforcing the rules of
                      the protected area; (ii) procedures, rules, staffing arrangements, code of conducts (CoCs) relating to enforcement of
                      park rules; and (iii) existing relationships with communities living in or near the protected areas, all in line with
                      international good practice and standards acceptable to the Association. The Borrower will also assess and
                      implement measures to manage the security risks of the Project, including the risks of engaging security personnel
                      (including rangers) to safeguard project workers, sites, assets, and activities as set out in the ESMP.


                    Feb 14, 2025                                                                                                       Page 10 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              Guinea Water And Sanitation Project (P179017)



                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                               Relevant

                      The project's activities may result in impacts within the scope of ESS5, including both permanent/temporary
                      physical/economic displacement (component 1) and disruptions to income-generating activities for local communities
                      due to altered access to Gangan National Park (component 3). The construction of the Yessoulou IV water treatment
                      plant (sub-component 1.1) and the equipment replacement and safety works for the Samou, Baneah and Grandes
                      Chutes dams do not involve land acquisition as they will be carried out on land (154 ha) managed by SEG or within the
                      existing site of the infrastructure concerned. Regarding component 3, the process of reforming protected areas in
                      Guinea does not involve population relocation. There will be no additional access restrictions to those already
                      existing, knowing that the national park will be managed as a ''biosphere reserve' whose central protection area
                      already exists. On the contrary, the integration of the populations of the watershed into the transition zone of the
                      national park will allow the populations to benefit from the income-generating activities developed by the national
                      parks. On instruments, a process framework (PF) will be developed for component 3, expanding a well-established
                      framework developed and approved under Natural, Mining and Environmental Resources Management Project
                      (P168613). The PF will be reviewed, commented on, cleared and disclosed per ESF requirements. Two RAPs
                      corresponding to the activities funded by IDA and EIB/EU will be developed based on an umbrella document
                      previously prepared under the PUEG project (P157782). The latter suggests that implementing IDA and EIB/EU funded
                      activities would affect 1,358 people. The estimated cost (details in the below table) for compensation, support, and
                      implementation monitoring is GNF 117,740,200,092 (US$ 13,635,448). The draft RAP for the IDA-funded portion
                      (including the land requirement for the construction of the access road to the water treatment plant (6km) is being
                      reviewed by the IDA (2nd round). This portion could impact 954 Project Affected Persons (PAPs), with a projected
                      budget of 48,194,675,270 GNF (equivalent to 5,581,407 USD). Multiple consultations were organized in August 2024



Public Disclosure
                      with local authorities and PAPs who have expressed their full support for the project to strengthen the capacity for
                      drinking water production. They have been informed about the sub-project and its potential impacts, their rights to
                      compensation, and the resettlement process. The developpment of RAP for the EIB/EU portion is scheduled to
                      commence in June 2025 following the signing of the credit agreement. For associated activities (EBI funded water
                      intake and raw water trunkline), per policy requirements, the RAP will be prepared, reviewed, cleared and disclosed
                      in accordance with the World Bank ESSs. The preparation of this RAP has recently commenced (currently in the
                      finalization stage of the ToR). The GoG will ensure that before taking possession of the land and related assets, full
                      compensation has been provided and, as applicable displaced people have been resettled and moving allowances
                      have been provided. The GoG has also requested the World Bank to finance the RAP implementation budget (US$
                      18M) to finance the resettlement costs required for activities funded by the World Bank and EIB/EU. However, during
                      the appraisal process, the government agreed to cover a portion of the resettlement costs, thereby reducing the
                      requested amount to US$ 13 million. All key stakeholders (EIB/EU, GoG) are fully aware that the World Bank’s ESF will
                      apply to all activities under PEAG as well as associated activities. The requirements have been shared with the
                      Government of Guinea and will be detailed in the project's legal documents (including the ESCP).

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                Relevant
                      Resources

                      The project will target primarily urban and semi urban areas for the distribution networks and reservoirs; the Grandes
                      Chutes dam area was assessed as an Important Bird Area (IBA), thus as a Key Biodiversity Area (KBA) due to the
                      presence of the Vulnerable bird Picathartes gymnocephalus., the potential for the impacts of the project on these
                      areas cannot be ruled out, particularly that increased traffic during construction and the presence of workers can

                    Feb 14, 2025                                                                                                  Page 11 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              Guinea Water And Sanitation Project (P179017)



                      have an impact on biodiversity. Also the presence of the endangered species Pan Troglodytes verus (Western
                      Chimpanzee) was noted on the 150-ha water treatment site owned by SEG (the national water utility). The project is
                      not expected to cause harm to the small group(s) of chimpanzees present on the site or to their habitat. Access to the
                      site is restricted and the risk of hunting of the protected species by staff or individuals accessing the site without
                      authorization is considered low. The ESIAs include biodiversity screening, assessment, identification of mitigation and
                      management measures to ensure that project activities do not alter or cause destruction or degradation of any
                      critical or sensitive natural habitats, especially forests and wetlands. Moreover, ESIAs address biodiversity impacts
                      and include assessment of risks on critical habitats and propose mitigation measures to the impacts on critical
                      Habitats and protected areas. Aso, along the route of the raw water pipeline (from Grandes Chutes Dam to Yessoulou
                      water treatment) to be funded by EBI, a rapid biodiversity assessment will be conducted and the required measures
                      will be incorporated in the tender documents of the raw water pipeline. Finally, the Borrower will Carry out a Critical
                      Habitat Assessment, adopt and implement biodiversity management measures (as part of the relevant ESMP or a
                      standalone Biodiversity Management Plan when the assessment so warrants), including maintaining an ecological
                      flow downstream of rehabilitated dams in the case of activities concerning dams under the Project, all consistent with
                      ESS6.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional               Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      This standard is not considered relevant as there are no Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically
                      Underserved Traditional Local Communities currently identified in the potential project areas. Should the presence of
                      indigenous communities be confirmed through further screening during implementation, the necessary assessments,



Public Disclosure
                      consultations and instruments will be undertaken per the requirements of this standard.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                        Relevant

                      It is not anticipated that the project will have significant impacts on cultural heritage but as the project will finance
                      activities involving excavations during the construction phases of some project related infrastructure, the
                      environmental and social assessment process will identify cultural heritage in project areas. The first mitigation
                      measure will be to avoid known cultural heritage. The ESMPs include a “chance finds” procedures, to be subsequently
                      included in contractors’ documents, which will require contractors to stop construction/rehabilitation in the event
                      that any cultural heritage is encountered during civil work.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                  Not Currently Relevant

                      This project is not a FI



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                          No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                   No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features


                    Feb 14, 2025                                                                                                     Page 12 of 14
                              The World Bank
                              Guinea Water And Sanitation Project (P179017)



                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                            No
                       The project will not rely on the Borrower’s environmental and social Framework but will comply with relevant national
                       legal and regulatory requirements.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                               No
                       Other financing partners including EIB and EU will finance additional components of the project but no common
                       approach will be envisaged. All key stakeholders (EIB/EU, GoG) are fully aware that the World Bank’s ESF will apply to
                       all activities under PEAG.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     By Appraisal
                     - Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)
                     - Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)

                     Post-Appraisal to Effectiveness:
                     - Labor Management Procedures (LMP)
                     - Three (03) Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs): (i) water treatment plant, (ii) water distribution




Public Disclosure
                     networks and and reservoirs, and (iii) Improving operations and safety of water reservoirs.
                     - One (01) Resettlement Action Plans (RAP)

                     During implementation:
                     - E&S instruments (ESIA, RAP) for components/activities financed by EIB/EU and EBI
                     - Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIA) for natural based solutions
                     - Process Framework for component 3
                     - Critical Habitat Assessment
                     - Assessment of the capacity and law enforcement functions of the agencies involved in protected area management
                     - Assessment of the risks of engaging security personnel (including rangers) - E&S Audits (As needed)
                     - Project Implementation Manual (PIM)
                     - Integration of E&S aspects in TA type activities
                     - Procurement documents (bidding and contracts)
                     - E&S quarterly reports




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank



                    Feb 14, 2025                                                                                                   Page 13 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               Guinea Water And Sanitation Project (P179017)



                      Task Team Leader:       Dambudzo Josephine Muzenda         Title:       Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                              Specialist

                      Email:                  dmuzenda@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Karamoko Sanogo                    Job Title:   Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                              Specialist

                      Email:                  ksanogo@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                          Dambudzo Josephine Muzenda, Karamoko Sanogo



Public Disclosure
                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                 Randa Jean Nemer

                     ADM Social Specialist:                        Nghi Quy Nguyen




                    Feb 14, 2025                                                                                            Page 14 of 14
