Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                             Program Information Document
                                                                          (PID)




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                       Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 23-Sep-2022 | Report No: PIDC265101




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Aug 19, 2022                                                                                         Page 1 of 14
         The World Bank
         Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)


  BASIC INFORMATION


 A. Basic Program Data OPS TABLE

  Country                         Project ID                       Parent Project ID (if any)      Program Name
  India                           P179039                                                          Karnataka Sustainable
                                                                                                   Rural Water Supply
                                                                                                   Program
                                                                                                   Does this operation
  Region                          Estimated Appraisal Date         Estimated Board Date            have an IPF
                                                                                                   component?
  SOUTH ASIA                      20-Apr-2023                      14-Jul-2023                     Yes

  Financing Instrument            Borrower(s)                      Implementing Agency             Practice Area (Lead)
  Program-for-Results             Department of Economic           Rural Development and           Water
  Financing                       Affairs, Government of India     Panchayat Department,
                                                                   Government of Karnataka,
                                                                   Rural Drinking Water and
                                                                   Sanitation Department,
                                                                   Government of Karnataka

   Proposed Program Development Objective(s)

    To increase access to safely managed rural drinking water services and strengthen institutions to deliver sustainable
    services of drinking water to rural communities of Karnataka

   COST & FINANCING
 FIN_SRC_TABLE1
 SUMMARY (USD Millions)

  Government program Cost                                                                                            763.00
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                               763.00
      Total Program Cost                                                                                             743.00
      IPF Component                                                                                                   20.00
  Total Financing                                                                                                    763.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                                           0.00


  FINANCING (USD Millions)


 Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                                    363.00



Aug 19, 2022                                                                                                     Page 2 of 14
         The World Bank
         Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



    World Bank Lending                                                                                                                        363.00

 Total Government Contribution                                                                                                                400.00


   Concept Review Decision
   The review did authorize the preparation to continue




   Country Context

 1.       In India, the growth rebound in FY21/22 was quick, pulled up by investment, recovering consumer demand.
 Real GDP growth moderated from an average of 7.4 percent during FY14/15-FY18/19 to an estimated 3.7 percent in
 FY19/20[1], mostly due to (i) shocks to the financial sector, and (ii) decline in private consumption growth[2]. Against this
 backdrop, the outbreak of COVID-19 had a significant impact, with real GDP contracting by 6.6 percent in FY20/21[3]. On
 the fiscal side, the general government deficit widened significantly in FY20/21, owing to higher spending and lower
 revenues[4]. However, with the easing of Covid-19 restrictions, Goods and Services Tax (GST) collections have crossed the
 INR 1 trillion mark every month since July 2021, reaching as high as INR 1.67 trillion in April 2022. The robust GST revenue
 collections are expected to continue as the economic recovery gathers momentum. The real GDP in FY21/22 expanded by
 8.7 percent and exceeded the FY19/20 level, on the back of increased capital expenditure by the government and
 recovering consumer demand. Given the global concerns on significant uncertainty around the pandemic, elevated
 inflation, geo-political tensions, and extended supply disruptions, growth in FY22/23 is expected to be 7.5 percent[5]. The
 expected recovery will put India among the world’s fastest-growing emerging economies over the next two years.

 2.      Although India has made remarkable progress in reducing absolute poverty in recent years, the COVID-19
 outbreak has delayed the course of poverty reduction[6]. Between 2011-12 and 2020-21, India’s poverty rate declined
 from 22.5 percent[7] to values estimated to range between 9 to 12.3 percent[8]. However, projections of GDP per capita
 growth suggest that this estimated decline also includes a reversal of poverty reduction due to the pandemic[9]. Labor
 market indicators from high frequency surveys -including from the Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy (CMIE)- suggest
 that vulnerability has increased after the pandemic, particularly for urban households (HHs), with a moderate recovery in
 2021. Overall, the pandemic and its economic impacts are estimated to have raised urban poverty, creating a set of “new
 poor” that are relatively more likely to be engaged in the non-farm sector and to have received at least secondary
 education. In order to respond to the pandemic, Government of India (GoI) has deployed significant resources as part of
 the Prime Minister Garib Kalyan Yojana (PMGKY) for social assistance, including for urban poor households and migrants.


 [1] National Accounts Data, National Statistical Office, Ministry of Statistics and Program Implementation (MOSPI).
 [2] National Accounts Data, National Statistical Office, MOSPI.
 [3] National Accounts Data, National Statistical Office, MOSPI.
 [4] Union budget 2021, 2022, Ministry of Finance.
 [6] World Bank projections. The Government of India has deployed significant resources for social assistance, including towards urban poor

 households and migrants.
 [7] Consumption Expenditure Survey 2011-12, National Sample Survey Office (NSSO), Government of India
 [8] World Bank estimates. Macro Poverty Outlook, October 2021.
 [9] World Bank estimates. Source: Macro Poverty Outlook, 2020.



Aug 19, 2022                                                                                                                             Page 3 of 14
         The World Bank
         Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)


 3.       Karnataka is located on the western edge of the Deccan peninsular region of India. The state comprises the
 Deccan Plateau, the Western Ghats Mountain range, and the coastal plains covering an overall area of 5.8 percent of the
 total geographical area of India - the sixth largest state by area. The state has seven river basins, with Krishna and Cauvery
 basins dominating. There is high rainfall diversity with the Western Ghats receiving nearly 4,000 mm rain annually
 compared to less than 500 mm in the eastern districts, and an overall decline in annual rainfall is predicted for the south-
 western and north-eastern regions of the state (2021-2050). About 77 percent of Karnataka is arid or semi-arid making
 the state the second most drought-prone state in India.1 According to the 2011 census, Karnataka’s population counts 61
 million people, of which around 60 percent lives in rural areas. The capital, Bengaluru (formerly Bangalore), is a high-tech
 hub and the state’s GDP per capita is approximately USD 3,000 compared to USD 1,900 for India.
 Sectoral and Institutional Context of the Program
 4.      Karnataka is expected to face increased challenges due to climate change. Groundwater levels have been
 declining at an alarming rate for several decades in many parts of the state, which is attributed to overreliance on
 groundwater, especially by the irrigation sector, coupled with insufficient groundwater recharge.2 This has directly
 impacted the rural water sector as water sources increasingly face water quality issues, become seasonal, or simply dry
 up; trends that are accelerated by climate change. Ensuring reliable rural water supply in Karnataka is a challenge.3
 5.      The Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM), launched by the Government of India in 2019, aims to provide every household
 with a Functional Household Tap Connection (FHTC) by 2024. The JJM objective is to avail water in adequate quantity, of
 prescribed quality and on a long-term sustainable basis. The approach is similar to that of other successful national Indian
 programs on providing amenities such as electricity, toilets and smoke-free kitchens to rural households. The JJM supports
 single village schemes (SVSs) in areas with sufficient groundwater and multi-village schemes (MVSs) in areas where
 groundwater is either not abundant or not of satisfactory quality. The central and state governments have jointly pledged
 to spend more than USD 44 billion4 on the national JJM program. According to the official JJM data, the JJM lifted access
 to FHTC connections from 17 percent in 2019 and up to 51 percent of rural household in 2022.5 In Karnataka, rural access
 to FHTC rose from 24 percent in 2019 up to 51 percent in 2022, benefitting almost 3 million households since the launch
 of the mission. Nonetheless, 49 percent of Karnataka’s rural population are still to be served with FHTCs.
 6.      The dual approach to rural water supply. The SVS is the traditional and prevalent service delivery model for rural
 water supply in Karnataka, where the Gram Panchayat (GP), the lowest level of government, and the Village Water and
 Sanitation Committee (VWSCs, a GP sub-committee), are responsible for the distribution, and in-village water facilities,
 including operations and maintenance (O&M), tariff setting, billing, and collection. The GPs own and operate the water
 scheme with water typically sourced from groundwater. In addition to SVSs, the Government of Karnataka (GoK) recently
 made the strategic decision to use surface water for its rural water supply through larger multi-village schemes (MVSs),
 thus moving the sector to increasingly rely on bulk surface water rather than groundwater. Investments in MVS can be
 seen as a necessary response to groundwater depletion, water quality concerns and increasing water demand. In
 Karnataka, MVS can range from smaller schemes comprising 3-5 villages, to larger bulk water supply where one MVS
 covers more than 500,000 people. To date, Karnataka has invested approximately USD 1.6 billion in around 548 MVSs.6
 The MVSs are built through Design Build Operate Transfer (DBOT) contracts with private contractors, which include 5-year
 O&M post-construction contract meant to be re-tendered every 5 years. The MVS contractors are tasked with sourcing,
 treating, and distributing bulk surface water to village overhead tanks (OHT). From the OHT, the GPs and their VWSCs are

 1 EMPRI and TERI (2013).
 2 http://cwp-india.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/Report-on-Karnataka-SWP-with-regard-to-National-Water-Policy-2012.pdf
 3 Climate Risk Country Profile – India https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/sites/default/files/country-profiles/15503-

 WB_India%20Country%20Profile-WEB.pdf
 4 Rs. 3.50 lakh crores
 5 JJM Management Information System.
 6 https://english.swachhamevajayate.org/water-2/



Aug 19, 2022                                                                                                                       Page 4 of 14
         The World Bank
         Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)


 responsible for the distribution and in-village O&M equivalent to SVSs. Household connections (FHTC) are used for both
 SVS and MVS schemes. While the shift to bulk surface water supply will ensure more reliable drinking water, mitigate
 water quality concerns, and provide resilience to climate change, it inevitably brings about higher O&M costs, requires
 more professional management by private contractors, and necessitates more support from district-level governments.
 7.       The long road to cost recovery. The Indian JJM program supports the move to a cost-reflective tariff but very few
 states have managed to advance this agenda. In Karnataka, the sector has over the last decades moved from handpumps
 with low O&M requirements, to electric deep-well pumping systems for SVS, to the emerging energy-intensive multi-
 village bulk water systems with higher O&M costs. The JJM includes a one-time 10 percent community contribution to the
 in-village capital investments; this does not include the capital cost of the bulk MVS. In terms of O&M costs, most villages
 in Karnataka still pay a small monthly flat rate for water, insufficient to cover the O&M costs. With expected public
 resistance to a volumetric tariff, the state has through the introduction of FHTC connections under the JJM included
 volumetric meters at every household without introducing a volumetric tariff. The introduction of meters, coupled with
 community awareness have led to a measured water saving of 40 percent. In some villages, meters were allegedly
 vandalized as they are believed to eventually lead to a volumetric tariff. Few GPs have successfully introduced a tariff that
 sufficiently covers the O&M cost, but most GPs have not. The overarching goal for the sector is to achieve long-term
 financial sustainability. Efforts are made to raise community awareness of the relationship between revenue and cost and
 how this can support long-term sustainability. Relatedly, no formal arrangements currently exist between the MVS
 contractors and the benefitting GPs, but the GPs is sought to carry the MVSs’ O&M costs in the future.
 8.       Groundwater recharge and the emerging issues of greywater management. The JJM moves water access points
 from the traditional community standposts to household taps (FHTC) typically placed outside the house and facing the
 road. The JJM provides 55 liters per capita per day which equates to 275 liters for the average household for drinking,
 bathing, washing etc. This does create post-use challenges for villages as about 65 percent of the total water supplied
 reemerges as greywater. Greywater management is a small component under JJM, and the collection, treatment and
 reuse are included in the villages action plan, however, the JJM does not formally fund such activities, as funding is
 expected to be sourced from other programs such as the Swachh Bharat Mission (SBM). With regards to groundwater
 recharge, water tanks have historically been constructed to store water for drinking and irrigation during dry periods.
 However, tanks increasingly also serve various socio-ecological purposes, among others, soil and water conservation,
 groundwater recharge and enhanced resilience in the context of floods and drought.7 Karnataka has recently through tank
 rehabilitation and other groundwater recharge methods been successful in recharging dried up aquifers in some areas.
 9.       Water quality - health, cost, and trust. In Karnataka, fluoride and nitrate contamination of groundwater is a
 common challenge along with other contaminants. GoK is investing in a future with safe rural drinking water, but the
 partial transition to surface water will not include all rural villages, nor solve remaining surface water quality challenges,
 thus water quality will remain a top priority. To ensure clean drinking water, GoK installed 18,000 reverse osmosis (RO)
 water treatment plants, one for every village with water quality problems on a 5-year build and operate contract with
 private contractors. The operators typically charge 2-5 rupees for 20 liters of water. In addition, the state provides water
 quality test kits to GPs and is building laboratories in each district for routine testing. Nevertheless, there is limited testing
 capacity for coliforms bacteria such as Escherichia coli (E. coli) as the microbiological testing capacity is still being built.
 More data on bacterial contamination, a leading indicator of fecal pollution, could inform decisions to increase the
 application of chlorination in SVSs which is currently not standard. The state is also yet to develop a modern water quality
 database where information can easily be accessed by the public. As the states increasingly succeeds in providing clean
 tap water to every household, a dichotomy may arise where taps provide clean water, but households continue to rely on
 RO, bottled water, or boiling due to lack of data and confidence on quality. A “drink from the tap” behavior communication
 change campaign may be considered to unlock the full benefits of clean drinking water at the tap.

 7 V. Ratna Reddy, 2018. “Tank rehabilitation in India: Review of experiences and strategies.” Agricultural Water Management 209: 32–43.



Aug 19, 2022                                                                                                                           Page 5 of 14
         The World Bank
         Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)


 10.      With the transitions to bulk surface water, larger water schemes and household connections, reforming the
 institutional and policy architecture is essential for the achievement of long-term sustainability. Conscious of the need
 for reform, GoK has prepared a comprehensive Operations and Maintenance Policy (O&M Policy) with the clear objective
 to improve institutional capacity and human resources of the Rural Drinking Water and Sanitation Department (RDWSD),
 GPs and VWSCs to provide sustainable water supply services. The O&M Policy clarifies institutional roles and
 responsibilities of sector stakeholders, and provide guidance on technical, institutional, and financial sustainability of
 water schemes in the state. While the pending notification of the policy is a critical milestone for the sector, its
 operationalization is arguably one of the greatest sector-specific challenges for GoK.

 11.      Two decades of World Bank (WB) investments in rural water supply (RWS) in retrospect. The WB has provided
 approximately USD 2 billion of support to RWS in India since 1991. In Karnataka, two WB water supply and sanitation
 projects were implemented from 1993 to 2014. The first Karnataka Rural Water and Sanitation Project (KRWSSP I, 1993-
 2000, USD 92 million), covered 1,200 villages in 12 selected districts across the state. The second project from 2001-2014
 invested USD 151 million in 11 drought prone districts of Karnataka. KRWSSP I was one of the first projects in India to
 implement a community demand driven (CCD) and decentralized approach with cost sharing by the community towards
 both capital and O&M costs. The second KRWSP (Jal Nirmal Project-JNP) also sought to assist GoK in increasing rural
 communities' access to improved and sustainable drinking water and sanitation services. Both projects aimed to
 institutionalize the decentralization of RWS service delivery. GPs and VWSCs were placed in the ‘driver’s seat’ and
 capacitated to make decisions, procure materials, carry out construction, manage funds, and contribute towards capital
 cost. Several organizations supported the GP-level planning, implementation, and operations of the projects.

 12.     Lessons learned: While the two prior WB projects were able to establish a culture of paying for water, GPs were
 generally unable to establish sustainable cost recovery mechanisms; as a result, tariff collection targets were not met.
 This impacted larger sector issues regarding scheme sustainability, which the sector is yet to resolve. The approach lacked
 government participation and leadership from above the GP-levels and the absence of technical capacity hampered
 sustainable outcomes. Other lessons included a need for third-party engagement on quality assurance, dedicated
 attention to source sustainability, coupled with an effective modern monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system.

 13.      To a large extent, the JJM has incorporated many of the past lessons from implementation of rural water supply
 initiatives in India. Different management models are developed for SVSs and MVSs with the latter moving to professional
 private sector service delivery, along with appropriate efforts for achieving efficient and accountable services. Under JJM,
 the GPs’ prior responsibilities on planning, procurement, and project implementation, have been transferred to the
 districts who also provide technical post-construction backstopping support to GPs. This transition seeks to balance the
 importance of GP ownership with a more centralized and professional district-level and private sector support. As an
 extension of this setup, the JJM engages Implementation Supporting Agencies (ISAs) which are district-level organizations
 contracted by the districts to mobilize and train the GPs to plan, design, manage, operate, and maintain in-village water
 supply infrastructure. The ISAs play a crucial role in the last-mile delivery of the JJM and eventually the Karnataka O&M
 Policy vision. The ISAs are typically contracted for a one-year period with six to eight staff covering an entire district of
 100-200 GPs. The JJM’s resource allocation to community mobilization (ISA) is arguably underfunded and insignificant
 compared to similar efforts like the Swachh Bharat Mission but the JJM objective of providing universal and sustainable
 FTHC may prove equally valuable in the long run.

 14.      In contrast to several other state JJM programs, GoK’s initiative explicitly aims to resolve the sustainability
 challenges that have hampered the rural water sector for decades. The World Bank Program has a unique opportunity
 to leverage the momentum of both the JJM Program and the Karnataka O&M Policy efforts to support GoK in
 institutionalizing performance improvements across all levels of government. Where the JJM sets clear targets on water


Aug 19, 2022                                                                                                        Page 6 of 14
         The World Bank
         Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)


 access, WB’s Program will translate the O&M Policy to core technical and financial performance criteria at the state,
 district and GP levels. The WB is well-placed to support the state systematically institutionalize, operationalize, and
 monitor performance criteria for new rural water services, an endeavor which otherwise would have proven problematic
 for the state to achieve at scale. With regards to resilience and groundwater recharge, the Program will seek to broaden
 the rural water focus to ensure source sustainability.

   Relationship to CAS/CPF

 15.      The Program is consistent with the World Bank Group Country Partnership Framework (CPF) FY18-22 approved
 by the Board in 2018 (Report 126667-IN). The Program aligns with the WB’s twin goals of ending extreme poverty and
 boosting shared prosperity, and more specifically, with the WB’s India Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD)8 which
 highlights protection of water resources to combat water scarcity which is made more urgent by deteriorating water
 quality. The SCD emphasizes water use efficiency which the proposed program seeks to address through the introduction
 of volumetric metering and source diversification. The Program also directly aligns with Focus Area 1 of the CPF on
 Resource Efficient Growth by improving disaster risk management and resilience to climate change and Focus Area 3 on
 investing in human capital through improvement in access to rural water supply. Relatedly, India’s Nationally Intended
 Determined Contributions - Towards Climate Change9 identifies the water sector as vulnerable to climate change and its
 adaptation strategy focuses on the efficient use of water. This aligns the Government’s investments in water supply with
 its wider national goals on climate change.

  Rationale for Bank Engagement and Choice of Financing Instrument

 16.     With this Program, the World Bank has a unique opportunity to leverage international and national lessons on
 rural water supply, and to facilitate convergence between its five active water related operations in the state of Karnataka.
 The current operations include Dam Rehabilitation and Improvement Project (DRIP 2), National Groundwater
 Management Improvement (ABHY), Rejuvenating Watershed for Agriculture Resilience through Innovative Development
 (REWARD), Karnataka Urban Water Supply Modernization Project (KUWSMP, P176107), National Hydrology Project (NHP)
 coupled with analytical work such as the India Water Analytical Program (P176229). This program will facilitate
 convergence across the ongoing projects, focuses on enhancing climate resilience, integration of water sector activities
 and groundwater recharge.

 17.      The rationale for using the PforR instrument is clear. The JJM program provides a natural opportunity for the
 Bank to support the ongoing program in a state where the existing implementing capacity for procurement and financial
 management is strong and the Government’s social and environmental safeguards procedures are in place. The PforR
 instrument has proven effective in Government programs where the results are clear, in this case installation of functional
 and sustainable household taps and performance enhancement of the implementing entities of the JJM program. The
 results can be structured to incentivize institutional and policy reforms at all levels of governments including progressive
 performance metrics to help the Government evolve the sector as well as leverage sector funds in the long run. A small
 IPF is included to fund result verification, capacity building, M&E system enhancement, increased engineering capacity
 among others.




 8 World Bank Group. 2018. India Systematic Country Diagnostic: Realizing the Promise of Prosperity. World Bank, Washington, DC. © World Bank.

 https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/29879 License: CC BY 3.0 IGO.
 9 https://moef.gov.in/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/revised-PPT-Press-Conference-INDC-v5.pdf



Aug 19, 2022                                                                                                                         Page 7 of 14
         The World Bank
         Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)


  Program Development Objective(s)
 18.      The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase access to safely managed rural drinking water services
 and strengthen institutions to deliver sustainable services of drinking water to rural communities of Karnataka. Safely
 managed drinking water is defined as an improved water source that is accessible on household premises, available when
 needed, and is free from fecal and chemical contamination.10 With regards to “sustainable service”, the Program defines
 this as technical sustainability, financial sustainability, and the sustainability of the water source.
 PDO Level Results Indicators
 19.      Key results indicators for the proposed project could include:
    •     Number of people living in rural areas provided with access to an improved household water tap connection
          (total/female)
    •     Indicator of water supply service sustainability (to be defined)
    •     Monitoring system for water supply services and institutional improvements at GP, district and state level
          established and operationalized
    •     Improved financial performance in the rural water schemes (to be defined)
    •     Indicator on source sustainability (to be defined)

  PforR Program Boundary

 20.     The proposed PforR Program (‘P’, the Program) will support and strengthen the implementation of the
 Government of Karnataka’s program (‘p”, the JJM program) by focusing on a core set of service delivery improvement.
 As a subset of the Government program, the boundaries of PforR are defined as follows:
 - Duration: The Program will be implemented over a period of five years (2023-28).
 - Financing support: The total program budget is proposed as USD 763 million, with USD 363 million from IBRD-supported
   Program.
 - Geographical coverage: The Program will cover all 31 districts of Karnataka. With regards to tank rejuvenation for
   groundwater sustainability under Result Area 3, the scope will be limited to identified eight water-stressed districts.
 - Services: The Program will cover: (i) delivery of infrastructure in new and existing single-village schemes with metered
   household connections, and in-village facilities (such as distribution systems, additional storage reservoirs) where bulk
   water is available through MVSs, and third party quality assurance (ii) strengthening of existing MVSs11, (iii) institutional
   performance enhancement at state, district and GP levels; (iv) enhancing implementation capacity on greywater
   management, water quality, energy efficiency, M&E system and (v) investments in climate resilience and source
   sustainability and recharge through tank rejuvenation and sustainability of tank operations.
 - Implementation responsibility: The Program will be implemented by the Rural Drinking Water and Sanitation
   Department (RDWSD) who is the custodian of the state-level JJM program. The district and block units of RDWSD are
   mandated to implement the program and handover the water assets to the GP. RDWSD will help coordinate Program-
   level activities, including monitoring and evaluation, and will provide necessary technical and financial support to the
   relevant service delivery agencies. The Program will be coordinated with the following agencies although they are not
   expected to have fiduciary responsibilities under the Program: Minor Irrigation and Groundwater Development
   Department, the Water Resources Department (WRD) including the Advanced Centre for Integrated Water Resources
   Management (ACIWRM). The Program will be implemented following government systems.

 10 JMP. https://washdata.org/
 11 The Program will not finance new MVS but aim to improve the sustainability and efficiency of existing MVSs.



Aug 19, 2022                                                                                                          Page 8 of 14
         The World Bank
         Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)


    Table 1. Program alignment
                            Government program                                          Program supported by PforR
  Objective        To provide every household with                    To increase access to safely managed rural drinking water
  and              drinking water supply in adequate                  services and strengthen institutions to deliver sustainable
  duration         quantity of prescribed quality on                  services of drinking water to rural communities of Karnataka.
                   regular and long-term basis at
                   affordable service delivery charges                Duration: The state is planning to extend the JJM 2024 closing
                   leading to improvement in living                   date to focus on sustainability. The Program will make use of
                   standards of rural communities.                    Prior Results to support the JJM timeframe. Post- 2024 will
                                                                      mainly focus on sustainability and O&M aspects.
             Duration: 2018-2024
  Geographic All rural districts of the state of                      Fully aligned, the PforR includes all 5,659 GPs in Karnataka.
  coverage   Karnataka
  Financing  USD 4.3 billion (2018-2024, planned)                     USD 363 million

 21.     Program Results Areas. The Program will support three results areas (RAs) to contribute to the Government
 program. A total of 5-8 Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs) will be developed under the results areas outlined below,
 and will cover service delivery, technical and financial sustainability, as well as institutional and policy strengthening.

 Results Area 1 - Increase access to sustainable safely managed drinking water

 22. Provide access to metered household water connections: This Result Area (RA) will support the delivery of metered
 household connections through new and rehabilitated single village water schemes. The WB Program seeks to support
 delivery of 1 million household connections. This RA will also support sustainability of services delivery, O&M, water
 quality and quantity, and quality of construction.

 23. Infrastructure as an entry point for improved sustainability. Sustainability efforts under RA1 will be focused on
 new infrastructure whereas RA2 will apply broadly to all existing rural water schemes in the state. The RA1 sustainability
 efforts will include 10 percent community contributions to the capital costs, as per the JJM policy. Prior to construction,
 O&M budget and plans will be prepared along with community awareness building.12 The current ISA-led community
 mobilization in Karnataka follows the guidelines of the JJM set out by the GoI. The ambition on metering, cost-recovery
 and sustainable O&M in Karnataka goes well beyond the scope of the national JJM program, consequently, activities under
 this RA will increase funding for and efforts on community mobilization and behavior change. These awareness campaigns
 will include water conservation and demand management techniques for enhanced climate resiliency against drought.
 Smart bulk water meters will be included to allow remote monitoring of water use, hours of service and water losses.

  Results Area 2: Strengthen policies and institutions to secure universal and sustainable access to rural water services.

 24. The policies and institutional arrangements required to accommodate the new ambition of rural water supply are
 still to be adopted and operationalized. The O&M Policy has been prepared but not notified. The key objectives of the
 O&M Policy, among others, are to improve the institutional capacity and human resources of RDWSD, districts, GPs and


 12 The current ISA-led community mobilization in Karnataka follows the guidelines of the JJM set out by the GoI. The ambition on metering, cost-

 recovery and sustainable O&M in Karnataka goes well beyond the scope of the national JJM program, consequently, activities under this RA will
 increase funding for and efforts on community mobilization and behavior change. These awareness campaigns will include water conservation and
 demand management techniques for enhanced climate resiliency against drought.

Aug 19, 2022                                                                                                                            Page 9 of 14
         The World Bank
         Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)


 VWSCs to provide (i) effective and sustainable drinking water supply services; and to (ii) clarify institutional roles and
 responsibilities including those of private operators. The Policy is to provide guidance on technical, institutional, and
 financial sustainability of rural water supply schemes and to establish a roadmap to cost recovery at the GP and community
 level from operations of MVS and SVS in the State. Specifically, the Policy includes detailed tariff setting calculations and
 progressive roll out guidelines along with clear budgeting and reporting guidelines. By institutionalizing this sector policy,
 the WB Program can leverage global experiences and add value to the state. Thus, achievements towards the notification
 and institutionalization of sector policies are envisioned as the key disbursement linked indicators under RA2.

 25. Institutional performance metrics and monitoring on service standards and sustainability. It is essential to ensure
 that the 20-year design life and operations of the JJM investments is realized. The Program will help the state of Karnataka
 develop and institutionalize a set of performance criteria at GP, district, and state levels; an approach which has been
 proven effective in similar WB PforR operations elsewhere13. The performance criteria will encapsulate core elements
 from the O&M Policy and further seek to enhance the focus on planning, gradual cost-recovery, accounting, reporting and
 system maintenance, but also gender, social inclusion and GRM aspects. The performance criteria will rank GPs in three
 performance levels, such as 1. basic, 2. JJM and 3. Level of excellence. The higher level could introduce aspirational
 performance such as adoption of volumetric tariffs, greywater management etc. whereas the basic criteria will include
 environmental and social safeguards standards, fiduciary standards, GRM, gender equality, water quality reporting, basic
 budgeting and planning activities. The criteria could be developed so that it differentiates between single and multi-village
 schemes. A separate set of performance criteria will be developed to enhance district and state-level performance. These
 performance incentives would apply to all GPs in the state.

 26. Energy and operations expenditures. Lifting water from deep-wells or distant surface reservoirs is energy intensive
 but critically important. Some of the State’s MVS uses more than five megawatts to power the pumping operation. The
 energy cost related to water pumping will in many areas be a key determinant of the long-term price of water or the
 required subsidy to the sector. RA2 will provide an increased focus on energy expenditures through activities such as
 energy audits, inclusion of energy performance criteria in long-term Design Build Operate Transfer (DBOT)/ Build Operate
 Transfer (BOT) contracts with private contractors and mainstreaming of SCADA and Internet of Things (IoT) technology.
 Considerations for integrating inexpensive renewable energy solutions such as solar to pumping systems, will be included
 along with PPP and energy service company (ESCO) contracting models.

 Results Area 3: Enhance Resilience, Integration and Recharge

 27.    GoK is still to develop a comprehensive Water Security assessment and strategy that cuts across departments
 and enables the state to carry out state-wide long-term planning and decision-making. The Program will lay the
 foundation for a comprehensive Water Security Strategy that will support the state in navigating increasing water demand
 from irrigation, rural and urban sectors and the growing uncertainties attributable to climate change, especially water
 shortages and droughts. This includes modernization of sector monitoring and reporting systems both for the rural water
 supply sub-sector specifically, but also modern systems encompassing the entire sector.

 28.     The Water Security Strategy will encompass activities that the GoK is already aiming to achieve but is yet to
 prioritize and sufficiently fund. The ACIWRM has plans to develop a River Health Index at state and district levels,
 providing an annual assessment of the health of water systems across a number of important parameters. The World Bank
 has five lending operations in Karnataka that focus on water. With this operation, there is an opportunity to strengthen
 the convergence across these projects. This will be explored further in the program preparation phase.

 13 Vietnam: Results-Based Scaling Up Rural Sanitation and Water Supply Program (P127435, P152693); Tanzania: Sustainable Rural Water Supply

 and Sanitation Program (P163732); and, Bangladesh: Local Governance Support Project 3 (P159683).

Aug 19, 2022                                                                                                                       Page 10 of 14
         The World Bank
         Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)


 29. Water quality. RA3 will support the state in modernizing its Water Quality Monitoring Information System (WQMIS)
 and data governance architecture to make reliable water quality data easily accessible to policy makers and citizens. With
 its existing 18,000 RO village-level plants, investment in field-kit water testing, laboratories, and the strategic move to
 surface water, the state of Karnataka is investing in safe drinking water for its rural population. The proposed Program will
 further support the state in this endeavor with specific attention to prioritize microbiological testing capacity and
 increased application of chlorine to treat water in single village schemes to address the risk from coliforms bacteria. At
 rural water schemes where RDWSD is certain of the purity of water, an emergent task will be to build customers’ trust in
 the quality of water supply, potentially through a “drink from the tap” behavioral communication change campaign.

 30.    Recharge resilience through tank rejuvenation. RA3 will incentivize tank rejuvenation and especially the
 sustainable management of small tanks less than 40 hectares in size. This activity would be focused around eight (8) water
 scarce districts14 in the state and focus on institutionalizing tank sustainability. This activity links directly with the
 overarching goal of promoting source sustainability of the borewells for rural water supply schemes by contributing to the
 natural recharge of aquifers, making rural area residents more resilient to water shortages and droughts. There are clear
 synergies between tank rejuvenation and RA1-RA2, especially because the responsibility of small tanks falls to the Gram
 Panchayats.

 Strategic Support Activities (IPF)

 31.     The proposed Program would have a Strategic Support Activity implemented through the World Bank’s standard
 Investment Project Financing (IPF) instrument. The proposed Program is recognizing the importance of allocating the
 majority of the financial resources to infrastructure investment, which is why the IPF will be linked to increasing RDWSD’s
 implementing capacity to expedite its JJM investments along with innovation and piloting. The IPF is envisaged to make
 up 3-8 percent of the IBRD lending allocation. The IPF component will potentially be confined to: i) human resources:
 support on human resources such as engineering capacity at the project management units at state, district and block
 levels including international expertise on hydrology etc.; ii) a training strategy, including Field Level Leadership15 activities,
 study tours, international partnerships, and training of engineers; iii) the Program’s Independent Verification Agent; iv) IT
 hardware, software and data systems development; v) analytical studies; and vi) financial audits and incremental
 operating costs.

 32.    Citizen engagement. The department currently uses PARIHARA, a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) software,
 to redress water related complaints. This Public Grievance & Redressal Application allows complainants to register and
 track their complaint through various modes such as internet, phone or social media. Several districts have already
 received more than 1,000 complaints demonstrating the effectiveness of the current GRM. The Program will further
 strengthen the GRM relating to report generation, feedback mechanism and using customer feedback when closing
 complaints. The program will also focus on strengthening participatory planning and institutionalizing social audit
 processes to assess the planning and implementation phase of the schemes.

 33.    Gender. Women and girls suffer disproportionately from the lack of adequate water supply services. The 2022
 National Family Health Survey (NFHS-5) shows that the time taken for obtaining drinking water has reduced for higher
 share of rural households in Karnataka, as compared with NFHS- 4 data. Reduced time in accessing water will yield positive
 development outcomes, particularly for women and children who bear the burden of water collection over long distances,
 that has been associated with negative effects on well-being, school attendance, and a higher risk of gender-based

 14 The proposed districts are Bengaluru Rural, Bengaluru Urban, Bidar, Chikka Ballapura, Chitradurga, Kalaburgi, Kolar and Tumakuru.
 15 The Field-level Leadership approach is aimed at creating a broad cadre of change champions at all levels in the public service delivery agencies.

 This approach has demonstrated positive changes in the attitude and behavior of civil servants and significantly improved project performance.

Aug 19, 2022                                                                                                                            Page 11 of 14
         The World Bank
         Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)


 violence. Further, gender disparities are exacerbated by the relatively low participation of women and vulnerable groups
 in committees responsible for the planning, implementation, and O&M of water supply facilities. To address under-
 representation of women in technical job roles, the Program will explore the following entry points during preparation:
 (a) design of gender-informed HR strategies; (b) creation of safe workplace environments for women professionals; (c)
 prioritize childcare, flexible work hours, creche facilities and career advancement opportunities for women; (d) offer on-
 the-job skilling opportunities for women; and (e) enhance participation of women and vulnerable groups as members as
 well as leadership roles in committees for maintenance of water facilities. The proposed operation is expected to positively
 contribute to gender inequality through increased participation and representation of women and marginalized groups.

 Environmental and Social Systems Aspects
 34.     The Program is expected to have positive achievements of environmental and social (E&S) impacts, resulting in
 improved access to water, and improved community health. The Program involves civil works relating to single village
 schemes, in-village facilities such as distribution systems, metered household connections, and tank rejuvenation. The
 reduced time and effort of fetching water, particularly for women and girls from marginalized communities, will lead to
 improvement in quality of life by enabling them to take advantage of other opportunities such as education,
 alternate/additional livelihoods, or even leisure. The program already has a successful and effective grievance redressal
 mechanism which will only be further strengthened to include citizen feedback and consultative processes and effective
 communication strategy during the preparation and implementation phase. Other benefits of this Program on E&S include
 strengthened rural institutions and resilient communities, which manage their resources optimally in an inclusive and
 transparent manner.

 35.      The concept-stage risk screening across four criteria revealed that the likely E&S effects of the program is
 Moderate. The likely E&S risk rating for PforR activities is also Moderate. Potential environmental concerns include
 limited water availability, groundwater quality, sustained systems for ensuring disinfection of water, implications of sub-
 optimal construction practices, consequences of reservoir/tank rehabilitation and the need for avoiding impacts on
 specific environmentally or culturally sensitive areas or structures. The RDWSD has qualified and experienced personnel
 for establishing and operating rural water supply infrastructure. However, the capacity of the Department on environment
 management requires substantial strengthening. The prevalent social risk is Moderate given: i) The approach of using
 existing Right of Way to lay pipelines (which limits land acquisition) and minimizing construction stage impacts; and ii) the
 inclusion of a negative list of activities relating to tank rejuvenation and construction of additional storage reservoirs to
 exclude activities that might adversely impact peoples and communities. Other possible social risks could relate to weak
 information dissemination and community mobilization, extent of coverage of rural drinking water services, and labor
 safety and rights at sites during construction, operation, and maintenance of WASH facilities. Based on the sexual
 exploitation and abuse and sexual harassment (SEA/SH) social protection risk screening tool, the risk rating is low. The
 rating will be re-assessed during preparation stage.

 36.      The risk relating to institutional capacity and complexity risks is moderate. There is vast experience in
 involvement of local governance institutions and the ISAs to implement the program and more of such measures will be
 undertaken during this program to further strengthen capacity of all implementation units. Further, there may be some
 risks related to lack of capacity and limited participation of marginalized communities, such as below poverty line,
 scheduled castes and scheduled tribes, women in the planning, decision-making and monitoring processes.

 37.     The Environment and Social System Assessment (ESSA) to be carried out by the Bank during preparation, will
 assess the adequacy of provisions of legal and regulatory framework, implementation capacity, past performance, and
 methodology, including processes to adequately manage E&S risks and impacts. ESSA will result in an action plan for
 improving the overall system of the borrower for achieving better environmental and social sustainability results in the

Aug 19, 2022                                                                                                       Page 12 of 14
          The World Bank
          Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)


 Proposed Program. The IPF component will focus on program verification, training, IT Hardware, software and data
 systems development, analytical and community mobilization. No construction-related activities are foreseen, thus, the
 E&S risk rating for IPF component is low. The Bank’s Environment and Social Framework (ESF) shall be applicable for this
 component, and the draft Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) and Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) will
 be prepared, consulted upon and disclosed prior to appraisal. The Program will clearly define the sexual exploitation and
 abuse and sexual harassment requirements and expectations in the bid and contracting documents, as engaging of
 consultancy firms and contractors for IPF activities may create opportunities for SEA/SH at the workplace.



 .

     Legal Operational Policies                                                       Triggered?
     Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                      No
     Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60                                               No


     .Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts of the IPF Component

     .
     CONTACT POINT


     World Bank

     Name :                  Kristoffer Welsien
                             Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
     Designation :                                                   Role :         Team Leader(ADM Responsible)
                             Specialist
     Telephone No :          5220+30651 /                            Email :        kwelsien@worldbank.org

     Name :                  Mariappa Kullappa
                             Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
     Designation :                                                   Role :         Team Leader
                             Specialist
     Telephone No :          5785+47848 /                            Email :        mkullappa@worldbank.org


     Borrower/Client/Recipient

                             Department of Economic Affairs,
     Borrower :
                             Government of India
     Contact :               Mr. Hanish Chhabra                     Title :         Director
     Telephone No :          01123094140                            Email :         hanish.ias@ias.nic.in

     Implementing Agencies




Aug 19, 2022                                                                                                   Page 13 of 14
         The World Bank
         Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



                          Rural Development and Panchayat
  Implementing
                          Department, Government of
  Agency :
                          Karnataka
  Contact :               Mr. L.K Atheeq                         Title :   Additional Chief Secretary
  Telephone No :          08022353929                            Email :   lk.atheeq@gov.in


                          Rural Drinking Water and Sanitation
  Implementing
                          Department, Government of
  Agency :
                          Karnataka
  Contact :               Mr. Gangadhra Swamy G M                Title :   Director
  Telephone No :          080-22240508                           Email :   krwssd@gmail.com


  FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
  The World Bank
  1818 H Street, NW
  Washington, D.C. 20433
  Telephone: (202) 473-1000
  Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects




Aug 19, 2022                                                                                            Page 14 of 14
