Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                      Project Information Document (PID)



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                     Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 09-Dec-2022 | Report No: PIDC34232




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Dec 07, 2022                                                                                      Page 1 of 10
         The World Bank
         SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)


  BASIC INFORMATION


  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE

  Country                                        Project ID                   Parent Project ID (if any)   Project Name
  St Maarten                                     P179067                                                   SINT MAARTEN:
                                                                                                           WASTEWATER
                                                                                                           MANAGEMENT
                                                                                                           PROJECT (P179067)
  Region                                         Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date         Practice Area (Lead)
  LATIN AMERICA AND                              Jul 21, 2023                 Sep 15, 2023                 Water
  CARIBBEAN
  Financing Instrument                           Borrower(s)                  Implementing Agency
  Investment Project Financing                   Government of Sint Maarten   National Recovery Program
                                                                              Bureau

   Proposed Development Objective(s)

    The objectives of the Project are to (i) increase access and improve sustainability and resilience of wastewater services
    in Sint Maarten, and (ii) reduce risk of coastal and surface waters pollution.

    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

   SUMMARY-NewFin1

   Total Project Cost                                                                                                        25.00

   Total Financing                                                                                                          25.00

                             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                0.00
   Financing Gap                                                                                                              0.00

   DETAILS     -NewFinEnh1




   Non-World Bank Group Financing

       Counterpart Funding                                                                                                   15.00
          National Government                                                                                                15.00

       Trust Funds                                                                                                           10.00
          Sint Maarten: Hurricane Irma Recon., Rec., & Res. Prg TF                                                           10.00




Dec 07, 2022                                                                                                             Page 2 of 10
           The World Bank
           SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)




     Environmental and Social Risk Classification                                      Concept Review Decision
     Substantial                                                                       Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to
                                                                                       continue



     Other Decision (as needed)

     B. Introduction and Context

      Country Context

     1.    Sint Maarten is a constituent country of the Kingdom of the Netherlands located in the Caribbean. The country
     occupies the southern half of an island shared with the French overseas collectivity of Saint Martin. Spurred by economic
     development, the island's population (estimated at 41,177 in 2019) has been steadily increasing over the past several
     decades, making Sint Maarten one of the most densely populated countries in the Caribbean.

     2.     Sint Maarten's economy is largely based on tourism. Restaurants, hotels, and other tourism-related sectors
     account for about 45 percent of the country’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP), and tourism accounted for 73 percent of
     foreign exchange income, with tourism creating employment for approximately one-third of the employed population1.
     Sint Maarten primarily caters to cruise tourists, with the island’s only deep-water port located in Philipsburg. About 80
     percent of the visitors to the island are short-stay cruise tourists

     3.       Sint Maarten is highly vulnerable to natural disasters and adverse climatic events due to its location within the
     hurricane belt. For the past decades, the country has been exposed to high winds and numerous hurricanes, including
     notably intense storms: Donna in 1960 (Category 3), Hugo in 1989, Lenny in 1999, Luis in 1995 (Category 4), and Irma in
     2017 (Category 5 of the Saffir-Simpson scale). Due to the small size of the country, a single storm has the potential to
     impact the entire population directly. High winds, rainfall, and flooding are the principal risk factors while the country is
     also vulnerable to earthquakes. Coastal areas are exposed to flood risk from sea level rise, storm surge and potential
     tsunamis. Increased urbanization, climate change, and limited capacity in the country to build resilience to its
     vulnerability to natural hazards. The World Bank estimated damages and losses related to Hurricane Irma at US$1.38
     billion and US$1.35 billion respectively (about 129 percent of the Gross Domestic Product then), affecting 90 percent of
     all infrastructure and large parts of the natural environment.

     Sectoral and Institutional Context

     4.     Sewerage network coverage is low in Sint Maarten and 89 percent of households rely on mostly unsafe septic
     tanks or direct discharges into water bodies.. Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, Sint Maarten experienced rapid economic
     development along with population growth for a few decades, however, this growth was not followed by sufficient
     investment in wastewater infrastructure. As a result, existing public sewerage network coverage is severely limited, and
     covers only a few districts and neighborhoods of Sint Maarten, leaving significant areas and percentage of the population


 1
   National Recovery and Resilience Plan, Government of Sint Maarten, June 2018. Labor Force Survey 2017: tourism-based economy includes wholesale and retail
 industries, hotels, restaurants, and catering.


Dec 07, 2022                                                                                                                                         Page 3 of 10
           The World Bank
           SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)


     uncovered. Although the GoSM has made several wastewater investments over the time, including the construction of a
     municipal wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) and development of sewerage infrastructure in various residential and
     commercial districts2, it is estimated that only 23 percent of GEBE’s water customers in east Sint Maarten have sewerage
     connections. In total, less than 11 percent of the properties in the country, corresponding to approx. 2,000 properties
     are connected to the sewerage network. Instead, 89 percent of households rely on mostly unsafe septic tanks or direct
     discharges into water bodies.

     5.     Contaminated runoff negatively impacts the environment, affects the water quality of coastal areas, which are
     important for tourism, and represents a health threat to residents. Removal of the sludge from septic tanks does not
     take place in a general or in a structural manner. As a result, those tanks are prone to overflow, causing untreated
     discharge, often into open gutters which in turn flow into Little Bay or the Simpson Bay Lagoon and are eventually
     released into the sea. Given the low connection rate to the public sewer system on the island and the above-described
     problems, expanding the sewage network to connect more properties has been recognized as a priority necessary to
     protect the health of the population and mitigate pollution of the island’s ponds and coastal/beach areas.

     6.     Sint Maarten’s wastewater treatment infrastructure requires an upgrade to deal with current and future loads.
     The country’s single existing public biological treatment plant located on A. T. Illidge Road, is designed to service the
     Greater Philipsburg area (including Cul de Sac, Upper Prince’s Quarter and the Lower Prince’s Quarter areas) and other
     sewered districts. The WWTP (co-funded by GoSM and the Netherlands) has the capacity to treat 4750 m3 of sewage/day
     (up to 30,000 households), and is currently operating at approx. 70 percent of its design hydraulic load. An unknown part
     of these flows originates from the intrusion of stormwater, and discharge from cruise ships that are docking at Sint
     Maarten. Additionally, it receives about 450 m3/d of household septic sludge delivered by trucks to the plant. Treated
     wastewater is discharged into the Fresh Pond, a small water body connected to the sea via an blocked open canal that is
     only occasionally used for water discharge. A.T. Illidge Road WWTP and the sewer network on Sint Maarten are currently
     operated by Ministry for Public Housing, Spatial Planning, Environment and Infrastructure (VROMI) in collaboration with
     `Wastewater Maintenance and Management (WWMM)` company, a private operator. A.T. Illidge Road WWTP has a
     VROMI issued Hinderance Permit (No. HP.12.006) that specifies the required performance of the plant, including effluent
     quality, water quality monitoring and plant operation (noise, air pollution, etc.). Since wastewater quality monitoring
     process in the plant is inadequate, it is not clear to what extent those standards are fulfilled. There are also several
     individual WWTPs in Sint Maarten that are operated by individual resorts that are not part of public wastewater system
     and that cover only the specific needs of the resorts or island facilities, like the Princes Juliana International Airport (PJIAE)
     WWTP that treats wastewaters from airport operations, and it is operated separately.

     7.      Extreme weather events are causing direct or indirect discharge of untreated wastewater, leading to land,
     surface water and sea pollution. After storms and hurricanes, septic systems tend to overflow and sludge collection and
     transport to the country’s wastewater treatment plant get interrupted for a considerable period, leading to land, surface
     water and coastal water pollution. Even without extreme weather events, in the most densely developed, low-lying areas
     of Sint Maarten, septic systems are saturated, leading to groundwater pollution and sewage runover to public roads and
     private properties. Clean coastal and bathing waters and rich biodiversity constitute the island’s major assets, which are
     essential for the development of a tourism-based economy. However, this richness of nature is acutely threatened by
     the pollution created by the direct or indirect discharge of untreated wastewater. Studies and tests, done by the Nature
     Foundation St Maarten (*https://naturefoundationsxm.org/tag/water-quality/) that episodically monitors the country’s

 2
   The districts connected to the public sewerage system include South Reward, Ebenezer, St. Peters Road, St. John’s Estate, Belvedere, Middle Region Road, ‘911’
 Emergency Homes at Union Farm, A. Th. Illidge Road (Dutch Quarter) Madame Estate, Fort Willem, FOGA, Hope Estate, and parts of Philipsburg. In Philipsburg
 however, many streets are only partially connected to the main line on the WJA Nisbeth Road. Furthermore, some of those districts have partial or even fully
 complete sewerage pipelines without home connections and not connected to the existing public wastewater system.


Dec 07, 2022                                                                                                                                             Page 4 of 10
           The World Bank
           SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)


     coastal water quality and coral reefs status have confirmed the unsatisfactory state of the coastal waters, with medium
     to elevated levels of phosphorus and nitrogen and presence of fecal coliform bacteria, indicating sewerage pollution of
     coastal waters. The effluents from A. T. Illidge Road WWTP discharge into the nearby so-called ‘Fresh Pond’, which is
     interconnected with the `Great Salt Pond`, itself connected with the Great Bay coastal area via an open canal that can be
     opened during strong rainfall events. Data on water quality of those ponds are very limited, but it can be concluded that
     there is a noticeable level of water pollution in both ponds.


     8.       There are multiple reasons for inadequate sanitation in Sint Maarten. The limited advance in the solution of
     wastewater management in Sint Maarten results from a number of socio-economic, technical, and institutional issues,
     including (i) budget deficits leaving no room for capital expenditures, or budget allocation prioritized for other projects;
     (ii) lack of a wastewater financing model and no tariff or billing system for the provision of public wastewater services;
     (iii) lack of a sewerage development master plan to address the existing problem; (v) limited capacity - insufficient data,
     fragmented knowledge and lack of clearly defined roles and responsibilities among the main stakeholders active in the
     water sector; and (vi) limited public awareness and reaction to wastewater pollution, in part due to the absence of
     comprehensive and continuous monitoring of the water quality on Sint Maarten beaches. A few concepts for expansion
     of wastewater system were prepared over time but without follow-up actions. In an effort to define future developments
     of wastewater system of Sint Maarten, several feasibility studies and development plans3 for wastewater management
     system on the island have been prepared over the past two decades. However, no implementation has followed, and the
     wastewater management situation in Sint Maarten had seen only marginal improvements in the last decade, while the
     major wastewater pollution-related challenges and risk to coastal/beach waters remain. The last document developed is
     the `Sewerage master Plans 2020-2030` completed in 2022, which gives a comprehensive overview of the current
     situation and a general direction for future developments of wastewater system. However, this plan has not been
     formally endorsed by the GoSM.


     Policy Context

     9.      The Ministry for Public Housing, Spatial Planning, Environment and Infrastructure (Ministerie van
     Volkshuisvesting, Ruimtelijke Ordening, Milieu & Infrastructuur - VROMI) is responsible for the policies and regulation
     of WSS municipal services in Sint Maarten. VROMI’s responsibilities include infrastructure development, environmental
     protection, and management of natural resources. The VROMI Ministry Plan 2015-2018 envisaged the preparation of
     several sectoral studies for the expansion of the primary physical infrastructure network for roads, utilities, sewerage,
     and drainage. A Project Plan for Wastewater Management was prepared by VROMI Department for Infrastructure
     Management in 2020. It described the strategy and required investments for an effective and sustainable management
     of wastewater. The Plan describes three main goals to create an affordable, reliable, culturally acceptable, and
     (economically) sustainable wastewater system are: (i) to protect public health from the potentially harmful effects of
     wastewater; (ii) to enable sustainable economic development through the provision of adequate, culturally acceptable
     and affordable wastewater services; and (iii) to protect the environment by minimizing adverse environmental impacts
     from wastewater discharges. VROMI is also responsible for the preparation of environmental and technical standards
     and the issuing of relevant permits for service provision (including the WWTP hindrance permit). The country has its own
     legal framework that governs the water sector, including water quality and wastewater standards.




 3
  Basis Rioleringsplan in 1998, Eilandelijk Rioleringsplan in 1998, Aquanet report in 2000, Preliminary Design Cole Bay 2015, Nature and Environment Policy Plan for
 Netherland Antilles 2004-2007, Project Plan for Wastewater Management 2020, etc).


Dec 07, 2022                                                                                                                                              Page 5 of 10
            The World Bank
            SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)


     10.    Future investments in wastewater on Sint Maarten are proposed to be funded under the Sint Maarten Recovery
     Reconstruction and Resilience Trust Fund. The Steering Committee of the Sint Maarten Recovery Reconstruction and
     Resilience Trust Fund agreed on March 9, 2022, to allocate unallocated resources to new activities to develop and
     strengthen social and utility services, including US$10M for the improvement of wastewater services (co-financed by
     GoSM). This confirms the strong commitment and support of the Steering Committee to prioritize investments in
     wastewater collection and treatment, to reduce risks to public health and protect Sint Maarten’s surface water and
     beaches from environmental degradation, preserving the country’s extraordinary natural assets and enhancing the
     sustainability of the tourism economy.


     Relationship to Higher Level Objectives

     11.      The proposed project is closely aligned with the priorities highlighted in the Strategic Framework 2019-2025:
     Sint Maarten Reconstruction, Recovery and Resilience Trust Fund4. The Strategic Framework outlines the planned
     cooperation between the World Bank and Sint Maarten for the period 2019 to 2028. The planned investments are
     expected to be financed by the Government of the Netherlands through the SXM TF. The areas highlighted in the Strategic
     Framework aim to (i) promote sustainable economic recovery, (ii) support citizens and resilient communities, and (iii)
     build the foundations to improve long-term resilience and good governance. The proposed project will directly contribute
     to the two key objectives identified under Focus Area 1 – Promote Sustainable Economic Recovery, which are resilient
     utility services and improved sanitation services. Moreover, among the seven prioritized areas identified as critical for
     investment in the long term, sewage management is emphasized along with hurricane-resistant schools and shelters,
     psychosocial support and mental health, tourism recovery, and low-income housing. This is because appropriate sewage
     management is critical for health safety, flood risk mitigation, ocean cleanliness, tourism, and the country's long-term
     resilience. Therefore, the proposed project will significantly contribute to Sint Maarten’s development agenda.

     12.    The proposed Project will directly support the implementation of the National Recovery and Resilience Plan
     (NRRP5). GoSM defines priorities and a roadmap for Sint Maarten’s recovery, reconstruction, and resilience following
     Hurricane Irma, which are then executed by NRPB. Under the proposed interventions, there is emphasis on the urgent
     need for expanding the existing sewage network and upgrading the wastewater treatment infrastructure were necessary.
     Moreover, NRRP stressed that significant resources should also be directed to upgrading the country’s sewerage network
     in the interest of public health. Furthermore, the proposed project is closely in line with the Sint Maarten National
     Development Vision 2020-2030 (draft).

     13.    The Project will also work in synergy with other World Bank projects supported by the Trust Fund. Specifically,
     the Project will exchange information and collaborate with the ongoing First Emergency Recovery Project (ERP-I) and the
     Emergency Debris Management Project (EDMP) which also has the objective of strengthening the institutional framework
     by establishing a Waste Authority. Specific areas of synergies or collaboration will be discussed during project preparation
     and included in the final design of the Project.


     C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

     14.   The objectives of the Project are to (i) increase access and improve the sustainability and resilience of
     wastewater services in Sint Maarten, and (ii) reduce the risk of coastal and surface water pollution.

 4 Strategic Framework 2019-2025: Sint Maarten Reconstruction, Recovery and Resilience Trust Fund
 5
     Sint Maarten National Recovery and Resilience Plan, 2019. https://nrpbsxm.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/08/NRRP.pdf


Dec 07, 2022                                                                                                             Page 6 of 10
         The World Bank
         SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)




  Key Results (From PCN)

  15.     The PDO level results indicators are the following:
          1) Number of people (out of which share of female) /households provided with access to the public sewer
              system (objective 1)
          2) Operating cost ratio for the wastewater sector: total annual operational revenues/total annual operational
              cost (objective 1)
          3) Volume of BOD/COD removed by wastewater treatment before discharge (objective 2)
          4) Seawater and surface water quality level in selected project locations (objective 2)

  D. Concept Description

  Project beneficiaries

  16.     While the direct project beneficiaries from new sewerage access will be around 11,000 people (25 percent of
  the Sint Maarten population) residing in the areas to be covered by the project, the complete population will benefit
  from a safer environment and improved water quality on the island. Direct beneficiaries will benefit from improved
  quality and resilience of sanitation services, primarily through the construction, rehabilitation, and modernization of
  sewerage networks, and from the reduction of pollution due to the elimination of uncontrolled wastewater runoff. The
  rest of the population of Sint Maarten will also benefit from improved municipal wastewater service provision achieved
  through the improved policy and regulatory environment, cleaner surface and coastal waters, and a safer environment.
  Moreover, the key beneficiary will be the island’s tourism-based economy, and through it the complete island population
  that will benefit from cleaner coastal waters for bathing, which is a precondition for the long-term sustainable
  development of the hospitality sector as a backbone of the island economy.
  Project components

  17.    The Project will include three components: (i) Wastewater infrastructure investment, (ii) Policy and institutional
  development and coastal seawater and surface water quality monitoring, and (iii) Project management.
  Component 1: Wastewater infrastructure investment (Tentative amount: US$20 million)

  18.     This component would finance all stages of infrastructure development, including identification, design,
  supervision, and construction of new wastewater collection infrastructure, and/or rehabilitation of existing wastewater
  infrastructure. Component 1 will include two sub-components:

  A.           Wastewater collection This first sub-component aims at improving the coverage and resilience of wastewater
               collection. This will be done through the:
               (i)     Expansion of the existing sewerage network to enable the connection for residents and commercial
                       enterprises. The priority project areas that are being considered include: (a) Cul-de-Sac, (b) St. Peters
                       Main Road, (c) Philipsburg, and (d) Lower Prince’s Quarter;
               (ii)     Rehabilitation of critical parts of the existing sewage system to improve its climate resilience and
                       operational efficiency
               (iii)   Improvement in collection and treatment of wastewater from septic tanks.


Dec 07, 2022                                                                                                          Page 7 of 10
         The World Bank
         SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)


           This sub-component would include the preparation of Feasibility Studies, Environmental Impact Assessments,
           and other project documentation necessary to secure required permits, detailed designs, and final bidding
           documents. The Project will support providing more energy-efficient wastewater services to minimize energy
           costs of service provision, and explore possibilities for decentralized wastewater management, including the
           introduction of appropriate individual and close-to-nature wastewater solutions. The Project support will focus
           on the area where investments can deliver the biggest benefits to the population’s health and safety, as well as
           protection of the environment especially in the area with high population density, low sewerage coverage,
           sources of pollution, and direct threat to surface and coastal waters, etc. Given the existing water scarcity on the
           island, the Project will also promote potential wastewater reuse in line with applicable national legislation, where
           technically feasible and economically justified.

  B.       Upgrading of existing A. T. Illidge Road WWTP. The second sub-component will be the rehabilitation and
           expansion of the existing WWTP that would be required for adequate treatment of the additional wastewater
           flows that will be collected through the Project financed sewerage network expansion. Such rehabilitation and
           expansion work will include upgrades of both wastewater treatment and sludge treatment lines, capacity
           strengthening for measurement and analysis of wastewater, as well as preparation of WWTP development plans
           for further expansion of the sewerage network that would cover the whole Sint Maarten.

  19.    Concrete investments to be financed under both above-mentioned sub-components would be identified during
  the Project preparation or in initial stage of Project implementation, following the review of existing development plans,
  based on Government priorities, readiness for implementation, costs, and social and environmental impacts.

  Component 2: Policy and institutional development and surface and sea water quality monitoring (Tentative amount:
  US$3 million)

  20.   Component 2 aims at creating the framework for the sustainable provision of efficient wastewater services in Sint
  Maarten. This would include the following activities:

         (a) capacity strengthening of the line Ministry (VROMI) for planning, regulation, and supervision of wastewater
             services.
         (b) strengthening of the legal and regulatory framework for sustainable wastewater service provision (building on
             existing plans and ordinance), and introduction of cost recovery principles through the adoption of wastewater
             tariffs. The institutional and financial modality for the operational management of wastewater services would
             be defined to contribute to the financial sustainability and resilience of the services that would allow the service
             providers to better respond to and reduce the impact of extreme weather events resulting from climate
             change. The project would aim to bring international experience, knowledge, and innovation in wastewater
             service provision, customized to the specific needs of Sint Maarten. The main elements of the institutional and
             financial modality will be defined during Project preparation and agreed upon before Project negotiation.
         (c) development and adoption of national WSS strategies and mid/long-term implementation plans for
             wastewater management, including the adoption of circular economy principles.
         (d) establishment of an adequately financed system for monitoring seawater quality in coastal areas/beaches and
             the surface water quality of inland ponds. The first objective of this activity is to establish a national,
             comprehensive, and standardized system for seawater and surface water quality monitoring, with a particular
             focus on bathing waters quality monitoring, which would provide adequate information on status of Sint
             Maarten’s coastal waters, and existing inner ponds (primarily Fresh Pond and Great Salt Pond). The activity
             would aim at consolidating all seawater and surface water quality information, through collection into a single,


Dec 07, 2022                                                                                                           Page 8 of 10
           The World Bank
           SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)


               central publicly accessible database. The second objective of this activity is to implement at least one year of
               measurement that would include a sufficient number of sampling points to provide reliable info on the status
               of coastal and surface water.

     21.   Possible institutions that would carry out the above-mentioned functions, as well as gaps in the institutional
     framework would be identified, and the concrete needs for strengthening their capacity or creating new institutions
     would be assessed during project preparation. The potential for consolidation or simplification of institutional
     arrangements would be analyzed to ensure that the necessary functions are being delivered in the most cost-efficient
     manner possible.

     Component 3: Project management (Tentative amount: US$2 million)

     22.    Under this Component, the Project will support the project management and coordination capacity of the
     implementing unit of NRPB as a Project Implementation Unit (PIU), including support to the PIU to: (i) project monitoring
     and evaluation activities; (ii) environmental and social risk mitigation measures; (iii) training of PIU staff; (iv) annual audits
     for the project and providers; and (v) establishment of citizen engagement measures and grievance redress mechanisms
     for the project activities.


     Legal Operational Policies                                                                  Triggered?
     Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                                No
     Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60                                                         No

     Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
     .


 .
     CONTACT POINT


     World Bank
     Stjepan Gabric
     Senior Water Resources Management Specialist


     Borrower/Client/Recipient
     Government of Sint Maarten




     Implementing Agencies



Dec 07, 2022                                                                                                                 Page 9 of 10
         The World Bank
         SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)



  National Recovery Program Bureau
  Claret Connor
  Director
  c.connor@nrpbsxm.org


  FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
  The World Bank
  1818 H Street, NW
  Washington, D.C. 20433
  Telephone: (202) 473-1000
  Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects



  APPROVAL

  Task Team Leader(s):                     Stjepan Gabric

  Approved By
  APPROVALTBL
  Country Director:                    Ogo-Oluwa Oluwatoyin Jagha   08-Feb-2023




Dec 07, 2022                                                                      Page 10 of 10
