Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                 Project Information Document (PID)

                                                 Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 28-Jul-2024 | Report No: PIDIA00476




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                       Operation ID              Operation Name
                                                                                      Sustainable Power and
                               WESTERN AND CENTRAL
Nigeria                                                     P179684                   Irrigation for Nigeria
                               AFRICA
                                                                                      Project
Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Approval Date   Practice Area (Lead)
Investment Project
                               25-Jul-2024                  26-Sept-2024              Water
Financing (IPF)
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT OF          Federal Ministry of Water
NIGERIA                        Resources and Sanitation

Proposed Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective is to strengthen dam safety and improve management of water resources for
hydropower and irrigation in selected areas of Nigeria.

Components
Institutional strengthening and capacity building for Water Resources Management
Irrigation Modernization
Improvements in dam operations and enhancing dam safety
Project Management

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             Yes

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                       500.00

  Total Financing                                                                                            500.00
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                           500.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                                0.00


                                                                                                                Page 1
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



 DETAILS
   World Bank Group Financing
       International Development Association (IDA)                                                                 500.00
         IDA Credit                                                                                                500.00

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
Environmental And Social Risk Classification
High


 Decision
 The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate




 Other Decision (as needed)




 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context


1.       Nigeria, Africa’s most populous country, possesses substantial untapped economic potential. As a diverse
federation of 36 autonomous states and the continent’s largest country with a population exceeding 218 million, it boasts
the fourth largest economy in Africa, reaching a gross domestic product (GDP) of approximately US$253 billion in 2024.
Fueled by abundant natural resources, a youthful and entrepreneurial populace, and a vibrant private sector, Nigeria has
the capacity to become a prominent player on the global stage. However, despite these prospects, the country faces
significant challenges, with over 40 percent of its population living in poverty. Moreover, Nigeria houses the world’s
second-largest number of people living in extreme poverty and ranks 163 out of 191 countries on the most recent Human
Development Index (HDI) report, highlighting its status as one of the least developed nations globally.
2.       The Nigerian economy recovered modestly from the COVID-19 pandemic in 2021, but the momentum faded
throughout 2022 and into 2023. GDP growth rate nearly halved from an average of 7.7 percent in 2000–2009 to 3.6
percent in 2010–2019 on the back of weaker economic fundamentals and lower oil prices. In 2020, the impacts of COVID-
19 and the associated global oil price shock were severe, with output contracting by 1.8 percent (–4.4 percent in per capita
terms). While growth rebounded to 3.6 percent in 2021, the recovery lost momentum with growth slowing to 3.3 percent
in 2022 and further to 3.1 percent in Q3 2023. The most recent deceleration was driven by weak oil production and a
disruptive currency demonetization policy that took effect in Q1 2023 adversely affecting the non-oil industrial and service
sectors.


                                                                                                                        Page 2
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)


3.       Recognizing the need to change course, a new administration since May 2023 has undertaken bold reforms to
restore the economic fundamentals for inclusive growth. The Nigerian Government eliminated an increasingly costly,
opaque, and regressive gasoline subsidy that amounted to 2.2 percent of GDP in 2022; unified multiple foreign exchange
(FX) windows that distorted relative prices; partly liberalized the exchange rate to better reflect market conditions; and
lifted the restriction on purchasing FX at the official market to import 936 product lines. The Central Bank of Nigeria has
also restarted issuing securities in open market operations and lifted the cap for commercial banks to deposit funds at the
Central Bank. The reduction of excess domestic liquidity and changes toward a more conventional, rates-based monetary
policy has led to a rise in domestic market interest rates. Recognizing the short-term adjustment costs of these reforms—
particularly through rising inflation—the Government has also rolled out temporary, targeted cash transfers of NGN
25,000 per month, directly benefiting over 60 million people for three months.
4.       Nigeria is considered a fragile and conflict affected, with most of its regions experiencing violence and
disturbance. Currently, the six geopolitical regions of Nigeria face various issues, including political instability, civil unrest,
identity conflicts, resource-based disputes, and terrorism. The North-East faces insurgency and terrorism, primarily driven
by Boko Haram and the Islamic State’s West Africa Province (ISWAP), resulting in the displacement of over 2 million people.
The North-Central and North-West regions are plagued by banditry, identity clashes, and communal conflicts, as well as
herder-farmer disputes over land and cattle.
5.       Nigeria’s vulnerability to climate shocks has increased due to a combination of political, geographic, and social
factors and, specifically, the recent spike in insecurity in the country. Nigeria is highly prone to river, urban, coastal
floodings; water scarcity; extreme heat; and wildfires. Nigeria ranks among the top 10 countries most susceptible to the
detrimental effects of climate change and natural disasters.1 Projected climate change impacts include increased average
temperature and changes in precipitation patterns, leading to more frequent floods and droughts. These climate-related
risks can have severe implications on livelihoods and result in increased food insecurity, famine, population displacement,
conflicts, and biodiversity loss. Climate inaction could cost Nigeria between 6 and 30 percent of GDP by 2050, equivalent
to a loss of US$100–460 billion.2


 Sectoral and Institutional Context


6.     Nigeria faces water security challenges, which impact water availability for drinking water, energy and food
production, and are increasingly exacerbated by climate change, putting livelihoods and economic development at risk.

7.      Harnessing water storage and dam safety is central to climate change adaptation and mitigation in Nigeria. It is
a prerequisite to improving water management for water supply, irrigation, and hydropower generation and offer
protection from floods and droughts. Nigeria has over 400 dams and an estimated total combined storage of 59 billion
cubic meter (BCM). 46% of dams are federally-owned and are managed by the Federal Ministry of Water Resources and
Sanitation (FMWRS), through River Basin Development Authorities (RBDAs). 48% of dams are state-owned and are
managed by a state ministry3. Many dams are incomplete and more than 50 percent of the large dams which were built
in the 1970s and 80s require rehabilitation. This situation is due in part to institutions responsible for dam management,
whether at federal or state level, having inadequate budget, human resources and capacity to ensure dam management,
operation and maintenance (MOM) and non-adherence to operational manuals, where they exist. As a result, structures

1 Climate Scorecard 2019. https://www.climatescorecard.org/2018/11/nigeria-listed-as-one-of-the-10-most-climate-vulnerable-countries/.
2 World Bank Group. 2020. Country Partnership Framework for the Federal Republic of Nigeria for the Period FY21–FY25.

November 16, 2020. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/35098.
3 Dams in Nigeria, Federal Ministry of Water Resources, 2020.




                                                                                                                                         Page 3
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)


and equipment in several instances broke down or functioned below the installed capacity, limiting dams’ potential to
mitigate extreme weather events. In 2022, the country faced 4The World Bank GRADE analysis of the 2022 floods
estimated the total direct economic damage to be in around US$6.7 billion, equivalent to 1.6 percent of the estimated
2021 GDP. Combining addressing the root causes of poor dam O&M and the rehabilitation and retrofitting of existing
dams would offer substantial opportunities to promote and entrench integrated storage management and sustain the
provision of productive and climate-resilient water services including mitigating water5related natural disasters including
flooding events.

8.       Agriculture remains a key in Nigeria’s economy, contributing an estimated 25.58 percent6 of its GDP and
employing over 36 percent of the workforce. However, due to its heavy reliance on rain-fed agriculture, food production
is highly vulnerable to climate change and population growth. Nigeria is endowed with 70.8 million ha of agricultural
land area, broken down into eight agro-ecological zones capable of growing a variety of crops such as cassava, palm oil,
cocoa, maize, yam, cowpea, groundnut, beans, potatoes, and rice. Most agricultural areas are rain-fed and therefore
exposed to water scarcity, which constrains agricultural production in many areas. Nigeria has a tropical climate, with
historically longer rainy season in the south, receiving over 2,000 mm annual precipitation, and shorter rainy season in
the north, with annual precipitation of below 1,000 mm. Despite having an estimated 375 BCM of surface water and 156
BCM per year of groundwater potential, water is unevenly distributed, and availability per capita is expected to decline.
The yield of food-related crops has lagged population growth, leading to declining food self-sufficiency. This situation is
worsened by a decline in seasonal water availability due to climate change. For this reason, agriculture production is
increasingly dependent on the supplement water that irrigation provides. Otherwise, the overall crop production will not
grow in par with the anticipated population growth to maintain food security at its current level. About 26.5 million
Nigerians are projected to be food insecure in 20247. The situation is expected to worsen with the population projected
to reach 400 million by 20508.

9.       Increase in food production is a must in Nigeria and can be achieved through improving the performance and
management of existing irrigation and/or expansion of irrigation service area. Nigeria has set national target of 500,000
ha of irrigated area by 2030 with the objective of being able to feed the growing population. The country relies largely on
Federal and State Governments to continue developing large-scale irrigation development, which it sees as the fastest
way to reach that target. Presently, out of the 350,000 ha equipped for irrigation, 260,000 ha are large-scale irrigation
systems, the majority of which are owned by federal or state governments. The balance 90,000 ha are small-scale
irrigation. The institution responsible for MOM of federal- or state-owned dams is also managing downstream irrigation
schemes, which are both undergoing their MOM limitations. The National Irrigation Development Program (NIDP),
launched by the Federal Government in 2016 and supported by the World Bank-financed Transforming Irrigation
Management in Nigeria (TRIMING) Project (P123112, 2014–2025, US$500 million), is part of Nigeria’s recent efforts to
reform the irrigation sector and improve its governance. The TRIMING Project, which was designed as a pilot under the
NIDP, pioneered transformational management initiatives consisting in introducing, training and empowering Water User
Associations (WUAs) as a new model for the MOM of secondary and tertiary irrigation canals in selected Federally-owned
schemes, which were until then the responsibility of the RBDAs. However, RBDAs remain in charge of managing the
primary irrigation canals. TRIMING successfully tested the MOM by WUAs as part of the rehabilitation of about 32,000 ha
of large-scale irrigation. It led to improved production and positive impacts on the livelihood of farmers. However, more

4 GRADE = Global Rapid Post-Disaster Damage Estimation.
5 In 2012 and 2022, devastating floods threatened lives, infrastructure, and livelihoods of people.
6 Nigeria Bureau of Statistics, May 2023.


7 Cadre Harmonisé analysis 2023a.
8 The Lancet Nigeria Commission 2022.




                                                                                                                       Page 4
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)


work is needed to further increase overall financial sustainability in the schemes. The SPIN project builds on the
achievements, proof of concept and early lessons of the TRIMING project which it seeks to scale up in other Federally-
owned schemes as well as in State-owned schemes nationwide. To do so, the SPIN project will focus on: (a) strengthening
the cooperation and partnership between the Federal and state governments for dams and irrigation schemes MOM; and
(b) promoting the establishment of WUAs in all Federal- and state-owned irrigation schemes, possibly through
amendments of the RBDA Act and/or state legislation.

10.      Out of 36 states, 31 expressed interest in cooperating on irrigation development and management with the
Federal Government within the SPIN Project. Reaching the NIDP target of 500,000 ha irrigation by 2030 will require
enhanced cooperation between the Federal Government and all states. Irrigation development and management have
historically been divided between Federal-owned (38.7%), state-owned schemes (42.1%), and small-scale schemes with
other ownership arrangements (13.3%), with no financial or technical cooperation between the parties. In February 2024,
the FMWRS invited the 36 state governments and the Federal Capital Territory to present its ambition to scale up and
promote WUAs as a management model and the Commitment, Integrity and Capacity related criteria to be supported,
and asked States to express interest in participating in this effort under the SPIN Project. 31 states expressed their interest.
Stakeholders’ engagement workshops were organized for each of the six geopolitical zones of Nigeria to explain in further
details what is expected of participating States, including explaining the selection criteria for states, identify an initial list
of possible investments and the timeframe for next steps.

11.      Nigeria currently lacks an estimated 2,000 MW of capacity to cover current demand with acceptable reliability.
Hydropower development can play a significant role and can support economic growth and climate change mitigation.
60 percent of Nigerian population had access to electricity in 2021, excluding 85 million.9 The national average annual per
capita electricity consumption is 147 kWh, which is one-fifth of the average low-middle-income country consumption.
Demand is projected to grow at 7–8 percent per year in the medium term. The total exploitable hydropower potential in
Nigeria is estimated at 14,120 MW, of which 85 percent is yet to be developed. Currently, hydropower contributes up to
20 percent of Nigeria’s energy mix and its development would play a big role in the energy access and transition. As
thermal plants in the country face gas supply shortages, Nigeria seeks to increase hydropower in its energy mix, along with
variable renewable energy technologies such as solar and wind, to lower energy prices and replace or complement thermal
plants as a baseload power source. Hydropower is therefore a promising part of the country’s energy transition journey.

12.      The currently compartmentalized efforts to increase food production through enhanced irrigation coverage and
energy generation through hydropower make the attempts of the Government more disjointed highlighting the need for
synergistic and holistic management of water resources. This would require cross-sectoral convergence and inter-
institutional collaboration to achieve a water-energy food nexus.

13.     Relevant policy, institutional and regulatory frameworks exist in Nigeria for the governance of water resources,
but it needs strengthening. The 2004 Water Resources Act (the Water Act) is the overarching law governing water
resources in Nigeria. It vests in the FMWRS, at the Federal Government level, the responsibility to use and control both
surface and groundwater in any water course affecting more than one state.10 The Water Act confers to the Federal
minister extensive decision-making powers, which it exercises through 12 RBDAs and other parastatal institutions. The
Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) Commission, which has the mandate for water resources regulation,
currently exists based on a ministerial directive at the Federal level but it is not enacted by the Parliament. A

9 https://trackingsdg7.esmap.org/; 11 percent of the urban and 74 percent of the rural have no electricity access, and 69 percent of those
having no access to electricity belong to the lowest income segment of the population.
10 Other Federal legislations include the NWRI Act; River Basins Development Authorities Act, 1987; and Nigeria Hydrological Services Agency

(Establishment) Act, 2010.

                                                                                                                                          Page 5
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)


comprehensive National Water Resource Bill, combining the Water Act, the RBDA Act, Nigeria Hydrological Services, and
the National Water Resources Institute (NWRI), was presented to the Parliament in 2017 but has not been adopted. For
dam safety, the National Environmental (Dams and Reservoirs) Regulations, 2014, establishes the National Environmental
Standards and Regulations Enforcement Agency (NESREA) as the regulator to control the effects of dams and reservoirs
on the environment and human health. However, the dam safety regulations need to be strengthened to increase focus
on MOM, with complementary technical guidelines and protocols.

14.      Water resources and water infrastructure management in Nigeria is governed by the FMWRS and other
parastatal entities. The FMWRS is organized into several technical and non-technical departments including the
Department of Dams and Reservoir Operations (DDRO), River Basin Operation and Inspectorate, and Department of
Irrigation and Drainage (DID). The 12 RBDAs directly report to the FMWRS. Their role includes the provision of bulk water
supply as well as extension and other support services to farmers in irrigation schemes. At the state level, Departments
for Water Resources and/or Agriculture and State Water Agencies are responsible for sector management. In addition,
there are state-owned dams being utilized for water supply, hydropower generation, and public irrigation. Some of the
states11 have enacted a legislation to establish irrigation development authorities to identify, plan, design, and construct
irrigation schemes including regulation, supervision, operation, and maintenance of irrigation infrastructure for optimal
performance and water efficiency. All the states acquired considerable experience by implementing a series of National
Fadama Development Projects (1992–2019) in institutionalizing a bottom-up approach involving community-driven
development and farmer-led irrigation development.
15.     The Federal Government of Nigeria (FGN), through the development of a Hydropower Master Plan (HMP), can
increase collaboration between the FMWRS and FMP and attract private investments and partnerships. The governance
and oversight responsibilities for water resources development and hydropower generation are split between the FMWRS
and Federal Ministry of Power (FMP). Past studies such as the 2013 National Water Resources Master Plan, 2019 Master
Plan Study on National Power System Development, and 2016 Nigeria hydropower site screening do not reflect IWRM to
optimize both energy and water. Nigeria would benefit in building on these to update its National Power System
Development Plan and prepare a dedicated HMP, which could help: (a) crowd in private financing to modernize
deteriorating hydropower systems, including through Public-Private Partnership (PPP) models; (b) identify and prioritize
greenfield and brownfield hydropower investments across the country; and (c) improve coordination among the key
stakeholders, including the FMWRS and FMP.


 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)



 Development Objective(s) (From PAD)
 The Project Development Objective is to strengthen dam safety and improve management of water resources for
 hydropower and irrigation in selected areas of Nigeria.

  Key Results


      (a)       Share of Federal and State irrigation schemes under the Project managed by a functioning WUA (a
                functioning WUA is defined as legally established, staffed, funded and operating irrigation services)

11 Katsina State, for example.



                                                                                                                        Page 6
       The World Bank
       Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)


     (b)      Area provided with new/improved irrigation or drainage services (Hectare)
     (c)      Number of beneficiaries with enhanced resilience to climate risks (Corporate results indicator) defined as
              people protected from floods and droughts through enhanced dam safety and operations, and people
              benefitting from new/improved irrigation or drainage services
     (d)      Hydropower master plan prepared and structure a PPP transaction for a hydropower project jointly by
              FMWRS and FMP (Yes/No).


  D. Project Description
16.     SPIN is structured as an Investment Project Financing (IPF). It includes two Performance-Based Conditions
(PBCs) to incentivize the crafting of enabling policies and building of long-term capacity. The Project has four
components.
Component 1: Institutional strengthening and capacity building for Water Resources Management (US$30 million)
17.      This component supports institutions at Federal, state, and river basin levels, and collaboration among
irrigation, dam safety, and hydropower stakeholders to promote IWRM and help achieve the food, water, and energy
nexus in Nigeria. The component will institutionalize and scale up the implementation structure, processes, and design
standards successfully piloted by the TRIMING project while integrating lessons learned. It will, inter alia, bundle irrigation
rehabilitation and dam safety of related dam, introduce criteria-based funding allocation and used to prioritize
investments in bundled irrigation and dam safety under the Project, promote and institutionalize collaborative water
resources management and will strengthen integrated hydropower planning. The component will support three
institutional reforms: (a) the FMWRS will develop and adopt national dam safety guidelines and protocols, which will be
implemented in all SPIN target dams; (b) Water laws will be developed or updated to legally recognize WUAs in all SPIN
participating States; (c) FMWRS and FMP will jointly develop the HMP and prepare at least one priority hydropower
project. This component is structured in three subcomponents, as presented below.
Subcomponent 1.1: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building for WRM and Hydropower planning at Federal
Level (US$24 million)
Activity 1.1.1: Strengthening of dam safety institutional structure, including development and adoption of improved
dam safety technical guidelines and manuals (US$4 million)
18.     This Activity will strengthen the capacity and improve the management framework for dam owners, operators,
and agencies overseeing dam safety to help address dam safety risks by: (a) setting up a digital dam asset management
system, (b) strengthening the dam safety institutional structure and developing improved national dam safety technical
guidelines and manuals to complement NESREA’s checklist, and (c) institutionalizing capacity assessment and delivering
capacity building for the personnel involved in dam safety, owners, operators, and dam safety organizations at the Federal,
RBDA, and dam levels. The Activity will help the FMWRS deploy multi-disciplinary specialists, purchase necessary
equipment to perform dam safety mandates both at the Federal and RBDA level, consistent with the legislation for dam
safety requirements.
19.    The development and adoption of national dam safety technical guidelines and manuals by the FMWRS is
designed as a PBC. The allocation of US$50 million out of the US$100 million allocation for dam safety investments under
Component 3 is linked to the achievement of the PBC. This will incentivize that technical guidelines and manuals are
developed, adopted and applied to the rehabilitation of large dams under SPIN.
Activity 1.1.2: Capacity Building of and Support to Federal Institutions and Agencies on Water Resources and Irrigation
Management (US$4 million)



                                                                                                                          Page 7
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)


20.     This Activity will establish and operationalize a new framework for the co-management of federal irrigation and
drainage schemes with the state governments and WUAs. This activity sets the basis for the sustainability of the irrigation
investments under Component 2. Currently, Federal schemes are developed, managed, operated, and maintained entirely
by RBDAs12, and similarly state schemes are managed by state agencies. The new framework will empower the WUAs (to
be established through Subcomponent 2.1) with MOM responsibility of secondary and tertiary irrigation canals. The MOM
responsibility of primary canals will remain with Federal and state governments owning the schemes. This framework
requires a new collaboration between Federal and state levels and with WUAs. The states enact legislation to establish
WUAs for both Federal and state schemes located in the State, as was piloted under TRIMING in Katsina and Gombe states.
This framework also requires new partnerships between RBDAs and WUAs to optimize the use of irrigation infrastructure
and ensure the sustainability of irrigation schemes.
21.    This Activity will also implement capacity building of federal agencies on irrigation modernization, water
accounting and irrigation monitoring system,13 and a nationwide review of the status of irrigation schemes. Improved
water monitoring and management systems support climate change adaptation by mitigating the impacts on agriculture
and farmers’ livelihoods of precipitation variability and water extremes, exacerbated by climate change.
Activity 1.1.3: Capacity Building of and Support to Federal Institutions and Agencies in Hydropower Development (US$16
million)
22.      This activity will support convergence between the FMP and FMWRS through a joint HMP and feasibility study
for at least one prioritized project and ensure alignment with the water resources masterplan. In particular, this activity
will (a) prepare an HMP and climate-smart hydropower investment planning, (b) explore PPP options and preparing at
least one large transformative hydropower project, and (c) build the capacity of and support Federal institutions in
developing studies, strategies, and plans for improving hydropower planning and management. The activities contribute
to both climate change adaptation (through improved inter-sectoral planning of water storage and management) and
mitigation (through renewable energy).
23.    A PBC is linked to the adoption of the hydropower masterplan by the Federal Steering Committee (FSC) and the
preparation of one priority hydropower project ready for PPP. The eligibility of US$10 million out of US$16 million of this
subcomponent will be dependent on achievement of these objectives (detailed in the Results Framework and annex 4).
Subcomponent 1.2: Institutional strengthening and national knowledge exchange on water resources management at
state level (US$1 million)
24.       This subcomponent will support the participating states to develop and adopt legislation to establish WUAs for
participatory irrigation management at the scheme level. There are currently only two states14 with legislation in place
supporting the WUAs. To incentivize the states to adopt such provisions, the adoption of a legislation for WUAs and the
provision of a dedicated state budget line to finance irrigation MOM through WUAs are the two eligibility criteria for a
state to get financial support for irrigation rehabilitation under Component 2. To support this process, this subcomponent
will: (a) provide technical support in the formulation of legislation to establish WUAs, based on experience from other
countries, through development of models and organization of national workshops; and (b) establish a knowledge
exchange and peer-to-peer learning platform between states on irrigation, the role of water infrastructure in climate
change adaptation and disaster risk reduction and WRM.
25.     The transfer of appropriate level of MOM of irrigation schemes from RBDA to WUAs is necessary to address the
build, neglect, and rebuild cycle irrigation development is facing in Nigeria. Over time, RBDAs lost both adequate


12 Except schemes under the TRIMING Project were WUAs have been established.
13 In coordination with the Water Security and Governance Dialogue ASA (P178444).
14 Gombe State and Katsina State.



                                                                                                                       Page 8
       The World Bank
       Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)


budgetary provisions and human resources for irrigation MOM, leading to a growing number of schemes becoming
dysfunctional. Federal subventions are not sufficient and user contributions are almost non-existent. TRIMING addressed
this by introducing service agreements, whereby, in return for improved service, users pay a cost-reflective contribution
called Irrigation service fee (ISF) and organize themselves in WUAs to take up MOM of secondary and tertiary irrigation
canals. The SPIN project builds on early lessons from TRIMING.
Subcomponent 1.3: Improving WRM at river basin level (US$5 million)
26.     The SPIN Project will support RBDAs and state actors in refocusing their efforts on IWRM and resource planning
at river basin level and in enabling partnerships with WUAs for MOM of irrigation and drainage facilities. This
subcomponent will: (a) improve MOM of water resources’ infrastructural assets; (b) strengthen hydrological monitoring,
water allocation and WRM at the basin level through installation of modern tools for management of reservoirs; (c)
strengthen capacity for bulk water supply planning and irrigation scheduling at the scheme level to ensure farmers receive
water when needed; and (d) enhance cost recovery for MOM of assets through supply of bulk water for various
socioeconomic sectors, in particular irrigation schemes. While Subcomponent 1.2 supports State Water Legislations, the
SPIN will also facilitate the revision of the RBDA Act to introduce legal recognition of WUAs and cooperation on WRM
among states sharing a River basin.
27.      To support such a decentralized management model, a Field-Level Leadership (FLL) program will be established
by the Federal Government to support RBDAs, state governments, and WUAs, for performance improvements. The FLL
will include a leadership program for women focused on enhancing women’s technical and leadership skills in irrigation
management, and preparing women for managerial roles, enabling them to make decisions that impact women farmers.
28.     The implementation of activities in support of RBDAs will be in close collaboration with the Department of River
Basin Operations and Inspectorate of the FMWRS. A technical working group will be established within the Department
of River Basin Operations and Inspectorate, involving technical persons from RBDAs to support centralized activities.
RBDAs will increase stakeholder participation in planning and complaint redress.
Component 2: Irrigation Modernization (US$350 million)
29.     Component 2 will support the rehabilitation and revitalization of 40,000 ha of irrigated command area, through a
comprehensive modernization program combining improving irrigation and drainage infrastructure while implementing
the institutional reforms presented in Component 1. While potential investments sites were pre-identified across all
geopolitical zones, the Federal and state schemes15 which will be supported by the SPIN Project will be determined based
on technical and implementation readiness criteria agreed with the FMWRS. Component 2 is structured in three
subcomponents.
Subcomponent 2.1: Mobilization and Development of Water User Associations (WUAs) (US$20 million)
30.      This Subcomponent will support the creation of WUAs in all irrigation schemes under the project and will
provide capacity building. Building on the achievements of the TRIMING project, it will focus on organizing farmers sharing
tertiary irrigation and drainage canals in Water User Groups (WUGs), which will constitute building blocks for establishing
WUAs to manage secondary and tertiary irrigation canals. One of the key lessons emerging from the TRIMING Project is
the need for WUAs to be strengthened as inclusive, self-managed, and accountable institutions of farmers. The
subcomponent will build the capacity of WUAs to undertake their primary responsibilities: maintaining the secondary-
and field-level water conveyance system, facilitating crop planning, estimating water requirements, ensuring equitable
and sustainable irrigation scheduling and delivering irrigation services to members, and fixing and collecting irrigation and
drainage service fees from members to recover the MOM costs to help them sustainably manage the water conveyance

15 Hereinafter, federal-financed schemes are referred as Model 1 and state-financed schemes are referred as Model 2




                                                                                                                        Page 9
       The World Bank
       Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)


system. The WUA establishment and their capacity building on WRM will enable farmers to have direct responsibility on
the MOM and improve their adaptive capacity to water variability and climate change impacts. Moreover, well maintained
irrigation and drainage systems contribute to mitigating the effects of both floods and droughts. The implementation of
Subcomponent 2.1 will be done by the Federal Project Management Unit (FPMU) in close collaboration with RBDAs and
states. The coordination of activities and oversight will be taken up by the state governments. RBDAs will set up a
dedicated WUA unit as part of the bulk water supply to provide facilitation support to WUAs and the states. The activities
of this subcomponent are further detailed in annex 2.
Subcomponent 2.2: Irrigation and Drainage Infrastructure Investments (US$320 million)
31.      This Subcomponent will support rehabilitation and upgrading of water distribution and conveyance systems
aimed at increasing the irrigation command area, strengthening resilience to climate hazards such as droughts (through
delivery of stored water) and floods (through drainage), minimizing conveyance losses, and improving the reliability
and timely delivery of irrigation and drainage services. This activity will finance: (a) studies and/or design reviews of
irrigation schemes; (b) based on approved technical design, preparation of relevant Environmental and Social Framework
(ESF) instruments, including, ESIAs, Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs), and Resettlement Action Plans
(RAPs) as required, and monitor their implementation; (c) rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage civil works; (d)
associated engineering supervision; and (e) installation of critical canal monitoring system. Water resources for majority
of schemes to be rehabilitated would be supplied by existing dams. Rehabilitation of these existing dams are covered
under Component 3.
Subcomponent 2.3: Irrigation Management Modernization (US$10 million)
32.      The aim of the subcomponent is to operationalize management tools, information and communication
technology equipment, and management information systems to make the irrigation infrastructure deliver reliable,
accountable, and sustainable irrigation and drainage services. This subcomponent will: (a) develop a Comprehensive
Irrigation Management System to track the condition of canal assets for optimizing maintenance and investment planning;
(b) establishing water accounting systems, incorporating enhanced use of climate-related data to monitor water
availability, formulation of service delivery standards, and establishment of service regulations; and (c) establishing
benchmarking systems of service delivery and performance assessment of the participating irrigation systems. Such
activities pertain to basin/sub-basin planning, water accounting and data-driven allocation decisions across multiple uses
and multiple schemes. These activities will be implemented in parallel and in correspondence with the construction works
(rehabilitation or expansion) financed under the Subcomponent 2.2 so that the rehabilitated or newly constructed
infrastructure is handed over to the WUAs and scheme operator from the contractor in a progressive manner. The
procured ICT equipment will be aligned with the international standards on energy efficiency.
33.     This subcomponent will also promote climate-resilient water management strategies and change irrigation
management strategies to reduce climate vulnerabilities (for example, irrigation schedules) and improve water and
energy efficiency of the rehabilitated systems. The energy efficiency of the irrigation schemes will be ensured by
maximizing the use of gravity, and solar pumps when necessary. The resilience of the communities to water-related
disasters such as drought and flood will be also strengthened through the operationalization of the irrigation monitoring
systems. Moreover, the irrigation management modernization will improve the quality of service provided by the
operator. Key performance indicators will be defined among RBDAs and WUAs on the performance satisfaction of service
provided against water delivery plan.
Component 3: Improvements in dam operations and enhancing dam safety (US$100 million)
34.    This component will strengthen the dam safety management system in the country and will rehabilitate and
improve the safety of prioritized dams and associated appurtenances. The project will not finance the construction of
any new dam. Planned activities are neither intended to alter the original schemes, change their nature, nor expand dam

                                                                                                                     Page 10
       The World Bank
       Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)


extents to make them appear as new or different schemes. Priority will be given to select dams that provide downstream
irrigation services to the schemes which will be identified under Component 2. The safety of dams is key to climate
adaptation by ensuring water delivery for water supply, hydropower, ecosystem conservation and irrigation to mitigate
droughts, protecting against dam break flooding, and storing excess water to mitigate floods following high precipitation.
35.     This component will: (a) conduct a Dam Safety Portfolio Risk Assessment Exercise including establishing and
implementing a risk indexing screening method for dams in Nigeria and selecting dams for rehabilitation works; (b)
prepare an Emergency Action Plan (EAP), an O&M manual, including operational protocols, dam health monitoring and
reporting protocols, and an instrumentation plan for dam safety. The EAP will include safety protocols that address safety
concerns specific to women and persons with disabilities; (c) perform rehabilitation works including measures for seepage
reduction, hydrological and structural safety measures, strengthening main dam body and foundation, and improving
basic dam facilities and dam safety instruments; (d) prepare and implementing sediment management plans, through
bathymetric surveys and feasibility studies, piloting of institutional models, and plans for treatment of upstream drainage
catchments with construction of sediment-retaining check-dams and river bank protection structures; and (e) apply
nature-based solutions to dam/reservoir operation and management. Details on the activities are in annex 3.
Component 4: Project Management (US$20 million)
36.      The main objective of this component is to effectively implement, monitor, and evaluate project activities. It
involves establishing the FPMU and Technical Units (TUs) at the Federal level and State Project Implementing Units for the
state irrigation schemes to oversee and coordinate project implementation, as well as setting up a monitoring and
evaluation (M&E) system. Component 4 will also support the establishment of the FSC and Technical Steering Committee
for the project, with ministerial representations from the FMWRS, FMP, and other relevant agencies. An external M&E
agency will be contracted to provide support on the assessment of project activities and their impact. The component
includes financing for consultancies, trainings, materials, office equipment, and operating costs.



 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate
 Legal Operational Policies                                                           Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                          Yes
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                    No


Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts




37.      Environmental and social (High). Environment and Social (E&S) impacts/risks from proposed project activities are
anticipated on water resources and use, air quality, terrestrial ecology, biodiversity, natural resources, land use, human
and socio-economic context, public and land resources from the disposal of muck and other wastes which will vary
depending on the extent of rehabilitation activities proposed. Potential E&S risks include issues of occupational health
and safety of workers, community health and safety issues, grievance as a result of poor implementation of the
interventions and compensation (where it becomes relevant), and weak dam operation and maintenance and emergency
preparedness and potential dam failure. Poor stakeholder engagements can also impact the project if stakeholders are
not adequately consulted. Impacts on land and assets are likely in dams and irrigation areas. Also, considering the
specialized nature of rehabilitation works, using skilled migrant labour could potentially lead to potential Sexual

                                                                                                                      Page 11
       The World Bank
       Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)


exploitation and abuse/Sexual harassment (SEA/SH) risks, poor labour practices. Security risks level is equally high, since
the project is implemented in areas of conflict and volatile settings, which was also an issue for the TRIMING Project. The
Borrower will prepare Environmental and Social Assessments (ESAs) such as Environmental and Social Management
Framework, Resettlement Policy Framework, Labor Management Procedure and Environmental and Social Commitment
Plan before completion of Appraisal. Other sub-project ESAs such as Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs),
Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) and Resettlement Action Plans and other specific instruments will
be prepared during project implementation. Security Management Plans (SMPs) and Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual
Harassment (SEA/SH) Action Plans will also be prepared. A dam safety panel of experts will be hired by client to assess the
safety status of the dams and surrounding areas, status of dam operation and maintenance and emergency preparedness
and provide recommendations for dam safety measures. Effective stakeholder engagement will also be supported, guided
by a comprehensive Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) to be developed during project preparation. The strategy will
outline systems and processes to ensure that stakeholders and the public are active participants in all project design and
implementation aspects.
 E. Implementation

 Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
38.      The FMWRS is the lead implementing ministry for the project, in collaboration with the FMP and participating
state government. Given the administrative structure, as defined by the constitution of Nigeria, the project will be
executed through the Federal and state governments. The project implementation arrangements are to strengthen the
roles, responsibilities, and accountabilities of the administrative structure of the country and aim in reforming the
devolution and institutionalization of the water sector architecture. An inter-ministerial PSC will be set up with mandate
of discussing overall project direction, and concurring project outputs for World Bank’s no objection. The PSC will consist
of the FMWRS, FMP, Federal Ministry of Finance (FMF), Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security (FMAFS), Federal
Ministry of Environment (FMEnv), Federal Ministry of Budget and Economic Planning (FMBEP), Office of the Vice-President
(OVP), and commissioners of water resources and agriculture in participating states. The PSC will be mandated to meet at
least once in six months and will be co-chaired on rotation basis for one year each by the Ministers of FMWRS and FMP.
Establishment of the PSC and holding the first meeting will be an effectiveness condition for the project. The Federal
Technical Committee (FTC) will provide overall technical guidance. The Federal Technical Committee will be chaired by
the Permanent Secretary of the FMWRS and will include Directors of Irrigation and Drainage, Dams and Reservoir
Operations (DRO), River Basin Operation of the FMWRS, Director of Renewable Energy of the FMP, relevant Directors from
FMAFS and FMEnv, and Managing Directors from participating RBDAs.
39.     The FMWRS will set up a Federal Project Management Unit (FPMU) staffed with competent multi-disciplinary
experts from both the FMWRS and FMP fully dedicated to managing the project. The FPMU will be lean, with only
responsibility for coordination, fiduciary, that is, procurement and financial management (FM), M&E, and environmental
and social management. The technical arm of the FPMU will be handled by TUs hosted in the Departments of Irrigation
and Drainage and DRO of the FMWRS and the Department of Renewable Energy of the FMP. The appointed experts from
the ICRC and BPE will be part of the Hydropower TU in the Department of Renewable Energy of the FMP to support
operationalization of the PPP action plan and other activities around private sector participation in hydropower
development. The TUs will be responsible for preparing terms of reference for technical consultants, specifications, lead
evaluations of technical proposals, and other technical documents required for the project’s implementation.




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate

                                                                                                                      Page 12
     The World Bank
     Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)


CONTACT POINT

World Bank
 Jun Matsumoto
 Senior Water Resources Management Specialist

 Pravin Karki
 Senior Hydropower Specialist

 Emmanuel Chinedu Umolu
 Senior Water Resources Management Specialist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 FEDERAL GOVERNMENT OF NIGERIA
 Stanley Nyeso George
 Director IERD
 nyekenso@gmail.com

Implementing Agencies
 Federal Ministry of Water Resources and Sanitation
 Esther Oluniyi
 Director, Irrigation and Drainage Department
 akinronk@gmail.com

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                     Jun Matsumoto, Pravin Karki, Emmanuel Chinedu Umolu

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:                Anna Cestari                        25-Jun-2024



                                                                                               Page 13
     The World Bank
     Sustainable Power and Irrigation for Nigeria Project (P179684)



Country Director:                        Ndiame Diop                  28-Jul-2024




                                                                                    Page 14
