Public Disclosure Authorized
                                         The World Bank
                                         Additional Financing Grant Kosovo FOSTERING AND LEVERAGING OPPORTUNITIES FOR WATER SECURITY
                                         PROGRAM (PROJECT 1) (P179781)




Public Disclosure Authorized



                                                     Project Information Document (PID)



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                    Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 06-Dec-2023 | Report No: PIDA36312




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Nov 27, 2023                                                                                       Page 1 of 17
          The World Bank
          Additional Financing Grant Kosovo FOSTERING AND LEVERAGING OPPORTUNITIES FOR WATER SECURITY
          PROGRAM (PROJECT 1) (P179781)



   BASIC INFORMATION

 OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA
  A. Basic Project Data

   Country                             Project ID                  Project Name                Parent Project ID (if any)
   Kosovo                              P179781                     Additional Financing        P169150
                                                                   Grant Kosovo FOSTERING
                                                                   AND LEVERAGING
                                                                   OPPORTUNITIES FOR
                                                                   WATER SECURITY
                                                                   PROGRAM (PROJECT 1)
   Parent Project Name                 Region                      Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Board Date
   Fostering and Leveraging            EUROPE AND CENTRAL          20-Dec-2023                 22-Feb-2024
   Opportunities for Water Security    ASIA
   Program (Project 1)
   Practice Area (Lead)                Financing Instrument        Borrower(s)                Implementing Agency
   Water                               Investment Project          Ministry of Finance, Labor Ministry of Environment,
                                       Financing                   and Transfers              Spatial Planning and
                                                                                              Infrastructure

   Proposed Development Objective(s) Parent

   The proposed project development objective is to: (i) strengthen national capacity for managing water security, and
   (ii) improve water security in Morava e Binces basin.


   Components
   Foundational measures for water security
   Addressing water crisis with catalytic investments
   Project management

   PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

  SUMMARY      -NewFin1




   Total Project Cost                                                                                                5.33
   Total Financing                                                                                                   5.33
               of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                     0.00
   Financing Gap                                                                                                     0.00




Nov 27, 2023                                                                                                     Page 2 of 17
          The World Bank
          Additional Financing Grant Kosovo FOSTERING AND LEVERAGING OPPORTUNITIES FOR WATER SECURITY
          PROGRAM (PROJECT 1) (P179781)


  DETAILS      -NewFinEnh1




   Non-World Bank Group Financing

      Trust Funds                                                                                                             5.33
         Free-standing TFs for ECA SD Sector Unit                                                                             5.33


   Environmental and Social Risk Classification
   Substantial




   Other Decision (as needed)


   B. Introduction and Context

   Country Context

          1.        Kosovo faces a unique set of challenges and opportunities as one of Europe’s poorest countries
          in terms of its gross domestic product (GDP) per capita and as the youngest country in the continent.
          Since its independence in 2008, the country has made considerable socioeconomic progress, benefiting
          from the support of the international community and its own diaspora. With policies anchored in its
          overarching political objective of joining the European Union (EU), Kosovo has made progress in
          promoting growth, reducing poverty, and improving the business climate. Between 2010 and 2018, GDP
          per capita grew at an average of 3 percent in real terms and nominal GDP per capita reached EUR 3,746
          at the end of 2018, making Kosovo the fastest-growing country in the Western Balkans. However, it has
          one of the lowest living standards in Europe, with per capita GDP (purchasing power parity terms) of
          US$10,069 in 2018. The country scores particularly low on labor dimensions of gender equality, including
          from a regional perspective. According to the 2018 Labor Force Survey of Kosovo Statistics Agency,
          female labor force participation is low at 18.4 percent (63.3 percent among men). Female employment
          rate is also low at 12.3 percent (45.3 percent among men) and unemployment rate is high at 33.4 percent
          (28.5 percent among men). Over 62 percent of the country’s population lives in rural areas and depends,
          directly or indirectly, on agriculture for its livelihood. Poverty rate is high with 18 percent of the population
          living in moderate poverty in 2017. Poverty in rural area is especially high and over 40 percent of the rural
          population is unemployed. At the same time, with its new statehood and majority of its population under
          the age of 30,1 Kosovo is the youngest country in Europe.

          2.     Kosovo is at an important point in its development, and water security is at the heart of all
          socioeconomic activity. As a small country with many intertwined socioeconomic activities, Kosovo’s

          1 Kosovo Agency of Statistics, http://ask.rks-gov.net/media/5082/vjetari-2019_ang-final.pdf.



Nov 27, 2023                                                                                                             Page 3 of 17
          The World Bank
          Additional Financing Grant Kosovo FOSTERING AND LEVERAGING OPPORTUNITIES FOR WATER SECURITY
          PROGRAM (PROJECT 1) (P179781)


          economy has been sustained by limited water resources, including hydropower; cooling water for
          electricity generation in the two existing thermal power plants (accounting for 96 percent of power
          generation capacity of the country); municipal uses (98 percent coverage, most of it through regional
          water companies [RWCs]); industrial uses for light and heavy industry—mining and metallurgy—and
          irrigation. Irrigation infrastructure, enabling summer agriculture production, suffered a steep post-war
          decline from 29,000 ha to about 12,000 ha and is now slowly bouncing back to around 18,000 ha (both
          formal and informal). Social impacts of water pollution are severe, with direct and indirect health impacts
          as well as major impacts on productive landscapes and ecosystems. The broadening gap between growing
          water demand and available water supply quantities leads to water shortages and interruptions in water
          supply services, particularly in the drier southeastern part of the country, which are expected to become
          more frequent and severe due to climate change. Given the economic and social importance of
          sustainable land and water management and development, it is critical to address the root causes of water
          insecurity to support growth in Kosovo. In terms of service provision, this includes institutional
          strengthening and improving access to water services and participation in management decisions, broadly
          for all citizens, and particularly for women. Currently, Kosovo is facing an acute water crisis with several
          below-average rainfall years leading to restricted water supply in major towns in the east of the country
          and constraints on other uses. A more fundamental challenge is rooted in the lack of infrastructure,
          institutions, and information that would have built resilience to these shocks.

          3.       In this light, it is critical that Kosovo moves from fragmented, single sector-specific actions to
          joint decisions and concrete investments and measures that will set it on a more robust water secure
          trajectory. The World Bank’s Water Security Outlook for Kosovo2 studied the role of water as it permeates
          the economy, society, and environment in many aspects and highlighted immediate objectives, also
          emphasized in Kosovo’s national strategies. This requires a two-pronged approach with both foundational
          measures and concrete multifaceted investments to address the current crisis and catalyze a broader
          transformation. As foundational measures, Kosovo needs to improve the institutional capacity for
          modern, climate-smart, shared-vision planning and management of its water resources in the economy.
          It also needs to improve the information base and data use for planning and decision support. Finally, it
          needs to improve the operation and safety of its existing large-scale water infrastructure assets, through
          dam safety programs. As catalytic investments start to address the water crisis, the nation needs to
          prepare and implement a well-prioritized pipeline of water-related investments, in terms of water
          storage, irrigation for commercialization and competitiveness, drinking water supply, and water
          protection in the face of climate change-induced risks such as drought and flooding. These investments
          should prioritize Kosovo’s most water-stressed regions and sectors and thus increase economic
          opportunities for rural populations for development of agriculture, industry, tourism, services, and other
          water-dependent sectors. And it should make water security an issue that permeates society, through
          adoption of sustainable land and water management practices, agro-environmental protection, demand
          management, and increased awareness of the importance of sustaining precious water resources. These
          inclusive developments should encourage collaboration among diverse communities. Pursuing these
          opportunities should also enhance Kosovo’s implementation capacity of EU acquis and its readiness for
          transboundary water dialogue.




          2 World Bank. 2018. Water Security Outlook for Kosovo. World Bank.



Nov 27, 2023                                                                                                        Page 4 of 17
          The World Bank
          Additional Financing Grant Kosovo FOSTERING AND LEVERAGING OPPORTUNITIES FOR WATER SECURITY
          PROGRAM (PROJECT 1) (P179781)




   Sectoral and Institutional Context

          4.       Kosovo’s water resources are constrained, largely due to its geography. Kosovo is a small
          landlocked country with limited water resources and very little inflow from other countries, with only one
          river (Iber) flowing into the country. All rivers and smaller watercourses belong to the four main river
          basins: the White Drin (Drini i Bardhë), the Iber, the Morava e Binces, and the Lepenc. Kosovo’s water
          availability is largely shaped by its topography and geographic location. Its landscape is dominated by
          relatively high mountains (the highest peak is 2,656 m) surrounding two plains (Kosovo Plain from 510 to
          570 masl and Dukagjini Plain from 350 to 450 masl). The climate is mid-continental, but the Dukagjini Plain
          has a more Mediterranean climate due to its lower elevation and the valley of the Drini i Bardhë river. The
          climate features cold and snowy winters and hot and dry summers. The annual average rainfall is highest
          in the west at around 800 mm per year and lowest in the east at around 600 mm per year, with an overall
          declining trend, including longer dry spells and shorter and more intense precipitation periods leading to
          flash floods. Temperatures can range from −27 °C in winter to +39 °C in summer and precipitation
          generally falls in winter. Therefore, agriculture relies on irrigation, and all sectors require larger water
          storage capacity to meet summer’s demands, which are augmented with population and economic
          growth.

          5.       By regional comparison Kosovo is water stressed, and it has among the lowest levels of water
          resources development and storage. It is estimated that Kosovo has 1,600 m3 total renewable water
          resources per person per year, which is about 16 percent of the regional average. Also, storage volume
          per capita is only 300 m3, about 41 percent of the regional average. This combination makes Kosovo
          vulnerable to current and future climate change-related natural hazards, especially floods and droughts.
          In particular, Iber basin is water stressed and Morava e Binces basin is driest in terms of decreasing annual
          precipitation and lower storage capacity, which are exacerbated by climate change. It is expected that all
          Kosovo’s basins will be water stressed in the next 20 years.3 While the projected increase in water demand
          is attributed to population and economic growth, combined with the revitalization of the irrigation and
          mining sector and additional demands from the energy sector, the projected decrease in total water
          supply and its increasing variability are attributed to climate change. Several large water users are
          currently showing suppressed demand, and their revitalization is a key government priority. The
          anticipated increase in shocks and deterioration of water quality—associated with climate change—will
          require a more harmonized approach to and additional improvement in management of storage
          (snowcaps, groundwater, and artificial) and water pollution at its multiple sources, to satisfy increasing
          needs.

          6.      In addition to physical water stress exacerbated by climate change, poor management of
          available resources makes Kosovo water insecure. Inadequate investments in infrastructure; heavy
          water pollution; data-poor decision-making based on limited, unreliable data; and lack of integrated
          planning and enforcement of regulations add pressure on an already constrained resource base. While


          3 Based on projections of higher temperatures, reduced precipitation, and population growth, Kosovo’s water basins may become water

          stressed or water scarce by 2040 (Source: World Bank Water Security Outlook Report 2018, citing IPCC 5th assessment report; WRI Aqueduct
          2014; FAO Aquastat; NASA GLDAS; Shhiklomanov and Rodda 2004; Florke et al. 2012; Matsutomi 2019 and Republic of Kosovo Climate Change
          Strategy 2019–2028 https://konsultimet.rks-gov.net/Storage/Consultations/14-13-59-
          04102018/Climate%20Change%20Strategy%20and%20Action%20Plan_sep_2018.pdf ).


Nov 27, 2023                                                                                                                                     Page 5 of 17
          The World Bank
          Additional Financing Grant Kosovo FOSTERING AND LEVERAGING OPPORTUNITIES FOR WATER SECURITY
          PROGRAM (PROJECT 1) (P179781)


          the drinking water sector has made strides in increasing access, the problem of high nonrevenue water
          (NRW) persists, sewage and wastewater treatment is lagging, and access to services is still uneven across
          the country. The actual irrigated area is below half of the equipped area, let alone the potential in the
          country. At the same time, many problems have arisen from unprecedented urbanization and the
          construction boom of the past decade, which has caused at times development in flood-risk zones,
          impeded storm drainage capacities, and interrupted service systems. Water resources are often heavily
          polluted (from domestic, mining, industrial, and nonpoint agricultural sources) and cannot be used for
          drinking or irrigation, and services are poorly managed with outdated infrastructure, high losses, and poor
          service delivery. Hydrometeorological observations, analysis, and data services show shortcomings with
          limited stations and information in the public domain. Currently, there are no river basin management
          plans (RBMPs) or actionable plans or forums to convene, debate, allocate, and manage in an integrated
          way to optimize water use, sustain the country’s water resources, and/or build resilience against shocks.

          7.       There is no systematic surveillance of dam safety in the country. Monitoring and maintenance
          of the dams were partially suspended in recent years. The few existing large dams in Kosovo all pose major
          hazards if safety is not guaranteed, especially with projected trends of shorter and more intense periods
          of rainfall due to climate change. The absence of systematic dam safety surveillance and planning is of
          concern for downstream communities, their economic life span, and their broader operations and
          management, and it will block the much-needed expansion of water storage capacity. Careful integration
          of dam safety and operational improvements cognizant of basin changes can significantly enhance overall
          basin water efficiency for multiple sectors.

          8.       Climate change is expected to exacerbate existing problems and introduce new shocks. Climate
          change models predict that the region will get drier and warmer faster than the world average, particularly
          summer dry spells may increase, coupled with shorter but more intense rain periods. This climate trend
          is already observed, evidenced by the fact that communities are increasingly affected by water shortages
          and floods, ecosystem degradation, pollution and water-related diseases—particularly in the east of the
          country. Flood damages are already significant and on the rise. It is estimated that a 100-year flood may
          lead to damage equivalent to 3 percent of the country’s GDP (US$200 million). The annual average
          population affected by flooding in Kosovo is about 10,000 and annual average affected GDP is about
          US$50 million.4 With climate change-induced increase in the frequency and intensity of flood events in
          the future, coupled with projected economic growth, these figures are modeled to increase dramatically
          if no resilience is built up.

          9.      The adverse economic, social, and environmental impacts of these challenges are acute
          nationwide. Kosovo has been struck by droughts several times in the last two decades (1993, 2000, 2007,
          2008, 2014, and 2019). Between 2004 and 2008, 80 percent of Kosovo municipalities suffered from water
          shortages due to hydrological drought. The drought of 2007 was particularly severe and in 2014, following
          depletion of reservoirs from low snow and rain levels, water rationing was instituted in the capital,
          Prishtina. Due to climate change, the likelihood of severe drought is expected to increase significantly.
          Summer precipitation is expected to decrease further while evapotranspiration will increase, more
          intense rainfall events are expected, along with reduced system storage and baseflows due to reduced
          snowcaps and catchment degradation; the water availability in the dry season is even more sensitive. It is

          4 Kosovo Country Risk Profile for Floods and Earthquakes, GFDRR, World Bank. 2016.



Nov 27, 2023                                                                                                       Page 6 of 17
          The World Bank
          Additional Financing Grant Kosovo FOSTERING AND LEVERAGING OPPORTUNITIES FOR WATER SECURITY
          PROGRAM (PROJECT 1) (P179781)


          estimated that Kosovo will face a decline of 50 days of snow cover per year by 20505, which will have a
          large impact on water storage in snowpack with major impacts on system hydrology and increase in winter
          flooding risks.

          10.      The ongoing water crisis caused by severe drought particularly in the eastern part of the country
          raises the urgency for action. Within the Morava e Binces basin, the area already with lowest rainfall and
          among the highest water stress and least storage of Kosovo’s basins, the 2019 drought has had major
          consequences. Reservoir levels are at record lows due to absence of seasonal rains after a drier-than-
          usual 2018 raining season. Water quality has further deteriorated, making it unusable for any economic
          activity including irrigation. Importantly, major towns and villages have had to introduce strict rationing
          with parts of the service area de facto running out of drinking water. The southeast municipalities of Gjilan
          and Viti have been particularly hard hit with more than six months of water restriction among residents
          and businesses which has become a repeated episode in this region of Kosovo. Existing drought
          management plans do not address the root cause of the adaptation problem, that is, lack of systematic
          water resources planning and demand management.

          11.       Today’s challenges need to be addressed and new approaches need to be tested. The
          Government has laid out its long-term vision in the National Water Strategy (2017–2036), which includes
          both foundational measures and recognizes the need for immediate investments particularly in the most
          water-stressed parts of the country, where services are interrupted. This provides an opportunity to
          address the water crisis while also learning valuable implementation lessons in applying a broader water
          security lens. Development of new multipurpose water storage will be the backbone of this approach, and
          this will include the ‘Kike-Kremenata’ system, which has remained an unrealized priority project since the
          1980s. The most recent comprehensive water resources investment strategy is the 1983 Water
          Masterplan. The socioeconomic trajectory of the country, the water and climate change situation, the
          regulatory framework stemming from Kosovo’s national and EU legislation, and available technology and
          management insights have profoundly changed since then. Improving environmental services and nature-
          based solutions will be equally critical in a comprehensive approach of sustaining the country’s water
          resources. Watershed protection is important for ensuring environmental functions as well as for
          satisfactory quality and quantity of water throughout the year for productive livelihoods. More than 55
          percent of Kosovo’s land surface is prone to mild or severe erosion and through forest loss and thinning
          (largely due to illegal logging for meeting heating needs), catchments get degraded, threatening their
          hydrological functions and noticeably reducing summer baseflows as well as shortening the economic life
          span of reservoirs. At the same time, demand management and improved efficiency of service delivery
          (the Hidromorava RWC system for instance has over 62 percent NRW) go a long way in addressing the
          current crises, postponing the need for expensive additional storage. Thus, a water security approach
          builds resilience through a combined approach of increasing storage capacity, sustaining water resources,
          improving service delivery, and protecting citizens from major water risks.

          12.     Given its water scarcity, Kosovo aims to reduce high inefficiencies in the water services sectors.
          Despite steady improvements in recent years, efficiency gains can still be made. For instance, NRW levels


          5 Kosovo Climate Change Framework Strategy, Kosovo Ministry of Environment and Spatial Planning.

          2014 and Action Plan for the Climate Change Strategy. UNDP and Austrian Development Cooperation.
          2016.

Nov 27, 2023                                                                                                         Page 7 of 17
          The World Bank
          Additional Financing Grant Kosovo FOSTERING AND LEVERAGING OPPORTUNITIES FOR WATER SECURITY
          PROGRAM (PROJECT 1) (P179781)


          in 2017 reached 58 percent, negatively affecting service costs and service level6 This high level of NRW is
          due to a combination of factors including outdated infrastructure, outdated metering devices, data-
          handling errors, and water misuse. Staff productivity in 2013 was 6.6 employees per 1,000 connections7.
          The billing collection rate was 71 percent, revealing internal utility inefficiencies and unresolved
          affordability issues with customers8. However, at the same time improving the environmental and
          financial sustainability of RWCs remains a priority in the drinking water sector, especially through the
          reduction of NRW. At the national level, a drought management strategy and NRW reduction strategy
          have been elaborated, mirrored by medium-term plans for each RWC. Several utilities have started to
          implement pilot projects, although results are not yet visible in shifting efficiency and performance
          indicators at the sector level. At the same time, some utilities, including Hidromorava RWC, have not yet
          reached all their rural customers in the service area, and Hidromorava’s NRW is above average at over 62
          percent. Given its much reduced area, overall irrigation abstractions (~140 million m3 per year) are
          currently below water supply and sanitation abstraction (~178 million m3 per year), but if irrigation is to
          be revitalized, these figures will rise exponentially if efficiencies are not improved. The Government is
          currently developing a comprehensive irrigation investment framework that will help prioritize and
          prepare irrigation and drainage investments in the country that support a thriving agricultural sector and
          are based on sustainable water balances and water use efficiency. This study will be ready in July 2020
          and will inform future investments in this sector.

          13.      Currently, Kosovo is underprepared to tackle these water management challenges. Efforts to
          address them are hampered by a multitude of factors. A major challenge is weak and fragmented
          institutional arrangements and capacity for water management at both national and local levels and a
          severe lack of funding for these activities. The current institutional framework for water management in
          Kosovo involves many government institutions and other stakeholders. Overall, water management is the
          mandate of the Ministry of Environment, Spatial Planning and Infrastructure (MESPI), with key functions
          in subsectors managed by other line ministries (notably Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Rural
          Development [MAFRD]; Ministry of Economy [ME]; and Ministry of Health). State-owned enterprises for
          irrigation and/or water supply under ME manage most of the service delivery. Most of the forest and
          agricultural land is owned and managed by farming families and interventions on their land require a
          partnership approach. The River Basin Districts Authority (RBDA), currently a department under the
          MESPI, has an executive role for water resources management for all four basins, and there are many
          other institutes in the areas of environment, service regulation, public health, spatial data, and
          emergencies that fulfill specific functions in the water sector. Intergovernmental sector coordination has
          taken the shape of an inter-ministerial water council (IMWC), headed by the Prime Minister. The last
          decade saw an impressive development of the legal framework, strategies, action plans, and policies as
          well as notable successes in subsectors. Yet, institutional capacity to deliver on mandates and integrated
          water resources planning remains weak across line ministries and enforcement of plans and rules remains
          haphazard.



          6 The Kosovo Water Services Regulatory Authority report, 2017
          7 Annual Performance Report of Water Service Providers in Kosovo, in 2013. Pristina: Water and

          Wastewater Regulatory Office of the Republic of Kosovo. 2013.
          8 Annual Performance Report of Water Service Providers in Kosovo, in 2013. Pristina: Water and

          Wastewater Regulatory Office of the Republic of Kosovo. 2013.

Nov 27, 2023                                                                                                       Page 8 of 17
          The World Bank
          Additional Financing Grant Kosovo FOSTERING AND LEVERAGING OPPORTUNITIES FOR WATER SECURITY
          PROGRAM (PROJECT 1) (P179781)


          14.      Realizing the challenges, the Government and its partners have begun to address the multiple
          challenges. Under the guidance of the IMWC and following the National Water Strategy (2017–2036),
          efforts have begun to rehabilitate and improve management of critical water resources assets in the
          country. These efforts include restoring of Gazivoda-Iber Lepenc, rehabilitation and modernization of the
          Radoniqi Dam and Radoniqi-Dukagjini irrigation scheme, and a range of investments and reforms in the
          water supply and sanitation sector covering both larger towns and smaller conglomerations. The
          Government has support from several bilateral donors, notably the Swiss Agency for Development and
          Cooperation (SDC) on institutional support and sector coordination, Sweden on river basin planning in the
          Drini i Bardhë basin, several financiers on wastewater treatment, and the Deutsche Gesellschaft für
          Internationale Zusammenarbeit (German Agency for International Cooperation, GIZ) on preliminary flood
          risk management. Kosovo also developed its Climate Change Framework Strategy with financial support
          from Austrian Development Cooperation and United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). The
          country, therefore, has a good number of building blocks, but as highlighted in the World Bank’s 2018
          Kosovo Water Security Outlook Report, the focus needs to shift to a more holistic and less piecemeal
          approach on achieving water security and from strategies to on-the-ground implementation, building the
          foundations for real impacts and tangible outcomes that help Kosovo address these multiple challenges
          for the coming decades. The Government of Kosovo (GoK) has requested the World Bank’s assistance to
          prepare a comprehensive water security project in close coordination with other partners, particularly the
          SDC given its overarching institutional support. While development of new storage capacity presents a
          key objective in the Government’s vision, it is important to complement this with a holistic approach
          toward planning and investment preparation that could be the major outcome of the project and pave
          the way for further development of a transformational program in the broader water sector. The
          ‘Fostering and Leveraging Opportunities for Water Security’ (FLOWS) program aims to support this vision
          through a sequence of two interlinked phased projects, of which the corresponding Project Appraisal
          Document describes the first phase project.



   C. Proposed Development Objective(s)


  Original PDO
  The proposed project development objective is to: (i) strengthen national capacity for managing water security, and (ii)
  improve water security in Morava e Binces basin.

  Current PDO

  The proposed project development objective is to: (i) strengthen national capacity for managing water security, and (ii)
  improve water security in Morava e Binces basin.


   D. Project Description




Nov 27, 2023                                                                                                      Page 9 of 17
          The World Bank
          Additional Financing Grant Kosovo FOSTERING AND LEVERAGING OPPORTUNITIES FOR WATER SECURITY
          PROGRAM (PROJECT 1) (P179781)


  To achieve the Project Development Objectives (PDOs), the Fostering and Leveraging Opportunities for Water Security
  Project (FLOWS1) has three components. The project includes a financing contribution from the Western Balkans
  Investment Framework (WBIF) of 1 million EUR.
          The Project comprises three components:
               (i) Component 1 Foundational measures for water security (IDA EUR 5.3 million): aimed to support
               (1.1) national-level water resources investment preparation, (1.2) enhancement of water information
               system for decision-making including hydromet system, and (1.3) dam operations improvement and
               safety regulations and measures.


               (ii) Component 2: Catalytic investments in Morava e Binces Basin (IDA EUR 17.9 million and WBIF9
               grant EUR 1 million): aimed to catalyze water security investments in the Morava e Binces basin
               including (2.1) preparation of the ‘Kike-Kremenata’ hydro-system; (2.2) improvements to enhance the
               quantity and quality of drinking water supply in response to the region’s ongoing drought crisis; and
               (2.3) piloting of bottom-up, integrated upstream water stewardship measures that can strengthen
               water security and resilience, protect source water, reduce erosion, improve ecological services with an
               integrated approach, and improve rural livelihoods.


               (iii) Project Management (IDA EUR 1.9 million) aimed to strengthen the capacity of the implementing
               team.

  The Additional Financing seeks to cover mainly a financing gap to cover the soft-type activities in parent project. Few
  additional activities under Subcomponent 1.3 will be incorporated in response to client’s demand, and to establish a more
  sound foundation for future investments, including FLOWS2. The AF will finance all formerly-approved soft/technical
  assistance (TA)-type activities and few goods/equipment contracts under Component 1, Foundational measures for water
  security.

  The AF (US$5.33 million RETF, funded by the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation SDC) will enable bridging
  the financing gap under Components 1 and 2 to cover the envisaged soft-type activities, as well as to incorporate
  additional activities under Subcomponent 1.3, as described below, in response to client’s demand, and establish a more
  sound foundation for future investments, including FLOWS2. The AF will finance all formerly-approved soft/technical
  assistance (TA)-type activities and few goods/equipment contracts under Component 1, Foundational measures for water
  security.

  At the same time, the AF will allow for the IDA Credit funds of equivalent amount to be re-distributed between
  Component 1 and Component 2 to finance investments in water supply infrastructure and services, including investments
  in rehabilitation and upgrade of critical water supply system (Subcomponent 2.2) in addition to improving the operation
  and safety of its existing large‐scale water infrastructure assets, through dam safety programs and small rehabilitation
  works (Subcomponent 1.3).

          9 Western Balkans Investment Framework (WBIF) is a joint facility of the European Union (EU), financial institutions, bilateral donors,

          and the governments of the Western Balkans. It supports socioeconomic development and EU accession across the Western Balkans
          through the provision of finance and technical assistance for strategic investments in the energy, environment, social, transport, and
          digital infrastructure sectors.

Nov 27, 2023                                                                                                                                   Page 10 of 17
          The World Bank
          Additional Financing Grant Kosovo FOSTERING AND LEVERAGING OPPORTUNITIES FOR WATER SECURITY
          PROGRAM (PROJECT 1) (P179781)




  The re-distribution of the IDA credit funds will finance the hard-type activities under:
              (1) Subcomponent 1.3 “Enhancing regulation of dam operation and safety”, which will utilize around
                  EUR 3 million of IDA credit funds for financing activities related to assessments, equipment and
                  training for institutionalizing dam safety surveillance measures, and improved dam safety,
                  including small rehabilitation civil works for the adequate operationalization of the dam safety
                  surveillance measures, while all other activities under Component 1 will be supported through
                  SDC AF grant funds; and
              (2) Subcomponent 2.2 “Investments in water infrastructure and services addressing the water crisis”,
                  in the water supply service area in the Morava e Binces basin (the Hidromorava Regional Water
                  Company service area) which will utilize around EUR 1.83 million of IDA credit funds for
                  rehabilitation of water supply network and pumping stations, improved treatment capacity and
                  operation efficiency of existing water treatment plants, and improved demand management.

  The full scope of the project activities is below, highlighting the use of Additional Financing, and the corresponding IDA
  credit funds released.

          Component 1: Foundational measures for water security (IDA EUR 3 million + SDC grant US$5.33 million)

          15.      This component will build the foundations for water security in the country, thereby increasing
          targeted communities’ resilience to the climate change-induced threat of droughts, and build readiness
          for major investments that duly consider current and foreseen climate change impacts. It will support
          (a) national-level water resources investment preparation, (b) enhancement of water information system
          for decision-making. and (c) dam operations improvement and safety regulations and measures. These
          activities will also enable improved implementation of Kosovo’s Climate Change Framework Strategy. The
          AF will finance all the activities to be implemented under Component 1, and will be complemented with
          IDA credit to fund the activities envisioned under Subcomponent 1.3.
          16.      Subcomponent 1.1 - Strengthening National Water Resources Investment Planning. This
          subcomponent aims to update the hydrological, technical, and economic analysis underlying water
          resources investment planning in Kosovo in the context of increasing drought and flood risks and
          prepare a prioritized bankable investment pipeline for concrete water sector investments and
          interventions to support the socioeconomic and sustainable development needs of Kosovo. An updated
          and detailed National Water Resources Investment Preparation Study (WRIPS) will be prepared, including
          a national-level Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) and assessment of scenarios for
          investment opportunities considering projected drought and flood impacts. This will update the analysis
          of the 1983 Masterplan while introducing more flexible rolling plans based on appropriate decision
          support tools and a broader range of investments, including nature-based solutions and operational
          strategies. The WRIPS will inform the development of the RBMPs in presenting well-researched
          management and development alternatives that address the socioeconomic needs in the country, thus
          ensuring the RBMPs will respond to the country’s broad water security challenges. The activities will be
          based on a structured dialogue and consultation process involving relevant institutions, stakeholders, and
          other development partners. An Investment Pipeline for Priority Projects (IPPP) will be prepared, with
          prioritization criteria including climate change considerations. This will include the identification of a list
          of prioritized investments or interventions, analysis of financing options, and documentation for the
          integration into the RBMPs that conform with the EU WFD. These RBMPs are developed in parallel and in

Nov 27, 2023                                                                                                          Page 11 of 17
          The World Bank
          Additional Financing Grant Kosovo FOSTERING AND LEVERAGING OPPORTUNITIES FOR WATER SECURITY
          PROGRAM (PROJECT 1) (P179781)


          close coordination. In addition, this subcomponent will finance the preparation of EU Instrument for Pre-
          Accession Assistance financed irrigation measures prioritizing efficiency gains in the water supply sector
          to avoid exacerbating water stress. Irrigation investments will be prioritized in the Irrigation Masterplan
          and Investment Framework, currently under preparation by MAFRD and expected by July 2020.

          17.     Subcomponent 1.2 - Enhancing information services for water management. This subcomponent
          aims to overcome the immediate information gap for sustainable water resources management.
          Specifically, it will support the following activities: (a) technical assistance to improve spatial information
          systems from data production, analysis, and dissemination for the Kosovo Cadastral Agency (KCA) and (b)
          goods (equipment), civil works, and software to upgrade hydrometeorological facilities; systems to
          integrate various meteorological and hydrological information; and decision support systems for risk
          forecasting and early warning for floods and droughts.

          18.      Subcomponent 1.3 – Enhancing regulation of dam operation and safety. This subcomponent aims
          to restore rigorous dam safety surveillance and improve the operations of reservoirs in Kosovo in
          compliance with the Environmental and Social Standards (ESS) 4. It will finance the assessments,
          equipment, and training for institutionalizing dam safety surveillance measures which will reduce the risk
          of dam failures (and the associated flooding) and protect/expand essential water storage capacity for the
          country. These activities will include (a) assessments and training for dam safety surveillance programs,
          (b) investments in dam safety surveillance equipment to improve dam operation, and (c) a dam safety
          panel to ensure sustainability of dam operations improvement and safety management practices.
          Selection and prioritization of activities will be informed by a dam operations improvement and safety
          management program conducted during project preparation, which includes climate change-related
          criteria. The IDA credits will complement SDC grant funds in the financing of this subcomponent, in
          addition to complementing activities to help build a more holistic ground for future investments, including
          FLOWS2. These activities will include assessments, equipment and training for institutionalizing dam
          safety surveillance measures, and improved dam safety, including small rehabilitation civil works for the
          adequate operationalization of the dam safety surveillance measures. They will also include support for
          establishing the legal and institutional framework for Kosovo Committee on Large Dams (KCLD), and
          Increasing resilience and reducing climate change impacts through innovative technologies and
          approaches. The latter activity, as requested by SDC, will assess and potentially pilot the installation of
          floating photovoltaic (PV) systems in existing or new water storage systems with the aim of safeguarding
          and protecting water resources from evaporation and climate effects. Also this activity will raise
          awareness for the general public and responsible institutions to familiarize themselves with the use of
          renewable energy resources and scale up these innovative approaches in the water sector. This activity
          will ultimately look at innovative and renewable potential technologies and approaches for the water
          sector.




Nov 27, 2023                                                                                                          Page 12 of 17
          The World Bank
          Additional Financing Grant Kosovo FOSTERING AND LEVERAGING OPPORTUNITIES FOR WATER SECURITY
          PROGRAM (PROJECT 1) (P179781)


          Component 2: Addressing water crisis with catalytic investments (IDA EUR 19.73 million and WBIF10
          grant EUR 1 million)

          19.      This component aims to catalyze water security investments in the Morava e Binces basin that
          address the immediate challenges of water shortage and other risks exacerbated by climate change
          (erosion, rising temperatures, evapotranspiration rates, and so on), poor service delivery, and a single-
          sector approach to cross-cutting water security issues while embarking on an integrated water security
          agenda. It will finance immediate measures in integrated basin development and management: (a)
          preparation of the ‘Kike-Kremenata’ hydro-system; (b) improvements to enhance the quantity and quality
          of drinking water supply in response to the region’s ongoing drought crisis; and (c) piloting of bottom-up,
          integrated upstream water stewardship measures that can strengthen water security and resilience,
          protect source water, reduce erosion, improve ecological services with an integrated approach, and
          improve rural livelihoods.

          20.      Subcomponent 2.1 - Preparation of FLOWS2 investments. This subcomponent will prepare one
          reservoir planned under the ‘Kike-Kremenata’ hydro-system and other FLOWS2 critical water
          infrastructures based on the results of the WRIPS. This subcomponent is co-financed with a WBIF grant
          of EUR 1 million. The ‘Kike-Kremenata’ hydro-system was envisioned in the 1983 Masterplan and includes
          a system of three water reservoirs located at Kremenata, Hogosht, and Desivojca. This system is the
          highest priority water resources investment in the country’s investment pipeline and would, once
          constructed, relieve water shortage pressures and worsening conditions due to climate change-induced
          drought in the northern Morava e Binces basin. As this would entail construction of a high dam,11 and part
          of the design studies are more than 30 years old and incomplete, it is imperative to update the analysis in
          many aspects, including from a technical, social, and environmental perspective in accordance with
          current baseline, demands, and objectives. The project will support these studies, including through a
          WBIF technical assistance grant, and the development of an updated detailed design, procurement, and
          financial packaging as well as relevant social and environmental impact assessments and management
          plans. Phase 1 project analysis would set the stage for investments in storage and water supply network
          investments as well as irrigation investments to be considered for the Phase 2 project (FLOWS2), both of
          which would alleviate increasing water stress. The timing of the Phase 2 project is primarily determined
          by the timing of outputs under this subcomponent. In addition to the ‘Kike-Kremenata’ hydro-system, this
          subcomponent will finance additional preparation studies for activities under FLOWS2, including the
          development of feasibility studies and designs for prioritized investments or interventions.

          21.      Subcomponent 2.2 - Investments in water infrastructure and services addressing the water crisis.
          This subcomponent will finance critical water supply infrastructure, equipment, and activities focused
          on alleviating the current water supply crisis in the Morava e Binces basin (the Hidromorava RWC service
          area) primarily through improved water demand management and creating conditions for long-term,
          reliable water supply for the basin population and industry in a drought-prone area. This subcomponent
          will include (a) investments to rehabilitate and modernize critical municipal water supply system

          10 Western Balkans Investment Framework (WBIF) is a joint facility of the EU, financial institutions, bilateral donors, and the governments of the

          Western Balkans. It supports socioeconomic development and EU accession across the Western Balkans through the provision of finance and
          technical assistance for strategic investments in the energy, environment, social, transport, and digital infrastructure sectors. The World Bank
          became a full member of the WBIF in June 2019. A recipient-executed trust fund will be established.
          11 The 1980s design document estimated that the Desivojca reservoir and Kremenata reservoir could be more than 50 m tall with potential

          storage volume of 13 million m3 and 8.75 million m3, respectively.


Nov 27, 2023                                                                                                                                            Page 13 of 17
          The World Bank
          Additional Financing Grant Kosovo FOSTERING AND LEVERAGING OPPORTUNITIES FOR WATER SECURITY
          PROGRAM (PROJECT 1) (P179781)


          infrastructure; (b) development and implementation of demand management activities, such as
          communication, establishment of progressive tariffs, regulation of the efficiency of water-using
          appliances (in new buildings), water leak detection and elimination, and establishment and management
          of pressure management zones; (c) purchase, replacement, and installation of equipment and
          development of measures needed to improve energy efficiency, reduce commercial water losses, and
          establish efficiently control and management of water supply systems; and (d) preparation of NRW survey
          for selected water supply systems, project documentation for works, implementation support, project
          supervision, utility performance improvement plans, and staff training in Hidromorava RWC. All of these
          activities will directly or indirectly increase the reliable water supply, thereby making the targeted
          communities more resilient to the climate change-exacerbated drought risk. In addition, these four
          categories are expected to result in energy efficiency gains. This subcomponent will also finance the
          project-related operating cost and training for Hidromorava RWC. An additional of around EUR$1.83
          million of IDA credit funds will finance activities in the water supply service area in the Morava e Binces
          basin (the Hidromorava Regional Water Company service area) which will utilize for rehabilitation of water
          supply network and pumping stations, improved treatment capacity and operation efficiency of existing
          water treatment plants, and improved demand management, all in line with description above.
          22.      Subcomponent 2.3 - People-centered water stewardship investments. This subcomponent
          supports in piloting bottom-up activities that engage communities and individuals in water stewardship
          so that watersheds are able to sustain socioeconomic activity. This subcomponent will (a) prepare
          subwatershed action plans by community groups and (b) pilot a small grants program. The small grants
          will be provided to community groups, civil society organizations, or individuals in selected sub-basins,
          prioritized based on vulnerability to climate change, among other criteria, to (a) promote, test, and
          demonstrate innovative practices to increase water security, leading to improved resilience to drought
          and flood; (b) enhance sustainable natural resources management that will increase carbon sequestration
          potential in the project area; and (b) raise awareness about water security and environmental protection.

          Component 3 - Project management (IDA EUR 1.9 million)

          23.     This component will provide funding to contract professional and support staff to strengthen
          the Project Management Team (PMT) to be established in the MIE, facilitate its operations, and ensure
          that certain specialized tasks are professionally executed by people with the required background and
          knowledge, including professional staff, short-term experts, and support staff.

          24.      The project will finance operating cost for participating agencies in the execution of project
          activities through the Technical Working Group (TWG), with exception of Hidromorava RWC. This
          project is therefore following GoK guidance on project management and is building local capacity for aid
          effectiveness. General services will be shared between FLOWS and a parallel proposed project in the MIE
          on greening wastelands, that is, the Greening Land Project. More details are described in section III. In
          addition to the above, this component has provisions for workshops, short training courses, and a limited
          number of external internships for young professionals (linked specifically to project activities and
          multisectoral collaboration). Internships will follow similar arrangements as under other donor-funded
          programs with the aim to build capacity in the Government and help absorb young talent in the
          implementing agencies. While there is no shortage of well-educated graduates, their opportunities for
          gaining practical experience are limited.



Nov 27, 2023                                                                                                      Page 14 of 17
            The World Bank
            Additional Financing Grant Kosovo FOSTERING AND LEVERAGING OPPORTUNITIES FOR WATER SECURITY
            PROGRAM (PROJECT 1) (P179781)




 .
 Legal Operational Policies
                                                                  Triggered?

                                                                  Yes
      Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50
                                                                  No
      Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60



  Summary of Assessment of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
  .

      E. Implementation




Nov 27, 2023                                                                                  Page 15 of 17
            The World Bank
            Additional Financing Grant Kosovo FOSTERING AND LEVERAGING OPPORTUNITIES FOR WATER SECURITY
            PROGRAM (PROJECT 1) (P179781)


      Institutional and Implementation Arrangements


      25.     The implementation arrangements for the Additional Financing will follow the parent project, without change.
      The implementing agency is the Ministry of Environment, Spatial Planning and Infrastructure (MESPI). Broad sector
      coordination and policy level coordination of FLOWS are being organized through the Interministerial Water Council
      (IMWC). IMWC is a standing sector-coordination body, chaired by the Prime Minister and comprised of the MESPI,
      Minister of Economy, Minister of Finance Labor and Transfers, and Minister of Agriculture Forestry and Rural
      Development, with participation of representatives of the donor community as non-voting members.

      26.      A FLOWS Program Coordination Committee and a Technical Committee have been established. The
      Coordination committee is comprised of the Secretaries General of the ministries involved in the implementation of the
      Program, representatives of mayors of municipalities in which investments are made, the chief executive officer of the
      PMT, and the secretariat of the IMWC to support cross-sector coordination for the program and serve to steer the
      project, approve annual work plans and budgets, review semi-annual work plans and budgets, implementation progress
      reports and audits, and raise coordination issues to the IMWC. A Program Technical Committee (PTC) has been
      established and is responsible for providing technical oversight of project implementation as well as reviewing and
      recommending project work plans and budgets. The PTC also advises on the quality of project implementation reports
      and policy documents, guidelines and M&E reports, review coordination needs and implementation obstacles and
      suggest solutions. This committee is comprised of IMWC Secretariat, Directors of the principal departments and
      agencies, Hidromorava RWC management, as well as municipalities involved in project implementation and external
      experts and operate in an advisory role to the IMWC on project matters. The committees meet on a semi-annual basis,
      or more frequently, as needed.

      27.     A Project Management Team (PMT) has been established within MESPI to support FLOWS1 implementation.
      In addition to its manager, the PMU has appointed specialists with expertise in technical and social matters,
      procurement and contract management, communication, and environmental and social safeguards. The PMT has the
      responsibility for overseeing and managing project execution and compliance with project requirements, including
      those associated with procurement, financial management and audits, safeguards, monitoring and evaluation, and
      project reporting.



  .

      CONTACT POINT

      World Bank

      Ahmed Shawky Mohamed Abdelghany
      Senior Water Resources Management Specialist

      Trandelina Baraku
      Water Resources Management Specialist



Nov 27, 2023                                                                                                      Page 16 of 17
          The World Bank
          Additional Financing Grant Kosovo FOSTERING AND LEVERAGING OPPORTUNITIES FOR WATER SECURITY
          PROGRAM (PROJECT 1) (P179781)



   Borrower/Client/Recipient
   Ministry of Finance, Labor and Transfers




   Implementing Agencies

   Ministry of Environment, Spatial Planning and Infrastructure
   Liburn Aliu
   Minister
   blerim.kuci@rks-gov.net


   FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT


   The World Bank
   1818 H Street, NW
   Washington, D.C. 20433
   Telephone: (202) 473-1000
   Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects



   APPROVAL


                                          Ahmed Shawky Mohamed Abdelghany
   Task Team Leader(s):
                                          Trandelina Baraku



   Approved By

   Practice Manager/Manager:

   Country Director:                      Massimiliano Paolucci             29-Jan-2024




Nov 27, 2023                                                                                Page 17 of 17
