Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)




Public Disclosure Authorized

                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                     Concept Stage


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                    Date Prepared/Updated: 02/16/2023 | Report No: ESRSC03266




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Feb 16, 2023                                                                     Page 1 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)



                     BASIC INFORMATION

                     A. Basic Project Data

                     Country                       Region                           Project ID                     Parent Project ID (if any)

                     St Maarten                    LATIN AMERICA AND                P179067
                                                   CARIBBEAN

                     Project Name                  SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT

                     Practice Area (Lead)          Financing Instrument             Estimated Appraisal Date       Estimated Board Date

                     Water                         Investment Project               7/21/2023                      9/15/2023
                                                   Financing

                     Borrower(s)                   Implementing Agency(ies)

                     Government of Sint            National Recovery Program
                     Maarten                       Bureau


                     Proposed Development Objective



Public Disclosure
                     The objectives of the Project are to (i) increase access and improve sustainability and resilience of wastewater
                     services in Sint Maarten, and (ii) reduce risk of coastal and surface waters pollution.


                     Financing (in USD Million)                                                                                          Amount

                      Total Project Cost                                                                                                     20.00



                     B. Is the project being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project [including overview of Country, Sectoral & Institutional Contexts and
                     Relationship to CPF]
                     The proposed project would include three components as detailed below:

                     Component 1. Wastewater infrastructure investment
                     Component 1 will be made up of 2 sub-components: The first sub-component aims at improving the coverage and
                     resilience of sewage collection. This will be done through the expansion of the existing sewerage network and
                     additional wastewater connection points to residents and commercial enterprises in the project area of (i) Cul-de-Sac,
                     (ii) St. Peters Main Road, (iii) Philipsburg, and (iv) Lower Prince’s Quarter. The Project could also finance the

                    Feb 16, 2023                                                                                                        Page 2 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)



                     rehabilitation of critical parts of the existing sewage system to improve its climate resilience and operational
                     efficiency. The second sub-component will be the rehabilitation and expansion of the existing A. T. Illidge Road
                     Wastewater Treatment Plan (WWTP) to the extent necessary for treating the collected extra wastewater flows. The
                     upgrade will include upgrade of both, wastewater treatment and sludge treatment line, required strengthening of
                     capacity for measurement and analysis of wastewater, as well as preparing ground and WWTP development plans for
                     further expansion of sewerage network that should cover the whole Sint Maarten.

                     Component 2. Institutional development and surface and sea water quality monitoring.
                     This component aims at creating the framework for the sustainable provision of efficient wastewater services in Sint
                     Maarten. This would include, among others, the following activities:
                     (a) strengthening the capacity of the existing Government entity (VROMI) to regulate and supervise wastewater
                     services, potentially including the creation of a national agency for wastewater management and the establishment of
                     a system for monitoring seawater quality in coastal areas/beaches as well as for inland pond water.
                     (b) development of the legal framework for sustainable wastewater service provision, and introduction of cost
                     recovery principles through direct funding of services by tariffs. This would include development of the optimal
                     framework for operational management of wastewater services, including potential contracting out of the
                     wastewater service management to the private sector.
                     (c) preparation of national WSS strategies and mid/long-term implementation plans for wastewater management,
                     including the adoption of circular economy principles.
                     (d) establishment of a comprehensive and adequately financed system for long term monitoring of seawater quality in
                     coastal areas/beaches and surface waters of Sint Maarten.




Public Disclosure
                     Component 3. Project Management
                     Under this Component, the Project will support project management and coordination capacity of the NRPB as
                     Project Implementation Unit (PIU), including supporting the PIU to comply with environmental and social
                     requirements.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1. Detailed project location(s) and salient physical characteristics relevant to the E&S assessment [geographic,
                     environmental, social]
                     Sint Maarten (SXM) is a Caribbean constituent country of the Netherlands. The country occupies 34km2 in the
                     southern half of the island. SXM’s population, estimated at 41,177 in 2019, has been increasing in the last several
                     decades making it one of the most densely populated countries in the Caribbean. The government of SXM has made
                     several wastewater investments including construction of a wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) and infrastructure in
                     various residential and commercial districts. However, less than 11% of the properties are connected to the
                     wastewater system corresponding to approximately 2,000 properties. Approximately 89% of the population rely on
                     mostly septic tanks or direct discharges into water bodies. This situation has resulted in inadequate sanitation,
                     affecting marine life, large segments of the population and the tourism sector.

                     The project will finance the rehabilitation/ expansion of existing sewer network in four districts that the Ministry of of
                     Public Housing, Environment, Spatial Planning, and Infrastructure (VROMI) has prioritized: Cul-de-Sac, St. Peters Main
                     Road, Phillipsburg, and Lower Prince’s Quarter which are mostly residential, with some public facilities such as
                     schools, sports fields and small businesses. Residences vary from large to small low income homes. The unserved

                    Feb 16, 2023                                                                                                       Page 3 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)



                     households use septic systems that if not adequately maintained and treated, can pose health and environmental
                     risks to the population and surface, ground and coastal waters. Some businesses, particularly resorts, have individual
                     wastewater treatment facilities.

                     The project will also finance the rehabilitation and expansion of the existing public biological WWTP to process
                     wastewater from the additional connections. The plant is located in a mixed residential and commercial
                     neighborhood, adjacent to Fresh Pond, which is a 14 ha permanent freshwater body that hosts several bird and
                     mangrove species. Most of the influent to the Fresh Pond comes from untreated sewage discharges, surface runoff,
                     plastics and other litter from surrounding neighborhoods; the contribution from the treated effluent from the WWTP
                     is estimated to be minimal. Fresh Pond is connected to the sea via a canal. It is also connected to the Great Salt Pond
                     but there is a man-made barrier separating the two water bodies. The connection is sometimes opened to regulate
                     water levels in both ponds. A water quality assessment carried out in 2019 indicated that the Great Salt Pond is highly
                     polluted by leachate discharges from the nearby Municipal Landfill and from sewage discharges.

                     The WWTP is small (15,000 m2) with capacity to treat incoming waste of 4,750m3/day of sewage. However, due to
                     incomplete sewerage network, it is operating at 70% of its design flows. An unknown part of these flows originates
                     from intrusion of stormwater and discharge from cruise ships that are docking in Sint Maarten. Additionally, it
                     receives about 450m3/day of household septic sludge delivered by trucks. The WWTP biological treatment is achieved
                     through an activated sludge process with extended aeration. Sludge dewatering is achieved using drying beds and
                     then transported to the municipal disposal site. The government issued the WWTP a hindrance permit in 2012 that
                     mainly pertains to fire safety and emergency measures, soil/noise pollution, waste disposal, effluent quality,




Public Disclosure
                     reporting, inspection, and maintenance.

                     There is currently no regular monitoring of coastal or inland water quality. The SXM NGO Nature Foundation has
                     reported poor water quality in inland and coastal waters in several instances, including elevated levels of nitrates and
                     phosphates due to untreated wastewater discharges. Component 2 of the project will strengthen the capacity of the
                     government to conduct long-term water quality monitoring of the Fresh Pond and coastal waters.
                     D. 2. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity
                     The project will be implemented by the National Recovery Program Bureau (NRPB) which is already responsible for
                     the implementation of several projects supported by the Trust Fund. The NRPB will carry out technical, administrative,
                     legal, financial and procurement responsibilities as well as environmental and social (E&S) risk management. The
                     NRPB will work closely with the Ministry VROMI and other relevant stakeholders to ensure the effective
                     implementation of the project.

                     The World Bank has been engaging with the NRPB since 2018. As a result, the NRPB has developed in-depth
                     knowledge and experience with the Bank Safeguards Policies and the Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) and
                     has a positive track record on E&S performance of projects. The team manages several World Bank financed projects
                     currently being implemented on the island including the Emergency Management Debris Project, the Fostering
                     Resilient Learning Project, and the Emergency Recovery Project I. The NRPB has a dedicated team of full time E&S
                     specialists that includes two social specialists, three environmental specialists and the head of the E&S team. They are
                     in the process of hiring a third social development professional. The team is qualified and has experience in
                     conducting E&S assessments, screening for E&S risks, and in monitoring the implementation of mitigation measures in
                     coordination with design, supervision and construction firms. The NRPB E&S team also participated in the “ESF in
                     Practice” virtual training that was delivered by the Bank in March 2022. At this stage, it is expected that the current
                    Feb 16, 2023                                                                                                     Page 4 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)



                     E&S team will be sufficient to manage the E&S aspects throughout the project life cycle. However, the human
                     resources needs and E&S expertise specific to implement this project, will be further assessed during preparation.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                     Substantial


                     Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                  Substantial
                     The environmental risk rating is Substantial at the concept stage. This rating takes into account the nature and scale
                     of the project, the location and sensitivity of the receiving environment, the capacity and commitment of the PIU and
                     relevant contextual risks. The proposed interventions under Component 1 and 2 are expected to result in positive
                     environmental impacts by reducing the discharge of untreated wastewater into surface water and seawater. These
                     interventions would ultimately contribute to improving the state of lagoons, beaches, coastal water and corals, and
                     improve people’s overall health and wellbeing. Most of the physical infrastructure works will occur under Component
                     1. However, the exact investments at the WWTP and the sites and routing for the expansion/rehabilitation of the
                     sewer network have not been identified at this stage and will likely be known during project preparation or
                     implementation. Based on preliminary information obtained at the concept stage, it is expected that these
                     infrastructure works will be small to medium scale operations. The upgrade of the WWTP and expansion of the sewer
                     network under Component 1 and technical assistance (TA) activities under Component 2 are however associated with
                     environmental risks and impacts. During the upgrade of the WWTP, these include soil, water and air pollution,
                     occupational health and safety (OHS), community safety issues, risks related to sourcing of construction materials,



Public Disclosure
                     construction debris and other waste management, noise, release of odors and volatile organic compounds. During the
                     operation of the expanded WWTP, the potential environmental impacts are related to increased energy consumption,
                     greenhouse gas emissions, monitoring of effluent quality, handling and disposal of dewatered sludge and other
                     WWTP waste, OHS, community health and safety, the sensitivity and assimilative capacity of the Fresh Pond to the
                     additional effluent, and risks from natural disasters and accidental fires or spills. The current system relies on
                     biological processes and does not utilize chemicals. If chemicals are required as part of the upgrades to the WWTP,
                     then the environmental risks related to their use, storage and disposal will be assessed and corresponding pollution
                     prevention and management strategies will be identified and applied by the project. In general, Sint Maarten lacks an
                     effective solid waste management system which further increases the risks related to the management of dewatered
                     sludge and other hazardous and non-hazardous wastes from the WWTP. The potential environmental risks related to
                     expansion/rehabilitation of the sewer network include traffic disruption especially on high traffic zones, noise, dust,
                     demolition debris, safety of community and especially road users, OHS, and hazardous and non-hazardous waste from
                     machinery. The downstream environmental risks of the TA activities under Component 2 relate to the capacity of the
                     government to provide adequate wastewater services resulting from increased connections and the capacity to
                     conduct long-term water quality monitoring. The impacts at the WWTP and sewer network during the construction
                     and operational stages are expected to be short-term, localized and temporary and can be managed using routine
                     mitigation measures. These measures are discussed under ESS1 and will be detailed in E&S instruments. Given the
                     island's exposure to hurricanes, disaster risk management provisions will be adopted, to the extent possible, to
                     mitigate risks of system failure and increase the resilience of the sewer network and the WWTP. As noted in the
                     above section, the NRPB has qualified and experienced environmental specialists who will manage the
                     implementation of the project. The environmental risk rating will be reviewed during project preparation and revised


                    Feb 16, 2023                                                                                                    Page 5 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)



                     in the appraisal stage ESRS, if necessary, to ensure that it accurately represents the level of risk associated with the
                     project.
                     Social Risk Rating                                                                                               Moderate
                     The expansion and improvement of the sewer network is expected to bring a broad range of benefits to direct
                     beneficiaries but also to the community at large, particularly health and wellbeing. However, the exact investments at
                     the WWTP and the sites and routing for the expansion/rehabilitation of the sewer network have not been identified
                     at this stage and will likely be known during project preparation or implementation. Component 2 will complement
                     the infrastructure expansion with the development of a framework for the sustainable provision of efficient
                     wastewater services, which will include the introduction of cost recovery principles through direct funding of services
                     by tariffs. The social risk rating is considered moderate at concept stage. The specific impacts are unknown at this
                     time, however, due to the nature of the works and activities currently planned (including the technical assistance
                     under Component 2), the risks are likely to be: (1) potential temporary interruptions to the normal operation of
                     businesses along planned civil works route that could cause loss or reduction of income; (2) potential land acquisition
                     and/or temporary limitations to access to properties, including businesses, along the planned civil works route; (3)
                     cost implications for new residences and commercial businesses to connect to the expanded sewer network and the
                     introduction of tariffs that can create resistance among stakeholders if adequate engagement is not undertaken –
                     these risks will be further assessed during preparation and included in the ToR for the development of the legal
                     framework; (4) noise, dust and altered traffic patterns as a result of the civil works and, finally, (5) OHS risks
                     consistent with expected civil works. As noted under Borrower’s Institutional Capacity, the NRPB has the capacity and
                     experience to adequately manage these social risks, given that they have a dedicated team of E&S specialists that
                     includes two social specialists and they are in the process of hiring a third. However, the needs for human resources



Public Disclosure
                     will be further assessed during project preparation.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESSs) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1. General Assessment

                     ESS1 Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     Overview of the relevance of the Standard for the Project:
                     ESS1 is relevant. At concept stage, while the four geographical areas of intervention have been identified, Cul-de-Sac,
                     St. Peters Main Road, Philipsburg, and Lower Prince’s Quarter, the exact routing of the sewer lines and the need for
                     additional equipment and infrastructure such as pumping stations will be determined during project implementation.
                     The exact upgrades to the existing WWTP are also unknown at this stage and will be identified during project
                     preparation and implementation. However, construction phase impacts are expected to be site-specific, limited in
                     scope and duration, and can be mitigated with proven technologies and measures. Impacts may also include
                     interruptions to traffic and the normal operation of businesses along planned civil works route.

                     To manage the risks related to the expansion/rehabilitation of the sewer network under subcomponent 1.1. in the
                     four geographical areas of intervention, the NRPB shall develop, consult, adjust based on consultations and disclose a
                     Preliminary Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP). The preliminary ESMP will be developed, consulted
                     and disclosed no later than 60 days after the Project effective date. This will include, inter alia, a description of
                     baseline environmental and social information for the target neighborhoods, an assessment of direct, indirect and


                    Feb 16, 2023                                                                                                        Page 6 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)



                     cumulative E&S risks, analysis of the impacts of possible tariffs on vulnerable groups, possible legacy issues,
                     mitigation measures, an E&S screening tool for specific sites, a negative list of impacts that will support the decision
                     on the routing of the sewer lines (e.g. to avoid resettlement or purchase of land) and a chance finds procedure. By
                     appraisal, the client will develop Terms of Reference (ToR) for the Preliminary ESMP which will be agreed with the
                     Bank. The ESMP will be used to provide input into the analysis of alternatives and feed into the proposed design of
                     the sewer network before it is finalized. During implementation, the Preliminary ESMP will be updated based on the
                     final designs of the sewer network and will include the analysis of alternatives. The E&S measures of the final version
                     of the ESMP will be reflected in the technical specifications of the bidding documents and in the Contractor’s ESMP
                     (C-ESMP).

                     With the information available at this stage, there might be economic impacts to businesses located along the roads
                     and in neighborhoods where the civil works will take place, if mitigation measures are insufficient to avoid such
                     impacts. The mitigation measures to avoid temporary loss of income and the compensation framework to respond to
                     those impacts if they materialize, will be specified in a separate section of the ESMP for subcomponent 1.1. under
                     ESS1.

                     Regarding subcomponent 1.2., the scope of works in the existing WWTP are unknown at the concept stage and will
                     likely be finalized during project implementation. The NRPB shall develop ToR for an E&S assessment (ESA) and
                     Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) prior to appraisal which will be reviewed and cleared by the
                     Bank. Because the scope of the ESA is closely linked to the nature and scope of activities that will be financed at the
                     WWTP, the timeline to develop the ESA and ESMP will be aligned to the timeline of the technical assessment of the




Public Disclosure
                     WWTP. The ESA will examine E&S risks and impacts of the current WWTP operation, risks associated with
                     construction activities and those expected during the operational stage of the upgraded WWTP. It will incorporate
                     the World Bank Group General Environmental Health and Safety Guidelines (EHSGs), the industry-specific EHSGs for
                     Water and Sanitation and the laws of Sint Maarten. Given the solid waste management challenges facing Sint
                     Maarten, the ESA will assess the type and quantity of waste that will be generated by the WWTP, such as dewatered
                     sludge and other hazardous and non-hazardous waste. The ESA will also consider impacts to the Fresh Pond as the
                     receiving environment of the effluent, including baseline data collection and ecosystem services. Following the
                     completion of the ESA, the NRPB will develop an ESMP to manage risks and impacts specific to the works in the
                     WWTP and proportionate to the risks and impacts identified in the ESA. Prior to the finalization of the bidding
                     documents, the draft ESA and ESMP will be reviewed and cleared by the Bank, disclosed for stakeholder consultations
                     and will thereafter be finalized incorporating feedback from stakeholders and redisclosed. The results of the ESA and
                     ESMP will be used to inform the final technical design and scope of works and will feed into the technical
                     specifications of the bidding document and the C-ESMP.

                     TA activities under Component 2 include the development of a wastewater framework, preparation of national water
                     supply and sanitation strategies and implementation plans for wastewater management, and capacity building of
                     VROMI. The requirements set out in paragraphs 14–18 of ESS1 will be applied to TA activities as relevant and
                     appropriate to the nature of the risks and impacts. The ToR defining the scope and outputs of TA activities will be
                     reviewed by the Bank so that the advice and other support provided are consistent with ESS 1–10 and duly
                     incorporate relevant requirements of the ESSs. The Bank’s responsibility will not extend beyond the Bank-financed
                     TA.



                    Feb 16, 2023                                                                                                      Page 7 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)



                     The Borrower and the Bank will also agree on an Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) containing the
                     measures, actions and timeframe required to ensure compliance with the Environmental and Social Standards (ESSs).
                     A draft version of the ESCP will be disclosed prior to appraisal and will be finalized during project negotiations.

                     Component 3 is related to project management activities, and no environmental or social risks are anticipated.
                     Funding under this component will support E&S capacity development initiatives for the PIU such as staffing and
                     training activities. The WB E&S team also provides trainings as requested to the SXM E&S staff to cover both broad
                     and specific topics.
                     Areas where “Use of Borrower Framework” is being considered:
                     None


                     ESS10 Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure
                     ESS10 is relevant. The main project beneficiaries will be around 11,000 people (approximately 25% of Sint Maarten
                     population) in the areas that will be provided with access to new wastewater infrastructure. They will benefit from
                     improved quality and resilience of sanitation services, primarily through the construction, rehabilitation, and
                     modernization of sewage networks which, in turn, will translate into enhanced health and wellbeing. The rest of the
                     population of Sint Maarten will also benefit from improved municipal wastewater service provision achieved through
                     the improved policy and regulatory environment. Stakeholders will include the wider population, particularly as it
                     pertains to the development of the wastewater framework that will include the introduction of tariffs to the sector.




Public Disclosure
                     During project preparation, the client shall develop, consult, update based on consultations and disclose a
                     Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP). Initial consultations with stakeholders will take place before project appraisal in
                     which the client will solicit feedback on project design, potential risks and impacts, and mitigation measures being
                     considered. They can be complemented by a second round of consultations prior to finalizing the SEP when more
                     information will be available.

                      A draft version of the SEP shall be developed and consulted with stakeholder prior to project appraisal. The feedback
                     received during those consultations will be integrated into the design of the project and E&S instruments, as relevant,
                     and reflected in the draft SEP at appraisal stage. The updated draft SEP shall be disclosed prior to appraisal. The SEP
                     will be finalized no later than 60 days of the project effective date, but consultations will continue during
                     implementation as set forth in the SEP.

                     Finally, the project will benefit from the existence of a functioning Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) which serves
                     all projects implemented by the NRPB. The NRPB’s GRM is active and is receiving and responding to complaints in a
                     timely manner. It was recently updated to better meet the requirements of the ESF, particularly to include a GRM for
                     project workers, provisions for SEA/SH grievances and anonymous complaints.


                     B.2. Specific Risks and Impacts

                     A brief description of the potential environmental and social risks and impacts relevant to the Project.
                     ESS2 Labor and Working Conditions


                    Feb 16, 2023                                                                                                    Page 8 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)



                     ESS2 is relevant. At concept stage, the proposed project is expected to engage direct and contracted workers as well
                     as government civil servants. No primary suppliers or community workers are expected to be involved in the project.

                     Staff working in the NRPB and assigned to this project are civil servants, and hence, will remain subject to the terms
                     and conditions of their existing public-sector employment agreement or arrangement, unless there has been an
                     effective legal transfer of their employment or engagement to the project. ESS2 will not apply to such government
                     civil servants, except for the provisions set forth in paragraph 8 of ESS2. Direct workers will include full-time and part-
                     time consultants employed by the NRPB for different activities associated with project design and implementation.
                     Contracted workers, including contractors, subcontractors and supervision firms, are also expected for the civil works
                     associated with the expansion of sewer lines and other related works, the works in the WWTP as well as the
                     procurement of technical assistance under component 2. The contractor workforce is expected to be hired locally
                     except for a few skilled workers who may come from abroad, and hence, labor influx and associated risks are not
                     anticipated.

                     The NRPB will develop Labor Management Procedures (LMP). This LMP will specify the terms and conditions of
                     employment, non-discrimination and equal opportunities, workers' organizations, measures against child and forced
                     labor, OHS measures for the workers, and provisions to prevent and manage SEA/SH risks. It will be submitted to the
                     Bank for review and will be disclosed by appraisal. A mix of government staff and private contractors may be involved
                     in operation of the sewer network and the WWTP. The key E&S risks during operations such as OHS and the terms
                     and conditions of employment will be discussed with the authority designated with the management of the
                     wastewater system.




Public Disclosure
                     COVID-19 prevention measures will follow applicable Bank guidance as well as Government of Sint Maarten
                     prevention guidelines which are based on the guidelines provided by the Kingdom of the Netherlands.

                     A dedicated GRM for workers has already been developed as part of the NRPB-wide GRM. The aspects of the NRPB
                     GRM which relates to project workers will be incorporated into the LMP. All bidding documents and contracts for
                     civil works will include relevant provisions of the LMP, including OHS requirements and the Code of Conduct with
                     provisions on SEA/SH together with appropriate remedies for non-compliance.


                     ESS3 Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management
                     ESS3 is relevant. The proposed project will enhance pollution prevention and management measures by connecting
                     more residents and enterprises to the sewer network thereby reducing the quantity of untreated sewage that is
                     discharged onto streets, lagoons and the sea. The project also includes activities to strengthen and operationalize
                     monitoring and reporting of surface water and seawater quality. However, the construction and operation of the
                     WWTP and sewer network may also lead to risks related to energy use and pollution. These risks and mitigation
                     measures are outlined below.

                     The energy use required to operate the upgraded WWTP may increase due to increased influent from new
                     connections. Similarly, the increased effluent will be discharged into the Fresh Pond which could impact the water
                     quality of the pond depending on its assimilative capacity and the effluent quality. The management and disposal of
                     biosolids or dewatered sludge, and the use of hazardous chemicals for wastewater treatment operations could also


                    Feb 16, 2023                                                                                                        Page 9 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)



                     pose pollution risks. Other pollution risks are related to odor and general nuisance from the plant. The ESMP for the
                     WWTP (subcomponent 1.2) will identify opportunities to introduce energy efficiency measures for the WWTP
                     process, where possible. It will also include a waste management plan as part of the mitigation measures in the ESMP
                     to address and manage the above pollution risks in line with the ESF and EHSGs. The ESMP will also include an
                     assessment of the capacity of the Fresh Pond to assimilate more treated effluent. The Bank will estimate the annual
                     gross and net greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions for the economic lifetime of the WWTP prior to project appraisal.

                     The risks related to rehabilitation and expansion of the sewer network include soil removal, clearance or disturbance
                     of vegetation, demolition waste from trenching activities on roads, hazardous waste from machinery, noise, and dust
                     impacts. These risks are likely to be moderate and can be adequately managed through the ESMP for subcomponent
                     1.1. and EHSGs. This ESMP and C-ESMP(s) will include specific measures for the above civil works, including on waste
                     processing and eventual disposal. Due diligence will be conducted during project preparation on whether any of the
                     existing pipes to be replaced contain asbestos and if so, measures will be included in the ESMP to manage risks.
                     Energy efficiency measures where applicable, will be considered during the construction phase of sewer network
                     such as the replacement of aging pumps with energy efficient pumps.


                     ESS4 Community Health and Safety
                     ESS4 is relevant. Civil works planned under Component 1 might affect the health and safety of the people in the
                     vicinity of the construction sites. Impacts from wastewater civil works may include air emissions and odors, disposal
                     of effluent water, hazardous materials, closure of roads, traffic disruptions and traffic safety issues, interruptions to




Public Disclosure
                     normal operation of businesses, among others. Hence, the requirements of ESS4 and the EHSGs will apply.

                     The ESA and ESMP for the expansion and rehabilitation of the sewer network (subcomponent 1.1) as well as the
                     ESMP for the WWTP (subcomponent 1.2) will include, inter alia, the necessary measures to ensure community safety
                     during construction and operational phases of the project, accessibility of infrastructure, management of the
                     nuisance impacts of construction and traffic management. These measures may include signage, awareness, fencing
                     of the site, and traffic control as well as a plan to respond to emergencies, including hurricanes and floods. During
                     operation of the WWTP, the risks to the neighborhoods adjacent to the WWTP, especially during floods and
                     hurricanes, will be assessed and addressed in the respective ESMP.

                     The risk of SEA/SH was assessed as low using the SEA/SH risk screening tool. The LMP will outline a Code of Conduct
                     applicable to project workers which shall define and prohibit SEA/SH within the context of the project, as well as
                     state the sanction for breaching expected conduct. The project level GRM already includes provisions to receive and
                     address SEA/SH grievances. Measures to prevent SEA/SH during civil works will be considered as part of both ESMPs
                     (for subcomponents 1.1 and 1.2) and will include dissemination of awareness and information in areas adjacent to
                     project activities.

                     To address the potential spread of COVID-19 and other communicable diseases in the neighboring areas of project
                     works, contractors, subcontractors and supervision firms will put in place adequate health and safety protocols,
                     proportional to the health risks identified in the ESMP for subcomponents 1.1 and 1.2. COVID-19 prevention
                     measures will follow applicable Bank guidance as well as Government of Sint Maarten prevention guidelines which
                     are based on the guidelines provided by the Kingdom of the Netherlands.


                    Feb 16, 2023                                                                                                      Page 10 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)




                     ESS5 Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement
                     ESS5 is not currently relevant. Impacts covered under ESS5 during the civil works associated with the expansion and
                     rehabilitation of the sewer network will be part of the negative list to be included in the Preliminary ESMP to be
                     developed no later than 60 days of the project effective date. Said Preliminary ESMP will also include an E&S
                     screening tool that will support the NRPB to identify the potential of resettlement and purchase of land early on and
                     take it on board in the analysis of alternatives to decide the specific locations of civil works. Locations requiring
                     purchase of land or resettlement will not be selected for intervention under the project. The approach will be further
                     discussed with the NRPB during preparation.


                     ESS6 Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources
                     ESS6 is relevant. The treated effluent from the WWTP is currently discharged into Fresh Pond. Fresh Pond has a lower
                     salinity compared to other water bodies in Sint Maarten and a 2007 assessment by BirdLife International designated
                     it as an Important Bird Area due to six bird species that are less common in other parts of Sint Maarten and the
                     Caribbean. All six species are assessed as Least Concern by The International Union for Conservation of Nature
                     (IUCN). There are mangroves along some sections of the Fresh Pond including at the discharge point of the effluent
                     from the WWTP. Some of these mangroves have been planted through initiatives with the Nature Foundation.

                     There have been concerns of pollution of Fresh Pond from storm water runoff, trash, sewage outflows from the
                     neighborhood and from the busy traffic in the area and from the WWTP effluent. The WWTP ESA and ESMP will



Public Disclosure
                     provide guidance on biodiversity screening and mitigation measures to ensure that project activities do not alter or
                     cause destruction or degradation of the Fresh Pond habitat, including mangroves, fish and birds. Based the findings of
                     the ESA, a Biodiversity Management Plan (BMP) may be required as part of the ESMP. Component 2 of the project
                     includes activities to operationalize monitoring and reporting of seawater quality which is expected to benefit Fresh
                     Pond. The ESMP, where possible, will also propose measures to better protect, improve and manage Fresh Pond.

                     Most of the civil works under Component 1.1 will occur on the right of way and it is unlikely that there will be
                     significant impacts to biodiversity. The neighborhoods are largely urban landscapes. However, E&S screening will be
                     conducted once technical designs are completed, and prior to issuing bidding documents to identify and avoid or
                     mitigate any significant impacts to biodiversity.


                     ESS7 Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional Local Communities
                     ESS7 is not currently relevant. There is no population in the area of intervention that can be considered indigenous
                     peoples as per the four cumulative criteria set forth in ESS7.


                     ESS8 Cultural Heritage
                     ESS8 is relevant. The project will involve excavation to expand/rehabilitate the sewer network and may include
                     similar works at the WWTP. The ESMP for the sewer network, and if necessary, the WWTP ESMP, will include a
                     chance finds procedure to be implemented in line with national legislation and the requirements under ESS8.


                    Feb 16, 2023                                                                                                  Page 11 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)



                     Construction contracts will include clauses requiring civil contractors to take proper protective measures in case
                     cultural heritage sites are discovered, including to stop activities if cultural property is found during construction.


                     ESS9 Financial Intermediaries
                     ESS9 is not currently relevant. The project will not involve financial intermediaries.


                     C. Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                     OP 7.50 Projects on International Waterways                                                                               No


                     OP 7.60 Projects in Disputed Areas                                                                                        No



                     III. WORLD BANK ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL DUE DILIGENCE

                     A. Is a common approach being considered?                                                                                 No
                     Financing Partners
                     None




Public Disclosure
                     B. Proposed Measures, Actions and Timing (Borrower’s commitments)
                     Actions to be completed prior to Bank Board Approval:
                     Develop, consult, and disclose (as needed) the following instruments before project appraisal:

                     1.     Draft Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)
                     2.     Draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)
                     3.     Labor Management Procedures (LMP)
                     4.     Terms of Reference (ToR) for a Preliminary Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) for civil works
                     under subcomponent 1.1 (sewer network). These ToR will include management of ESS5 related impacts &
                     compensation (i.e., E&S screening tool, compensation framework, and negative List).
                     5.     ToR for an Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA) and ESMP for the Wastewater Treatment Plant
                     (WWTP) (subcomponent 1.2).
                     Possible issues to be addressed in the Borrower Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP):
                     1.    Finalize, redisclose, and implement the SEP, including the GRM.
                     2.    Implement the LMP.
                     3.    Develop, consult, and disclose an ESMP for the sewer network (subcomponent 1.1).
                     4.    Develop, consult, and disclose an ESA and ESMP for the WWTP (subcomponent 1.2).
                     5.    Include in the ESMP for subcomponent 1.1 mitigation measures to avoid temporary loss of income and
                     compensation framework if those impacts cannot be avoided.


                    Feb 16, 2023                                                                                                        Page 12 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              SINT MAARTEN: WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P179067)



                     6.      Identify potential resettlement and purchase of land using the E&S screening tool and avoid them based on
                     the negative list to be included in the ESMP for subcomponent 1.1.
                     7.      Implementation arrangements and any necessary E&S staffing and capacity-building measures.
                     8.      Screening of all proposed project sites to assess potential E&S risks and inform the technical designs and
                     incorporate results of the screening in the technical specifications prior to issuing bidding documents. The report of
                     the screening will be disclosed on the project’s website.


                     IV. CONTACT POINTS

                     World Bank
                     Contact:             Stjepan Gabric                        Title:             Senior Water Resources Management
                                                                                                   Specialist

                     Telephone No:        5258+7275                             Email:             sgabric@worldbank.org

                     Borrower/Client/Recipient
                     Borrower:              Government of Sint Maarten

                     Implementing Agency(ies)
                     Implementing Agency: National Recovery Program Bureau



Public Disclosure
                     V. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     VI. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):             Stjepan Gabric

                     Practice Manager (ENR/Social) Ana Maria Gonzalez Velosa Recommended on 26-Jan-2023 at 18:11:50 EST

                     Safeguards Advisor ESSA          Marco Antonio Zambrano Chavez (SAESSA) Cleared on 16-Feb-2023 at 09:30:28 EST




                    Feb 16, 2023                                                                                                    Page 13 of 13
