Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                                              STAKEHOLDER
                                                                                          ENGAGEMENT PLAN (SEP)
                                                                                                 May 2024




                               Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) -
                                  Balochistan Water Security and
                                Productivity Improvement Project -




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                              P179227
                                Balochistan Irrigation Department (BID) AND Balochistan
                                 Public Health Engineering Department (PHED/QWASA)
Introduction ............................................................................................ Error! Bookmark not defined.
1.      Project Description ........................................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined.
2.      Rationale and Objective of Stakeholder Engagement Plan ........................................................... 7
     The overall Objective of the SEP .............................................................................................................. 7
3.      Stakeholder Identification and Analysis ....................................................................................... 9
     Methodology .......................................................................................................................................... 10
     Affected Parties ...................................................................................................................................... 11
     Other Interested Parties ........................................................................................................................ 11
     Disadvantaged/Vulnerable Individuals or Groups ................................................................................ 13
4.      Stakeholder Engagement Plan................................................................................................... 14
     Summary of Stakeholder Engagement During Project Preparation ..................................................... 14
     Institutional/Secondary Consultations.................................................................................................. 15
     Summary of Project Stakeholder Needs, Methods, and Tools for Stakeholder Engagement ............. 18
     Purpose and Timing of Stakeholder Engagement Program .................................................................. 24
     Proposed Strategy for Information Disclosure and consultation process ........................................... 24
     SEP Summary Table ................................................................................................................................ 25
     Proposed Strategy to Incorporate the View of Vulnerable Groups ..................................................... 27
     Reporting Back to Stakeholders............................................................................................................. 28
5.      Resources and Responsibilities for Managing SEP Activities ....................................................... 28
     Project Implementation Arrangement .................................................................................................. 28
     Project Steering Committee (PSC) ......................................................................................................... 28
     Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements ............................................................................... 29
     Resources for SEP Implementation ....................................................................................................... 29
6.      Grievance Redress Mechanism ................................................................................................. 30




                                                                               1
TABLE 1: AFFECTED PARTIES AND ITS IMPACT WISE ANALYSIS ................................................................................11
TABLE 2: OTHER INTERESTED PARTIES AND ITS IMPACT WISE ANALYSIS .................................................................11
TABLE 3: DISADVANTAGED/VULNERABLE GROUPS AND ITS IMPACT WISE ANALYSIS ............................................13
TABLE 4: PRIMARY STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATION FOR COMPONENT A (KACHCHI PLAIN AREAS) ........................15
TABLE 5: SUMMARY OF OF PARTICIPANTS OF VILLAGE LEVEL FGDSFGD AT SHABAL VILLAGE QUETTA .................15
TABLE 6: CONSULTATION WITH INSTITUTIONAL STAKEHOLDERS ............................................................................16
TABLE 7: CONSULTATIONS ALONG WITH ITS DATES TO STAKEHOLDER DEPARTMENTS .........................................17
TABLE 8: SUMMARY OF PROJECT STAKEHOLDER NEEDS, METHODS, AND TOOLS FOR STAKEHOLDER
    ENGAGEMENT ....................................................................................................................................................19
TABLE 9: OVERVIEW OF LANGUAGE AND OTHER SPECIFIC NEEDS ...........................................................................20
TABLE 10: SEP SUMMARY TABLE ................................................................................................................................25
TABLE 11: PROPOSED ITEMS FOR THE BUDGET ..........................................................................................................29

ANNEXURE 1: CONSULTATIONS AND PRESCRIPTION GUIDE/QUESTIONNAIRE ............................................................0
ANNEXURE 2: PICTURES OF THE CONSULTATIONS MEETINGS .....................................................................................4




                                                                                 2
1. Project Description
Balochistan's water resources are crucial to its development and livelihood. The Province experiences
extended droughts and heavy flooding, yet resources are insufficient to handle both. Although 96% of
water comes from surface flows, predictable and managed water availability is becoming scarce. The focus
has been on developing scarce (4%) groundwater resources. This has caused critical situations in most
Province basins. In reaction to extended droughts, population growth and urban migration increase water
demand. Balochistan's government prioritizes water resource development to ensure enough water
availability for domestic and agricultural use.
Balochistan's population traditionally gets drinking water from streams and floodwater in distant villages
and mainly groundwater in urban areas. There are many kilometers of streams which are used by the
households near them for drinking water. Villages have floodwater ponds for annual drinking water needs.
When water runs out or floods arrive late, some towns' residents migrate or have to bring water from far
flung areas. Balochistan often experiences severe drought conditions with a 4–5-year cyclical frequency.
The long dry spells take a heavy toll on the livelihood patterns of the local population as irrigation and
potable water resources dry up1. Water availability is drastically reduced during extended droughts. The
rural poor is the most vulnerable to water scarcity in Balochistan. Crop, fruit farming and livestock rearing
are extremely important occupations in rural Balochistan, and key sectors of the economy, but are facing
the major challenge of access to reliable sources of water. The groundwater in Balochistan’s aquifers
provide a buffer against drought for crop production, and for livestock and human needs. However,
inefficient water management practices and excessive groundwater use created severe economic, social,
and environmental challenges for the province. Improving rural livelihoods and stimulating economic
growth require vastly improved management of the scarce water resources of the province.
The Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) Policy (2006) of the Government of Balochistan
recognizes the role of surface water supplies in meeting the growing needs of various sub-sectors of water
use and recharging depleted aquifers. The Policy prioritizes Sailaba agricultural and storage dams to
generate surface waters for command area expansion and groundwater recharge. The ongoing World
Bank financed BIWRMDP and the ongoing ADB financed BWRDSP are closely coordinating to support the
GoB in the revision of the 2006 Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) Policy and in the
preparation of the resulting Water Act. These two documents should lead to key improvements in the
water sector including (i) O&M of infrastructure; (ii) Improved control of groundwater use (iii) improved
watershed management, (iv) enhanced management of floods and droughts; (v) increased attention to
water quality issues. The legal reform will create a more enabling environment for the integrated water
resources management in the province and will help the implementation of this proposed operation.


The Balochistan Water Security and Productivity Improvement Project (BWSPIP) is designed to tackle
water security challenges exacerbated by climate change – droughts, floods, and rising temperatures. It
is envisioned that through this this project, the Government of Balochistan will be supported in developing
a credible long-term program to improve water security for production and public health and enhance
the productivity of key water-related sectors of the economy to create jobs and improve livelihoods
following an IWRM approach. The project will strengthen relevant institutions to adapt their IWRM
capacity and better position them for the implementation of Balochistan Water Policy and the Balochistan
Water Act. The project will directly benefit approximately 690,000 people. Around 500,000 people in

1 Kakar, Z., Khair, S. M., Khan, M. Z., & Khan, M. A. (2016). Socio-economic impact of water scarcity on the economy of Pishin Lora Basin in

Balochistan. Journal of Applied and Emerging Sciences, 5(2), pp90-96.
                                                                        3
Quetta city will benefit from improved water supply and sanitation services and around 390,000
households will benefit from improved flood protection as well as improved water availability for
agricultural uses in the Kachhi Plains. BWSPIP will have the following Components:
Component A: Flood protection, agricultural water and watershed management

This component aims at improving water security in the Kachhi plains by protecting populations
from floods and by improving access to water for productive use thereby reducing water security
challenges. The component will achieve this objective through a combination of structural and
non-structural solutions. The structural solutions will include a mix of grey infrastructure (flood
dispersal structures and associated canals) and green infrastructure (targeted revegetation of the
watershed). The non-structural solutions will include adequate planning especially at community
level, and strengthening the capacity of local water management and government institutions.
By doing so, this component will significantly contribute to strengthening the climate resilience
and sustainability through multiple pathways (i) enhanced opportunities for productive farming
activities through access to multiple sources of water throughout the year (as soil moisture,
groundwater and ponds); (ii) diversification of farming activities to enable both crop farming and
livestock breeding; and (iii) a combination of larger and smaller structures ensuring better
sediment management and improved flood risk mitigation. The component includes three sub-
components (i) Sub-component A1: Water Infrastructure; (ii) Sub-component A2: Watershed
Management and (iii) Sub-component A3: Improvements of on-farm water productivity. The
project will engage with local NGOs and Women Water Network such as Aurat Foundation in
Quetta to ensure female participation in consultations and ensure women’s voice is heard for the
flood protection, agriculture productivity and watershed management activities.


Sub-component A1: Water Infrastructure. This sub-component will finance the development of priority
flood protection and water utilization infrastructure to protect people and properties from floods and
ensure year-round water availability for agriculture and limited domestic uses. Moreover, the
infrastructure itself will be made resilient to floods, droughts, and high winds.2 The activities under this
sub-component will include: (i) Construction of flood dispersal structures; (ii) Embankment Protection
Works; and (iii) auxiliary infrastructure including canals, gauges, regulation and measurement systems.
This set of “grey infrastructure” will be complemented by nature-based solutions described in sub-
component A2.

Sub-component A2: Watershed Management. This sub-component will finance a combination of
watershed management and conservation interventions aimed at limiting erosion, promoting
groundwater recharge, increasing carbon stock and providing increased feed and fodder supply for
livestock. This sub-component includes the activities related to: (i) afforestation; (ii) erosion check and
control structures; (iii) land leveling; (iv) water detention structures/ponds; and (v) water and soil
conservation. The sub-component will also finance a technical assistance enabling participatory approach
to the watershed management.


2 The World Bank’s Resilient Water Infrastructure Design Brief, published in 2020, guides users on how resilience can be built

into the engineering design of their project. It focuses on the three natural hazards most likely to affect water and sanitation
infrastructure—droughts, floods, and high winds.
                                                                 4
Sub-component A3: Improvements of on-farm water productivity. The sub-component will finance
activities to improve on-farm water management to increase productivity of agriculture, horticulture,
livestock, and fisheries. It will support on-farm infrastructure, climate-smart agricultural water use
technologies, and technical assistance. On-farm infrastructure will include the construction/rehabilitation
of small water channels, small rainwater harvesting structures and access roads. Climate-smart
agricultural water use technologies will include improved irrigation efficiency and climate resilient
technologies (including contour bunds) enabled through matching grants to eligible beneficiaries. The
technical assistance will offer training to farmers for on-farm water management techniques and practices
and support the creation of water user associations` (WUAs) that will have responsibility in the O&M of
infrastructure. The project will ensure women’s representation and leadership in the WUAs by
establishing a quota of X% for decision-making positions held by women and providing women in these
positions, and more broadly female members in WUAs, with training in leadership and negotiation, as
well as in technical skills such as financial management and O&M. Separate trainings will also provided
to women on agricultural productivity, climate smart agriculture, horticulture, livestock, and kitchen
gardening and income generation activities to improve their resilience to climatic shocks.

Sub-component A4: Project Management & Technical Assistance. This sub-component will finance the
project management, monitoring and evaluation and studies for component A. The component will also
finance expenditures associated with the component implementation, including incremental costs
associated with the Project Implementation Unit (PIU), Project Supervision and Implementation
Assistance (PSIA) consultants, M&E consultants, and implementation of Management Plans and Strategic
Studies including the Environmental Management Plan (EMP), the Social Mitigation Plan and the Gender
Action Plan (GAP). Study tours will also be included with piloting of new technologies and others that may
be identified during project implementation, as well as feasibility studies for other river basins (that do
not include international waterways as defined in OP7.50).

Component B: Improvement of Quetta water supply and sanitation
This component aims to improve water security in Quetta by improving water supply and sanitation
services delivered by QWASA and increasing sustainability of groundwater use through increased
recharge. This will be achieved through a combination of priority infrastructure investments,
strengthening of QWASA, and application of circular economy principles to water supply and sanitation
systems. The project will finance a diverse set of activities that are all aligned with the objective of
enhancing the efficiency, resilience, and sustainability of QWASA’s operations to deliver improved, safe,
reliable, and inclusive services. These interventions are well aligned with the priorities identified in the
diagnostic and plans developed for QWASA through the Utility of the Future (UoF) Program and through
UNICEF Climate Resilient WASH Roadmap.

Subcomponent B1: Bulk water supply and municipal wastewater infrastructure investments. This sub-
component will increase bulk water available for supply through QWASA’s distribution network, support
technical and commercial improvements to the Sabzal Sewage Treatment Plant (STP), and expand
coverage of the sewerage network. Investments through this sub-component will ensure that there is
adequate physical infrastructure and water to help QWASA translate institutional and network
improvements (sub-components B2 and B3) into substantially improved water and sanitation services to
residents of Quetta. Bulk water augmentation will include rehabilitation of the conveyance system that
brings water from the Urak Headworks to Quetta city, construction of bulk supply lines to bring water
from up to three operational dams around Quetta Valley, development and implementation of a

                                                     5
comprehensive groundwater recharge program, rehabilitation of selected non-functional groundwater
pumping stations, and construction of public water points with a focus on Kacchi Abadis. The water and
sanitation facilities will be designed that is inclusive and easily accessible to people with disabilities.

Sanitation investments under B1 are concentrated in the Sabzal STP and its service area. The objectives
are to (a) achieve public health and environmental outcomes from past investments that were never
completed and/or are not operational, (b) develop a working institutional and operational model for
wastewater management to be scaled in the future, and (c) provide operational opportunity to implement
sanitation management practices that are supported by technical assistance under subcomponent B2.
The scale of investment is small and the outcomes are concentrated in one locality of Quetta City, but the
objective is to lay the groundwork for rapid scaling up of wastewater investments in the future. The
performance and reliability of the Sabzal STP, which is currently non-operational partly due to QWASA’s
inability to cover energy costs, will be bolstered by converting the energy supply to solar energy to make
the plant operations more cost-efficient. Other on-site improvements will include rehabilitation of STP
inlet, solid waste separation system, and restoration of settling tank. The STP is equipped with a sludge
drying and pressing unit and a facility for filling tankers with treated wastewater, which will be restored
through minor upgrades. The on-site water quality monitoring lab will also be modernized to increase
frequency and transparency of quality testing. Sewerage network investments will cover parts of the
Sabzal STP’s catchment area, currently served by open drains that also carry non-sewage drainage water
and solid waste. Investments through this sub-component will ensure that there is adequate physical
infrastructure and water to help QWASA translate institutional and network improvements (sub-
components B2 and B3) into substantially improved water and sanitation services to residents of Quetta.

Subcomponent B2: Improving Water Supply and Sanitation Systems and Services. This subcomponent
focuses on enhancing the technical and commercial efficiency of QWASA as a service provider through a
combination of technical assistance to improve customer services and utility operations, technology
adoption and related capacity building, and physical rehabilitation of segments of the water supply
network. The activities under this subcomponent will enable QWASA to reduce non-revenue water
(NRW), increase energy efficiency, improve utility service parameters such as ‘hours of service’, and
expand services to the most underserved localities. A detailed utility modernization program will be
developed in the first year of project implementation, building upon the work undertaken already through
the UoF Program. This will inform the specific technical assistance activities of the project, including
support for a communication and public outreach campaign to enable demand management and increase
tariff-based revenue. Technical assistance will also include: (a) establishment of a dedicated wastewater
management unit to manage existing and planned wastewater investments (see subcomponent B1); (b)
establishment of a kacchi abadi unit to expand QWASA services to the poorest settlements; and (c)
development and implementation of a Gender Action Plan to increase the number of women in technical
and decision-making positions. Constraints on women’s recruitment and promotion into decision-
making/management positions will be identified through the EQUAL AQUA HR survey, and addressed
through relevant measures, which may include introduction of incentives on hiring of women into new
and existing unfilled positions at management level; review of current hiring and promotion practices and
introduction of affirmative HR policies and procedures; launch of training and mentorship opportunities
for existing women employees; and support for university-to-work transition schemes. Technology
improvement, system rehabilitation, and related capacity building activities will include: (i) installation of
a Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) system, Geographic Information System (GIS), and
hydraulic network modeling of the QWASA’s water distribution networks; (ii) network repair, and
rehabilitation (or construction) of storage reservoirs within the city; (iii) rehabilitation of community water
                                                      6
filtration plants; (iv) hardware and software support for network zoning, leakage management, and
pressure management; (v) installation of bulk and consumer meters; and (vi) solarization and
rehabilitation of pumping stations and installation of electric generators.

Subcomponent B3: Institutional Strengthening and Modernization of Utility Management of QWASA.
This subcomponent will support the PIU for Component B in improving core project management
competencies – procurement, financial management, monitoring and evaluation, E&S safeguards -; hiring
of consultants for M&E, supervision and implementation support, and needs-based technical support; and
setup of a project specific Management Information System (MIS) and a WASH MIS housed at the
PHED/QWASA; and financing of costs associated with the PIU, which will be housed at the PHED/QWASA
and include substantial representation from QWASA (see Implementation Arrangements). This
component will also support studies to inform future investments and interventions.

Component C: Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)
This component will support preparedness for, and rapid response to climate and natural disasters,
emergency, and/or catastrophic events as needed. The provisional zero cost for this component will allow
for rapid reallocation of credit proceeds from other components under streamlined procurement and
disbursement procedures. A CERC annex will be included in the project operations manual outlining the
process for activation, criteria for eligible crisis, implementation arrangements, fiduciary and safeguards
aspects and a positive list of activities that may be financed.

    2. Rationale and Objective of Stakeholder Engagement Plan
The SEP recognizes the importance of open and transparent engagement between the Borrower and
project stakeholders as an essential element of good international practice. Effective stakeholder
engagement can improve the environmental and social sustainability of projects, enhance project
acceptance, and make a significant contribution to successful project design and implementation.
Stakeholder engagement is an inclusive process conducted throughout the project life cycle. Where
properly designed and implemented, it supports the development of strong, constructive, and responsive
relationships that are important for successful management of a project’s environmental and social risks.

The overall Objective of the SEP
The overall objective of this SEP is to define a plan of action for stakeholder engagement, including
technically and culturally appropriate approach to public consultation and information disclosure,
throughout the entire project cycle. The SEP outlines ways in which the project team will communicate
with stakeholders and includes a mechanism by which people can raise concerns, provide feedback, or
make complaints about project activities.

The involvement of different stakeholders, including the local population is essential to the success of the
project in order to ensure smooth collaboration between project staff and local communities. This SEP
will be reassessed and updated throughout the project life as a live document.

The SEP will:




                                                     7
    •   Establish a systematic approach to stakeholder engagement that will help Borrowers identify
        stakeholders and build and maintain a constructive relationship with them, in particular project-
        affected parties.
    •   Assess the level of stakeholder interest and support for the project and to enable stakeholders’
        views to be taken into account in project design and environmental and social performance.
    •   Promote and provide means for effective and inclusive engagement with project-affected parties
        throughout the project life cycle on issues that could potentially affect them.
    •   Ensure that appropriate project information on environmental and social risks and impacts is
        disclosed to stakeholders in a timely, understandable, accessible, and appropriate manner and
        format.
    •   Provide project-affected parties with accessible and inclusive means to raise issues and grievances
        and allow Borrowers to respond to and manage such grievances.

The environmental and social risk of the project is rated as ‘Substantial’. The project will have overall
positive impacts and will help to improve the water security and increase the economic productivity of
water use in the selected areas of Balochistan Province. The environmental impacts of project
components will vary in nature and scale depending upon the location and type of intervention which are
currently under consideration. Moderate to large scale civil works will be involved. The anticipated
environmental risks and impacts associated with project activities include generation of spoil from
excavation activities, dust generation caused by excavation and running of project vehicles on unpaved
roads/tracks, air emissions released by construction machinery and vehicles, soil and ground/surface
water contamination caused by release of contaminants at the worksites and discharge of domestic
sewage and other wastewaters from temporary facilities, solid waste generation, clearing of natural
vegetation and trees, CHS risks associated with movement of heavy machinery and dump trucks, OHS risks
associated with the construction works, security of workers and equipment, concerns related to river
water quantity and quality. In case of the flood water detention, water harvesting and ground water
recharge, other than construction-related impacts described above, the potentially adverse impacts
include reduction of surface water flow during the rainy season for lower riparian areas. Other than the
impacts associated with civil works, it is anticipated that there will be a temporary impact on supply and
quantity of water to the communities during implementation of Component-B. During the up gradation
of pumping stations and rehabilitation of pipeline systems it is anticipated that the water quality may
deteriorate and health and safety risks may arise.




                                                    8
    Project activities are envisaged to have Substantial social risks due to moderate to large scale civil
    works, unstable security situation in the province, congested project areas in Quetta city, including
    kacchi abadis (slums), risk of unequitable project benefits, institutional capacities, and general
    implementation challenges.

    The Project will have significant positive social impacts in terms of access to improved water quality
    and quantity to some of the poorest farming communities in Balochistan, and in the shape of
    improved sanitation and water supply for Quetta city. The moderate to large scale civil works under
    both components may cause adverse social impacts (localized) if not managed timely and properly.
    Associated social risks with the civil works may include impacts on land, labor management, OHS and
    community health and safety. Activities under Component B on rehabilitation of water supply and
    sewage infrastructure in the densely populated and congested areas of Quetta city carry risks of
    temporary economic and physical displacement of people and businesses (including informal settlers)
    during civil works. Road closures, disrupted access for civilians and digging for the replacement of
    water and sewage lines may also carry risks of CHS and GBV/SEA/SH. Improved water supply in
    Quetta, may also carry risks of equity in water supply, water quality, and ensuring access to increased
    water. Identified risks for land, CHS and equitable benefits will be further amplified for the project
    activities conducted in the ‘kacchi abadis’ (slums) of Quetta city. There are reports of Anti
    Encroachment Drives (AED) in Quetta city which Component 2 will have to be sensitive towards.
    There is a risk of exclusion of women under Component A from benefiting from on-farm water
    productivity activities due to lack of inclusion of women in Water Users Associations. Inter and intra
    tribal conflicts may also impact equity and targeting, which is a primary social risk associated with
    Component A. Security challenges in project areas under Component A may also carry a risk to project
    staff and labor. BIWRMDP has focused extensively on this, and has made considerable headway in
    gaining trust, through constant engagement with tribes of Nari and Porali basin. The project will
    capitalize on the same. Other social risks include the risk of GBV/SEA/SH across project activities. The
    IA for Component A (Balochistan Irrigation Department), while having extensive experience with
    World Bank projects has not implemented a project under ESF. The IA for Component B,
    PHED/QWASA does not have any experience of implementing a World Bank project. Given these, the
    social risk rating is Substantial.

3. Stakeholder Identification and Analysis
Stakeholder analysis identifies and determines the likely relationship between the project and the
different stakeholders. Stakeholders are directly or indirectly affected by a project, as well as those who
may have interests in a project and/or the ability to influence its outcome, either positively or negatively.
It is a useful tool for managing communication between the project team and stakeholders. Project
stakeholders are defined as individuals, groups, or other entities who:
    •   Are impacted or likely to be impacted directly or indirectly, positively, or adversely, by the Project
        (also known as ‘affected parties’); and,
    •   May have an interest in the Project (‘other interested parties’). They include individuals or groups
        whose interests may be affected by the Project and who have the potential to influence the
        Project outcomes in any way.

                                                      9
In all phases of the project, cooperation and negotiation with stakeholders is required. Persons within
the groups who act as legitimate representatives of their respective stakeholder group and entrusted by
their fellow group members will be identified in the process of engagement. Community representatives
may provide helpful insight into the local settings and act as main means for dissemination of the Project
information and as a primary communication/liaison link between the Project and targeted communities
and their established networks. Legitimacy of the community representatives can be verified by talking
informally to a random sample of community members and heeding their views on who can be
representing their interests in the most effective way.

Methodology
Stakeholder analysis helps to know the perceptions, interests, need, and influence of actors on the
project. Identifying the appropriate consultation methodology for each stakeholder throughout the
project lifecycle is necessary. In order to meet best practice approaches, the project will apply the
following principles for stakeholder engagement:
        •   Openness and life-cycle approach: public consultations for the project will continue during
            the whole project lifecycle. Stakeholder engagement will be free of manipulation, interface,
            coercion, and intimidation;
        •   Informed participation and feedback: information will be provided through out project
            duration and widely distributed among all stakeholders in an appropriate format; conducted
            based on timely, relevant, understandable and accessible information related to the project;
            opportunities provided to raise concerns and assure that stakeholder feedback is taken into
            consideration during decision making;
        •   Inclusiveness and sensitivity: stakeholder identification will be undertaken to support better
            communications and building effective relationships. The participation process for the
            projects is inclusive. All stakeholders are always encouraged to be involved in the consultation
            process. Equal access to information is provided to all stakeholders. Sensitivity to
            stakeholders’ needs is the key principle underlying the selection of engagement methods.
            Special attention is given to vulnerable groups, particularly women headed households,
            youth, elderly and the cultural sensitivities of diverse ethnic groups.
For the purposes of effective and tailored engagement, stakeholders of the proposed project can be
divided into the following core categories:
    1. Affected Parties: persons, groups and other entities within the Project Area of Influence that are
       directly influenced (actually or potentially) by the project and/or have been identified as most
       susceptible to change associated with the project, and who need to be closely engaged in
       identifying impacts and their significance, as well as in decision-making on mitigation and
       management measures.
    2. Other Interested Parties: individuals/groups/entities that may not experience direct impacts from
       the Project but who consider or perceive their interests as being affected by the project and/or
       who could affect the project and the process of its implementation in some way



                                                    10
    3. Disadvantaged/Vulnerable Individuals or Groups: persons who may be disproportionately
       impacted or further disadvantaged by the project(s) as compared with any other groups due to
       their vulnerable status,5 and that may require special engagement efforts to ensure their equal
       representation in the consultation and decision-making process associated with the project.

Affected Parties
Affected Parties are those groups of people that are directly influenced (actually or potentially) by the
project and/or have been identified as most susceptible to potential risks and impacts associated with the
project and who need to be closely engaged including local community members and other parties that
may be subject to direct impacts from the Project. Specifically, the following individuals and groups fall
within this category:
Table 1: Affected parties and its impact wise analysis

     Sector                        Affected Parties                                Impact Level
 Community             1. Villagers and residents of towns and           1. High
                          villages                                       2. High
                       2. Agriculture farmers and workers                3. High
                       3. Farmers Organizations/ Water Users             4. High
                          Associations                                   5. High
                       4. Community Based Organizations
                       5. Farming community
   Government          1.       Balochistan Irrigation Department        1.        High
                                (ID)                                     2.        High
                       2. Balochistan Public Health Engineering          3.        High
                          Department (PHED/QWASA)                        4.        High
                       3. PIU Staff Balochistan ID                       5.        High
                       4. PIU Staff Balochistan PHED/QWASA               6.        High
                       5. QWASA Staff                                    7.        High
                       6. Project Design and Supervision Consultants
                       7. Monitoring and Evaluation Consultants



Other Interested Parties
Other parties interested in the Project are identified as individuals, groups, or organizations who may not
be directly affected by the Project but who can help play a role in identifying potential risks, impacts, and
opportunities for the Borrower to consider and address in the assessment process and throughout project
preparation. The following Other Interested Parties (OIPs) have been identified as stakeholders of the
Project:
Table 2: Other Interested Parties and its impact wise analysis

              Sector                   Other Interested Parties (OIPs)               Impact Level



                                                       11
Government   1.        National Disaster                  1. Low
                       Management Authority               2. High
                       (NDMA)
                                                          3. High
             2.        Provincial Disaster
                                                          4. Low
                       Management Authority
                                                          5. Low
             3.        Pakistan Meteorological
                       Department                         6. Low
             4.        Forest and Wildlife                7. Medium
                       Department                         8. Medium
             5.        Politicians (local leadership in   9. High
                       targetted areas)                   10. High
             6.        Social Welfare Department,         11. Low
                       Balochistan
                                                          12. Low
             7.        Police Department
                                                          13. Low
             8.        Balochistan Environmental          14. Low
                       Protection Agency                  15. High
             9.        Revenue Department,                16. Medium
                       Balochistan                        17. Low
             10. Agriculture Department                   18. High
                                                          19. High
             11. Livestock & Fisheries
                       Department
             12.       Food Department
             13.       Health Department
             14.       Local Government Department
             15.       Education Department
             16.       P&DDs
Community          1.    General Public                   1. High
                   2.    Local NGOs                       2. Low
                   3.    Donor organizations              3. Medium
                   4.    Charity groups                   4. Low
                   5.    Contracted workers,              5. High
                         consultants
Others            1.     The All Balochistan Fruit &      1. Low
                         Vegetable Exporters,             2. Low
                  2.     Quetta Flour Mills               3. Medium
                         Association                      4. High
                  3.     Private sector companies         5. High
                         providing agriculture inputs/
                                                          6. Low
                         support:
                                                          7. Medium
                  4.     Construction contractors
                                                          8. Low
                  5.     Construction material
                         suppliers                        9. Medium
                  6.     Insurance companies              10. Low
                  7.     Goods Transporters               11. High
                         Association                      12. Medium

                                     12
                                      8.  Sindh Balochistan Rice            13. Low
                                          Millers and Traders               14. Low
                                          Association                       15. Medium
                                      9. Traders Associations               16. Low
                                      10. Shop Keepers                      17. Low
                                      11. Daily wage earners                18. Medium
                                      12. Artisans of rural markets
                                      13. Micro-Finance Institutions
                                          (Banks/NGOs)
                                      14. UN Agencies (e.g., WHO,
                                          WFP, UNICEF)
                                      15. Media Groups
                                      16. Balochistan Culture
                                          Department
                                      17. Cultural Organizations,
                                          writers, archeologists
                                      18. Universities and research
                                          institutions, e.g., Balochistan
                                          University, BIUTEMS
                                          Agriculture University;



Disadvantaged/Vulnerable Individuals or Groups
Disadvantaged or vulnerable individuals or groups are those peoples or groups highly vulnerable to
potential project impacts and often do not have a voice to express their concerns or understand the
impact and risk of the project. They may disproportionately be impacted or further disadvantaged by the
project as compared with any other groups due to their vulnerable status, and usually require special
arrangement to ensure their equal representation in the consultation and decision-making process
associated with the project. Their vulnerability may stem from person’s origin, gender, age, health
condition, disability, economic deficiency and financial insecurity, disadvantaged status in the community
(e.g., ethnic and religious minority groups, Indigenous peoples), and dependence on other individuals or
natural resources.
Awareness raising and stakeholder engagement with disadvantaged or vulnerable individuals or groups
on the project must consider such groups or individuals’ sensitivities, concerns and cultural differences to
ensure a full understanding of project activities and benefits. Engagement with these vulnerable groups
and individuals often requires the application of specific measures and assistance aimed at the facilitation
of their participation in the project related decision making so that their awareness of and input to the
overall process are commensurate to those of the other stakeholders.
Within the proposed Project, the vulnerable or disadvantaged groups may include, but not limited to, the
following:
Table 3: Disadvantaged/Vulnerable Groups and its impact wise analysis

 Sector           Disadvantaged/Vulnerable Individuals or Groups            Impact Level

                                                      13
                                                                             1.    High
 Community            1.  Women agriculture and livestock farmers
                                                                             2.    High
                      2.  Ethnic/religious/gender minorities
                                                                             3.    High
                      3.  Elderly people in hard-hit areas and facing food
                                                                             4.    High
                          shortages.
                                                                             5.    High
                      4. Female headed households
                                                                             6.    High
                      5. Children and youth heads of households
                                                                             7.    High
                      6. Agriculture labor dependent on share-
                                                                             8.    High
                          cropping
                                                                             9.    Medium
                      7. Communities practicing subsistence farming
                                                                             10.   High
                      8. People with special needs such as Pregnant
                                                                             11.   High
                          women, children, those in poor health.
                                                                             12.   Low
                      9. Illiterate persons
                                                                             13.   Low
                      10. Women Artisans (handicraft makers etc.)
                                                                             14.   Low
                      11. Differently     abled/physically     challenged
                                                                             15.   High
                          people.
                      12. Casual/Informal labor force (construction
                          workers, skilled and un-skilled labours etc.)


Vulnerable groups within the communities affected by the project will be further confirmed and consulted
during project preparation.

4. Stakeholder Engagement Plan
Summary of Stakeholder Engagement During Project Preparation
The Irrigation Department of Balochistan Government acquired the services of M/S MM Pakistan and
Techno Pakistan Consultants to study the detailed feasibility reports including all necessary aspects
covering technical, institutional and economics, social/environmental assessments, procurement and
financial management with spatial demarcation through advanced technological methods etc. required
for approval by the Government and the international funding institution including the World Bank.
Two separate consultations for Balochistan Water Security and Productivity Improvement Project
(BWSPIP) were organized by these consultants from January to October 2023. The consultations were
done into two sessions. Consultations mainly in form of “Focus Group Discussions” (FGD) with all Primary
and Secondary Stakeholders at public places or offices especially in those communities which is within the
project area or nearby with it are done. It was helpful to create a strong foundation for long-lasting and
trustful relationships between the client and the stakeholders. Representatives of the communities,
potential vulnerable groups such as women and youth has been consulted to understand their specific
issues and concerns. This has enabled the teams in meaningful participation. The findings and
recommendations has been discussed and disclosed in an open and transparent manner with the
communities in order to solicit their comments and suggestions in the studies.
Participants were first briefed about the Project objectives and major interventions associated with the
Project implementation. Afterward, people were asked to express their views regarding the proposed
Project. In general participants appreciated the Project and offered comments & suggestions to enhance
the expected environmental and social benefits and to mitigate the adverse impacts. The community
perception of the Project is very good but most of the people wish to implement the Project through

                                                      14
sustainable and safety manner. For the summary of the feedback of the consultations see Annexure 1,
and for details of the consultations with primary stakeholder are provided below:
Table 4: Primary Stakeholder Consultation for Component A (Kachchi Plain Areas)
  Sr.
                             Settlement           Tehsil         District    Number of Participants
  No.
   1.      Talli                                                                      30
   2.      Bokha Ghulam Bolak                                                         22
   3.      Ghulam Bolak                                                               07
   4.      Qasir Gahramzai                                                            06
   5.      Mall Gahramzai                                                             17
   6.      Juma Kash                               Sibi            Sibi               08
   7.      Goth Chandia                                                               09
   8.      Sultan Kot                                                                 14
   9.      Arbab Chachar                                                              12
  10       Mal Gorgage                                                                10
  11.      Sibi City (Women Consultation)                                             08
  12.      Theri Barmani                                                              07
  13.      Ralo Mian Khan                                                             12
  14.      Ralo Gulib                                                                 10
  15.      Hujo Machta                                                                05
  16.      Lehri                                   Lehri           Sibi               05
  17.      Goht Haji Tuma Khan                                                        04
  18.      Khairwah                                                                   08
  19.      Basti Kashmir (Sherkal)                                                    08
  20.      Bakhtiar Abad (Women Consultation)                                         09
  21.      Haji Jabalana                                                              06
  22.      Jalal Khan                                                                 10
                                                   Bagh          Kachhi
  23.      Rehanzai New                                                               07
  24.      Mogari                                                                     05
  25.      Dhadar City (Women Consultation)       Dhadar         Kachhi               07




Table 5: Summary of of participants of Village Level FGDsFGD at Shabal village Quetta

   S. No              Village Name                        Number of Participants
     1.               Shabal Village, Quetta           9 Male
     2.               Khula Dam Village, Quetta        11 Male




Institutional/Secondary Consultations
The consultants environmental and social teams along with technical teams of consultant visited various
stakeholders’ organizations and offices located in the districts and provincial levels for information
                                                  15
disclosure and to get feedback. Institutional stakeholder consultations were more formal as they involved
government personnel and non-governmental organization, who were consulted. They were briefed on
the proposed Project, its proposed interventions and the potential negative and positive impact of the
Project on the areas of social and environment.
The public sector representatives of the different line departments expressed their complete support and
efforts towards the Project development and mentioned the intent to ensure the Project was completed
at the earliest to the highest quality standards. In addition, these officials expressed the commitment to
ensuring the support and would adhere to all environmental and social compliance standards with no
leniency in this regard to be expected from the relevant Government line departments. The digest of
comment and suggestions received is given as under, whereas, complete list of offices visited, official
consulted and feedback received is provided below:


Table 6: Consultation with Institutional Stakeholders

  Sr.
            Department/Organization                            Designation
  No

                                         Project Director

                                         Social Safeguard Specialist
  1.    PMU
                                         Environment Specialist

                                         M&E Specialist

  2.    A.C Bagh                         Assistant Commissioner

  3.    Agriculture Department, Quetta   Director General

                                         Conservator/P.D 10 Billion Tree Project

        Forest Department, Quetta        CF M&E
  4.
                                         Media coordinator

                                         Assistant Director
        PCRWR, Quetta
  5.                                     Scientific officer

  6.    Forest Department, Sibi          Conservator

  7.    Wildlife Department, Sibi        Assistant Conservator

  8.    Agriculture Department, Sibi     Agriculture Officer

                                         Deputy Director
        OFWM, Sibi
  9.                                     Sub-Engineer



                                                       16
                                            Water Management Officer

                                            S.D.O
        Irrigation Department, Haji Shahr
  10.                                       Gate Supervisor

                                            D.F.O
  11.   Forest Department, Dhadar
                                            D.F.O

Coordination with and inclusion of the needs of all stakeholders are essential for successful
implementation of a project. The Project in-hand is particularly of social nature and requires due
participation and opinion sharing from the related stakeholders. In Quetta under Water Supply
Component B of the QWASA, the stakeholders directly involved and handling the system are Q-WASA,
Irrigation Department, MES, Forest Department, and Environmental Protection Agency. One each
meeting and joint field visits were held with the professionals,’ officials of these
departments/organizations to know about the existing conditions and challenges.
Main water resources stakeholder has also been given due heed to understand the project objectives,
goals, margin for water supply improvement, limitations and challenges. Weekly meetings and quarterly
presentations have been a ritual throughout the project timeline.
Q-WASA staff accompanied to several pumping stations and explained the operational issues being
faced by them due to various technical and administrative factors affecting the overall performance of
Q-WASA. Similarly, joint field visits with forest department officers were very useful as they indicated
suitable sites for watershed management interventions, these sites were studied and evaluated by the
Consultant team apart from examining the other potential sites.
Irrigation Department plays the key role in management of water resources, particularly those related
to surface water. Meetings and discussions with Irrigation Department professionals helped in finalizing
the selection of interventions for priority package as well as for future development options.
Meeting with Other Stakeholders
The Consultants teams also visited the other stakeholders of the project area for extraction of useful
information and to discuss the project related matters related to their jurisdiction. In this regard
following departments were visited throughout the project timeline.
    ▪   Agriculture Department
    ▪   Quetta Development Authority
    ▪   Urban Planning & Development Department
    ▪   Quetta Metropolitan Corporation
    ▪   Local Government Body
Table 7: Consultations along with its dates to stakeholder departments
  Date                  Venue                   Participants             Agenda / Discussion
 February 16, 2023     Project                 BIWRMDP Team            Component-B Sub- Projects
                       Directorate                                     Introductory meeting
 February 21, 2023     WASA Office             MD QWASA and Team       Component-B Sub-Projects

                                                        17
                                                                       Introductory meeting
 February 22, 2023   Secretariat            Secretary of Irrigation    Component-B Sub-Projects
                                                                       Introductory meeting
 February 22, 2023   Urban Planning&        Urban Planning &           Component-B Sub-Projects
                     Development            DevelopmentDept.           Introductory meeting
                     Dept Office
 February 22, 2023   Urban Local            Urban Local Government     Component-B Sub-Projects
                     Government                                        Introductory meeting
                     Office
 February 23, 2023   Pearl                  World Bank                 Component-B Sub-Projects
                     Continental                                       Introductory meeting
 February 23, 2023   ACE Quetta Cantt.      QMES and Irrigation        Component-B Sub-Projects
                                            Department                 Introductory meeting
 March 01, 2023      Agriculture            Agriculture Department     Component-B Sub-Projects
                     Department                                        Introductory meeting
                     Office
 March 13, 2023      Project                World Bank, BIWRMDP        Progress update and discussion
                     Directorate            Team,TCI, MMP              over PC-I
 March 14, 2023      Secretariat            Secretary of Irrigation    Discussion over PC-I
 March 14, 2023      WASA Office            Managing Director,         Data collection and discussion
                                            QWASA                      over PC-I
 March 14, 2023      Forest                 Forest Department          Data collection and discussion
                     Department                                        over PC-I
                     Office
 March 16, 2023      WASA Office            Chief Engr., QWASA         Data collection and discussion
                                                                       over PC-I
 March 21, 2023      Project                World Bank, BIWRMDP        Discussion over PC-I
                     Directorate            Team,TCI, MMP
 March 28, 2023      Project Directorate    World Bank, BIWRMDP        Update on Progress and
                                            Team, TCI, MMP             presentation



Summary of Project Stakeholder Needs, Methods, and Tools for Stakeholder
Engagement
The Project has materialized and been designed on the request of the main stakeholders including the
government and local populations of the Kachchi Plain areas and Quetta district. In this regard, the Project
will rely heavily on stakeholder feedback and engagement during the life of the project.
Strong citizen and community engagement are preconditions for the effectiveness of the project.
Accordingly, different tools, techniques and methods will be used for engagement to cover different
needs of the stakeholders. Given the nature of the project, the strategy for stakeholder engagement is
heavily focused on on-going information disclosure and dissemination that is efficient, transparent, and
addresses the needs of different stakeholders.
For consultations with rural and urban communities of Kachchi Plain areas and Quetta city and vulnerable
individuals and groups the following are some considerations for selecting channels of communication:
    •   Diversify means of communication and rely more on social media. Where possible and
        appropriate, create dedicated online platforms and chat groups appropriate for the purpose,
                                                     18
       based on the type and category of stakeholders;
   •   Employ traditional channels of communications (TV, newspaper, radio, dedicated phone-lines,
       and mail) when stakeholders to do not have access to online channels or do not use them
       frequently. Local Balochistan tv/radio channels and newspapers will be preferred. Traditional
       channels (such as PTV Bolan, PTV National, Balochistan TV) can also be highly effective in
       conveying relevant information to stakeholders, and allow them to provide their feedback and
       suggestions;
   •   Where direct engagement with project beneficiaries is necessary, identify channels for direct
       communication with each household via a context specific combination of email messages, mail,
       online platforms, dedicated phone lines with knowledgeable operators;
   •   Each of the proposed channels of engagement should clearly specify how feedback and
       suggestions can be provided by stakeholders.
   •   Information based feedback as a channel of communication will be received through local media,
       charity groups/individuals and local NGOs. Women, elderly and children have special needs that
       are mostly similar in all areas which should also be included in the communication channel.
   •   Government Officials: Senior officials (particularly those who are directly involved in disaster
       management) of Relevant Departments will be consulted by using structured interview tools such
       as questionnaires (to gather quantitative data) and key informant interviews or consultative
       workshops (for qualitative information) .
   •   NGOs/Civil Society: Senior managers and field workers of the NGOs/Civil Society groups who are
       directly involved in disaster response work will be interviewed by using structured interview tools
       such as questionnaires (to gather quantitative data) and key informant interviews or consultative
       workshops (for qualitative).
   •   Village Communities: Communities in the affected areas specially those who have limited access
       to information for being cut off due to flood, will be consulted in-person through multiple
       methods e.g., Focus Group Discussions, individual interviews of physically challenged people,
       women in special needs (pregnant, lactating), elderly people and transgender.
   •   Occupational groups such as farmers, fisher people, laborers will be consulted through separate
       focus group discussions
   •   In order to reach out to all these groups of stakeholders a team will be engaged. Cultural norms
       will be fully respected. For participation of communities and other local stakeholders, information
       of these consultation sessions will be disseminated through local contacts, social media and other
       means of local communication.
   •   Consultations will be conducted by experienced experts having understating of local context. All
       discussions/interviews with local stakeholders will be conducted in the local language. Women
       team members will consult women to ensure their comfort.
   •   All consultations will also be recorded with prior permission of the concerned stakeholders.
       Formal permission will be sought before taking photographs
   •   To assess more specific needs of different communities in different areas stakeholders’
       consultations will be conducted. The following methods and tools will be used:
Table 8: Summary of Project Stakeholder Needs, Methods, and Tools for Stakeholder Engagement

 Engagement Approach             Appropriate application of the approach




                                                   19
 Correspondences (Phone and IVR      Distribute information to Government officials, NGOs, Local Government,
 systems, Emails)                    private sector and other organizations/agencies
                                     Invite stakeholders to meetings and follow-up

 Focus group meetings                For communities, farmers’ organizations/groups, women beneficiaries,
                                     disadvantaged/vulnerable individuals/groups
                                     Present Project information to a group of stakeholders
                                     Allow stakeholders to provide their views on targeted baseline information
                                     Build relationships with communities
                                     Record responses

 Project website                     Present project information and progress updates
                                     Disclose ESIA, ESMP and other relevant project documentation

 Visibility/signage                  Share information door-by-door, respecting social distancing, on project
                                     activities; project investment location; project disclosure; Educational
                                     materials

 Project leaflet                     Brief project information to provide regular update
                                     Site specific project information

 Mass media (TV, radio, print and    Communication channels with the public to disseminate situation reports,
 electronic newspapers, social       latest information on floods, and project activities. Local Baloch media will
 media                               also be used for mass communication.



The table below provides an overview of the language and other specific needs of the various groups of
stakeholders for the Project:
Table 9: Overview of language and other specific needs

 Stakeholder Type             Characteristics                Language needs               Specific needs

 Balochistan Government       Government                     Engagement using Urdu,       Engagements should be in
 stakeholders, associations   departments/collectives        Pashto, Balochi , Brahvi,    person, and in FGD format
 and CSOs                     and likely to have diverse     Balochi and Sindhi will be   when consulting with
                              membership                     more     important     for   large groups.
                                                             consultation with these
                                                             groups
                                                                                          Supplemental
                                                                                          engagement       through
                                                                                          project website, leaflets,
                                                                                          mass media, and mobile
                                                                                          phones



                                                        20
Stakeholder Type              Characteristics                Language needs               Specific needs

Other Influential Parties     Stakeholders not directly      For      national    level   Correspondence via email
                              involved in or affected by     institutions/groups, Urdu    and phone, and in-person
                              project activities, but may    is appropriate.              individual or small group
                              be consulted for technical                                  interviews/meetings are
                              support or collaboration                                    appropriate
                              during the design and          For sub-district level
                              implementation of the          institutions, engagement
                              project.                       should be conducted in
                                                             Pashto, Balochi, Brahvi or
                                                             Seraiki.

Disadvantaged/vulnerable      Women, differently-abled       Urdu, Pashto, Balochi,       Engagement should be
individuals      directly     people, elder people,          Brahvi, Balochi and Sindhi   conducted in a culturally
involved    in   project      women           heading        (or other local language     appropriate manner.
implementation                households,       ethnic       depending on area) will
                              minorities.                    be used for consultations
                                                                                          Female       interviewers/
                                                                                          facilitators should be
                                                                                          employed             when
                                                                                          respondents are also
                                                                                          female.
                                                                                          Interviews should be
                                                                                          conducted    at   Union
                                                                                          Council, revenue village,
                                                                                          village and household
                                                                                          level.


                                                                                          Interviewees should not
                                                                                          be obliged to travel.
                                                                                          Physical      accessibility
                                                                                          requirements             of
                                                                                          interviewees should be
                                                                                          considered         before
                                                                                          organizing interviews.


                                                                                          Supplemental
                                                                                          engagement        through
                                                                                          project website, GRM

Farmers/small      business   Farmers/small business         Consultations should be      Local cultural contexts
owners                        owners that have been          held in local language       must be considered prior
                              affected by the floods         appropriate to the area      to engagement.


                                                                                          When          possible,
                                                                                          engagements should be

                                                        21
Stakeholder Type         Characteristics             Language needs              Specific needs
                                                                                 timed to avoid disruption
                                                                                 of livelihood activities
                                                                                 (e.g., not during morning
                                                                                 hours when they are busy
                                                                                 in their fields).


                                                                                 Face-to-face interviews
                                                                                 are preferrable.


                                                                                 Awareness          raising
                                                                                 through       appropriate
                                                                                 signage, leaflets, mobile
                                                                                 phone, and mass media.

Women farmers and farm   Women who are directly      Consultation with these     Local cultural contexts
labor                    or indirectly engaged in    groups should be in local   must be considered and
                         agricultural activities.    language such as, Pashto,   respected.      Female
                                                     Brahvi, Balochi, Sindhi     interviewers should be
                                                     and Urdu depending on       used.
                                                     the area)

                                                                                 Interview        locations
                                                                                 should be flexible to
                                                                                 ensure representation.
                                                                                 Participants should not be
                                                                                 obliged to travel long
                                                                                 distances.
                                                                                 Face-to-face interviews
                                                                                 should be preferred when
                                                                                 possible,               as
                                                                                 telecommunication
                                                                                 access        can     vary
                                                                                 significantly     between
                                                                                 stakeholders.
                                                                                 Awareness          raising
                                                                                 through       appropriate
                                                                                 signage, leaflets, mobile
                                                                                 phone, and mass media.

Illiterate people        Individuals   who    are    Consultations with these    Outreach,        awareness
                         illiterate                  groups should be held in    raising, and capacity
                                                     local language such as,     building           activities
                                                     Pashto, Brahvi, Balochi,    involving     this    group
                                                     Sindhi     and      Urdu    should be sensitive to
                                                     depending on the area)      their literacy needs.


                                                22
Stakeholder Type            Characteristics                 Language needs             Specific needs


                                                                                       Engagement should be
                                                                                       face-to-face    when
                                                                                       possible.


                                                                                       Awareness raising should
                                                                                       not require literacy,
                                                                                       preference to be given to
                                                                                       voice phone calls, visual
                                                                                       media (e.g., posters with
                                                                                       simplified,        intuitive
                                                                                       graphics, video clips, etc.).

Persons with disabilities   Physically        challenged    Consultations with these   Physical accessibility of
                            people.                         groups should be held in   interview locations should
                                                            local language such as,    be considered prior to
                                                            Pashto, Brahvi, Balochi,   arranging engagement.
                                                            Sindhi     and      Urdu   Participants should not be
                                                            depending on the area)     required to travel long
                                                                                       distances, and should be
                                                                                       given the option to be
                                                                                       interviewed at home or
                                                                                       via phone when possible.


                                                                                       Awareness          raising
                                                                                       through       appropriate
                                                                                       signage, leaflets, mobile
                                                                                       phone, and mass media.

Sharecroppers               Individuals engaged in          Consultations with these   Interview        locations
                            farming who do not own          groups should be held in   should be flexible to
                            the land they farm              local language such as,    ensure representation.
                                                            Pashto, Brahvi, Balochi,   Participants should not be
                                                            Sindhi     and      Urdu   obliged to travel long
                                                            depending on the area)     distances.
                                                                                       Face-to-face interviews
                                                                                       should be preferred when
                                                                                       possible,               as
                                                                                       telecommunication
                                                                                       access        can     vary
                                                                                       significantly     between
                                                                                       stakeholders.


                                                                                       Awareness          raising
                                                                                       through        appropriate

                                                       23
 Stakeholder Type            Characteristics               Language needs            Specific needs
                                                                                     signage, leaflets, mobile
                                                                                     phone, and mass media.



Purpose and Timing of Stakeholder Engagement Program
The approach for the stakeholder engagement analysis shall be underscored by three elements: (i) belief
in the primacy of qualitative data; (ii) commitment to participatory methods; and (iii) flexible responsive
methods. An inclusive and participatory approach shall be followed taking the main characteristics and
interests of the stakeholders into account, as well as the different levels of engagements and consultations
that will be appropriate for different stakeholders.
In general, engagements will be directly proportional to the impact and influence of a stakeholders. As
the extent of impact of a project on a stakeholder group increases, or the extent of influence of a particular
stakeholder on a project increase, engagement with that particular stakeholder group will intensify and
deepen in terms of the frequency and the intensity of the engagement method used.
The stakeholder engagement program shall aim to: establish a systematic and inclusive approach to
stakeholder engagement; build and maintain a constructive relationship with stakeholders; incorporate
stakeholders’ views and concerns into project design/implementation; mitigate negative social and
environmental impacts of the project; and enhance project acceptance and socio-environmental
sustainability. Stakeholder engagement has been divided into two phases:
    •   Phase I (Project Preparation): The purpose of stakeholder engagement during this phase has been
        to: ascertain institutional needs; apprise all stakeholders about planned activities; improve
        project design; create synergies; and enhance the socio-environmental sustainability of the
        project activities envisaged under the different project components.
    •   Phase II (Project Implementation): Extensive stakeholder engagement will be carried out during
        this phase with affected communities, disadvantaged/vulnerable groups and other interested
        parties.


Proposed Strategy for Information Disclosure and consultation process
The strategy for information disclosure and consultation may vary depending on the regional and local
context however, it is important that the different activities are inclusive and culturally sensitive, to ensure
that vulnerable groups outlined above will have the chance to participate in and benefit from the Project
while contained from potential pesticide risks. This can include, among others, household-outreach
activities, group discussions, use of local tv/radio channels, use of local mosques (Masjid) and the use of
verbal communication or pictures, etc. While district wise awareness campaigns will be established, area
specific communication and awareness raising consultation in local area wise languages will also be
conducted.
The Project will strategize and implement communications, engagement and social accountability to
conduct effective consultations with the local community members and other concerned stakeholders


                                                      24
      using communication channels outlined above as deemed appropriate. The SEP will serve as a precursor
      and a guiding document for this project and will be refined as the project progresses.
      During preparation and implementation of infrastructure schemes, at least 70% local communities will be
      consulted, and their full participation will be sought to take financial benefits (as labor wages for works)
      as skilled and unskilled labor. These, consultations will be conducted during the preparation of
      ESMF/ESIAs/ESMPs or other E&S instruments if required in the future. The draft and final
      ESMF/ESIAs/ESMPs and SEP will be disclosed prior to formal consultations.
      The approaches taken will thereby ensure that information is meaningful, timely, and accessible to all
      affected stakeholders, use of local language including addressing cultural sensitivities, as well as
      challenges deriving from illiteracy or disabilities, tailored to the differences in geography, livelihoods and
      way of life. Project will form citizen centric groups who will be regularly informed of these, while disclosing
      the same information on relevant channels. The first such communication will happen 60 days’ post
      project effectiveness. The project will also ensure the establishment of a Grievance Redress Mechanism
      (GRM) that is accessible to all project stakeholders and beneficiaries.

      SEP Summary Table
      Table 10: SEP Summary table

                      Target              Information to be
 Project Stage                                                        Methods Proposed                Responsible        Frequencies
                   Stakeholders                disclosed
                                     Project Documents,          Project Orientations, One-on-
                                     Environmental and Social    one meetings, Focus Groups              PIU ID for
                                     Commitment Plan (ESCP),     Discussions, Community               Component A,
                                     Grievance Mechanism         Consultations etc. Short                   PIU
                 Affected parties,   (GRM) procedures and        Message Service (SMS)                PHED/QWASA       Progress of each
                 Public at large,    project information         messages through cell               for Component     month, quarterly,
                 Vulnerable                                      phones, Project and World             B, Consulting    bi-annual and
                 groups,                                         Bank, website · Print and              firms, IPs,         annual
                                                                 electronic media like,                 Individual
                                                                 Newspapers, Radio and               consultants and
                                                                 Social Media and Quarterly                 WB
                                                                 Printed Newsletters.
Preparation
                                                                 Seminars, Workshops, FGDs,
                                                                 Meetings, Progress review               PIU ID for
                                                                 meetings, field visits, capacity     Component A,
                                     Project        Documents,   building programs, Short                   PIU
                                     Environmental and Social    Message      Service      (SMS)      PHED/QWASA       Progress of each
                 Interested          Commitment Plan (ESCP),     messages      through        cell   for Component     month, quarterly,
                 groups,             Grievance       Mechanism   phones, Project and World             B, Consulting    bi-annual and
                                     (GRM)      procedures and   Bank, website · Print and              firms, IPs,         annual
                                     project information         electronic     media        like,      Individual
                                                                 Newspapers, Radio and Social        consultants and
                                                                 Media and Quarterly Printed                WB
                                                                 Newsletters.




                                                                 25
                                                                     Seminars, Workshops, FGDs,
                                                                     Meetings, Progress review               PIU ID for
                                                                     meetings, field visits, capacity     Component A,
                                     Project        Documents,       building programs, Short                   PIU
                                     Environmental and Social        Message      Service      (SMS)      PHED/QWASA       Progress of each
                 Government          Commitment Plan (ESCP),         messages      through        cell   for Component     month, quarterly,
                 entities            SEP, Grievance Mechanism        phones, Project and World             B, Consulting    bi-annual and
                                     (GRM)      procedures and       Bank websites, Print and               firms, IPs,         annual
                                     project information             electronic     media        like,      Individual
                                                                     Newspapers, Radio and Social        consultants and
                                                                     Media and Quarterly Printed                WB
                                                                     Newsletters.
                 Consultants         E&S principles and              Seminars, Workshops, FGDs,
                 Other relevant      obligations, ESCP,              Meetings, Progress review
                 Government          Consultation process/SEP        meetings, field visits,                 PIU ID for
                 departments         including GRM,                  capacity building programs           Component A,
                                     Environmental and Social        etc. Short Message Service                 PIU        Progress of each
                 Private
                                     Management Plans                (SMS) messages through cell          PHED/QWASA       month, quarterly,
                 Institutions
                                     (ESMPs), and Resettlement       phones, Project and World           for Component      bi-annual and
                                     Plans (RPs), Other E&S          Bank, website · Print and             B, Consulting        annual
                 Civil Society       instruments, Grievance          electronic media like,                Firms, NGOs
                 Organizations       Mechanism (GRM)                 Newspapers, Radio and                    and WB
                                     procedures and project          Social Media and Quarterly
                                     information                     Printed Newsletters.
                                                                     Outreach     through       local
                                                                     community       organizations,
                 Local
                                                                     One-on-one meetings, Focus
                 communities
                                                                     Groups             Discussions,
                 (Communities                                                                                PIU ID for
                                     Regular updates on project      Community Consultations,
                 around project                                                                           Component A,
                                     activities  and    specific     Short Message Service (SMS)
                 areas) and                                                                                     PIU        · Outreach through
                                     interventions   for    the      messages      through        cell
                 Vulnerable                                                                               PHED/QWASA         local community
                                     targeted groups, SEP and        phones, Project and World
                 groups (including                                                                       for Component         organizations
                                     GRM procedures, other           Bank websites. Print and
                 local labor,                                                                              B, Consulting
                                     E&S instruments                 electronic     media        like,
Implementation   disabled people,                                                                        Firms and NGOs
                                                                     Newspapers, Radio and Social
                 minorities, and
                                                                     Media, Public notices, Press
                 women)
                                                                     releases in the local media
                                                                     and on the project website.
                                     Scope        of     Project,                                                              Biannual
                                                                     Virtual    meetings.   Short
                                     opportunities             for                                           PIU ID for       Consultative
                                                                     Message     Service   (SMS)
                                     collaboration,       regular                                         Component A,       sessions with
                                                                     messages     through     cell
                 Other               updates       on     project                                               PIU        agencies to create
                                                                     phones, Project and World
                 International       progress, ESMPs and Other                                            PHED/QWASA        synergies in the
                                                                     Bank, website · Print and
                 Donors              E&S instruments, SEP and                                            for Component     work undertaken
                                                                     electronic    media     like,
                                     its implementation, Scope                                             B, Consulting       and avoid
                                                                     Newspapers, Radio and Social
                                     of Project, opportunities for                                       Firms and NGOs      duplication of
                                                                     Media.
                                     collaboration                                                                              efforts
                                                                                                                               Biannual
                                                                     PIU websites, Short Message             PIU ID for       Consultative
                                                                     Service (SMS) messages               Component A,       sessions with
                                     Scope       of      Project,    through cell phones, Project               PIU        agencies to create
                 NGOs,      Media
                                     opportunities            for    and World Bank, website ·            PHED/QWASA        synergies in the
                 representatives
                                     collaboration,                  Print and electronic media          for Component     work undertaken
                                                                     like, Newspapers, Radio and           B, Consulting       and avoid
                                                                     Social Media.                       Firms and NGOs      duplication of
                                                                                                                                efforts


                                                                     26
                            Scope        of     Project,    Bi-Annual            Project,
                                                                                                                   Biannual
                            opportunities             for   Dissemination Workshops,            PIU ID for
                                                                                                                 Consultative
                            collaboration,       regular    Short Message Service (SMS)      Component A,
                                                                                                              sessions to create
                            updates       on     project    messages      through    cell          PIU
                                                                                                               synergies in the
          Academia          progress, ESMPs and Other       phones, Project and World        PHED/QWASA
                                                                                                              work undertaken
                            E&S instruments, SEP and        Bank, website · Print and       for Component
                                                                                                                  and avoid
                            its implementation, Scope       electronic     media    like,     B, Consulting
                                                                                                                duplication of
                            of Project, opportunities for   Newspapers, Radio and Social    Firms and NGOs
                                                                                                                    efforts
                            collaboration                   Media.
                                                            PIU websites, Short Message
                                                                                               PIU ID for
                                                            Service (SMS) messages
                                                                                             Component A,
                            Frequently asked questions      through cell phones, Project
                                                                                                  PIU
          General public    (FAQs), SEP and GRM             and World Bank, website ·                          PIUs websites
                                                                                             PHED/QWASA
                            procedures                      Print and electronic media
                                                                                            for Component
                                                            like, Newspapers, Radio and
                                                                                              B websites
                                                            Social Media.



Proposed Strategy to Incorporate the View of Vulnerable Groups
Vulnerable stakeholders are not a homogenous group. Some may be receptive to immediate and direct
contact with a government agency, and may be vocal about their concerns. At the other extreme, there
may be some groups who are reluctant to be contacted at all, perhaps because of their legal status or any
other reason. Varying strategies will thus have to be adopted.
The project will conduct regular consultations with vulnerable groups through various partners and focal
persons. Following that, a strategy shall be formulated which will broadly follow the steps below.
Identification of Potential Partners: As a first step, NGOs and community-based organizations working
with vulnerable groups, including women’s groups shall be identified. This identification exercise will
classify these partners by a) area/location of operations; b) nature of intervention or type of activity; and
c) sector(s) of interest. A total of five or six organizations will be shortlisted for further engagement, and
to develop potential partnerships through the life of the project.
Consultation with Partners: At the next stage, meetings will be organized with representatives of the
chosen partners, at first individually, and then in a group, to apprise them of the objectives of the
stakeholder engagement program. The requirements of the stakeholder engagement program, with
regard to consultations with different groups, and vulnerable groups in particular, will be shared with
them, and their inputs sought on how best to establish contact and create an atmosphere of mutual trust.
The shortlisted partners will then be asked to enter into formal partnership agreements for the duration
of the project.
A workplan and strategy shall be prepared giving the timelines for outreach with different groups and
linked to different phases of project implementation. At each stage of project implementation, and for
each type of outreach activity, consultations shall be chalked out (in person, through community-based
organizations in the field), and how records of consultation will be maintained, and how concerns raised
etc. will be responded to.




                                                            27
Reporting Back to Stakeholders
Stakeholders will be kept informed as the project develops and on all available reference documents to
share information about the project and its processes during implementation. This will include reporting
on project environmental and social performance and implementation of the stakeholder engagement
plan and grievance mechanism. This will be important for the wider public, but specifically critical for the
directly impacted community members.



5. Resources and Responsibilities for Managing SEP Activities

Project Implementation Arrangement

The Balochistan Irrigation Department (BID) will be Implementation Agency for Component A while the
Balochistan PHED/QWASA will be the Implementation Agency for Component B. The Balochistan ID will
rely on the existing PMU of the BIWRMDP for project management, with enhancements in capacities as
required. For the PHE Department, a new project implementing unit will be created and staffed with
QWASA staff and relevant specialists.

For both PIUs, project management functions will include staffing, procurement, contract management,
monitoring and evaluation, environment, social safeguard, project supervision, and financial
management. While the PIUs will also be responsible for collaboration with the communities, customers,
community organizations and the farmers’ organizations, and for sub-project implementation. The PIUs
will benefit from capacity strengthening during project preparation and implementation. The project
design will include a robust Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning system. The PIUs will have the overall
responsibility for project monitoring and evaluation in their respective domains and locations but will
outsource an M&E consultant for support. They will both benefit from a robust technical assistance
through project design and supervision consultants.

The PIUs will be responsible for collaboration with the communities, community organizations and the
farmers’ organizations, as well as for sub-project implementation. The PIUs shall be headed by
independent Project Directors.

The BID and PHED/QWASA PIUs will be responsible for the implementation of the SEP activities
independently.


Project Steering Committee (PSC)
A Steering Committee will be established to provide planning and strategic guidance, and to facilitate
inter-agency coordination. The Project Steering Committee will be responsible for the projects overall
management, policies and supervision. The Steering Committee will meet as a minimum on a quarterly

                                                    28
basis, or more often if necessary. The Steering Committee will be chaired by the Additional Chief Secretary
(Development) of the Department of Planning and Development and the Project Director will be an ex-
officio member and Secretary (of the PSC) with the following members:
     • Secretary Irrigation Department;
     • Secretary Agriculture Department;
     • Secretary Forestry Department;
     • Secretary Public Health Engineering Department;
     • MD QWASA


Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements

The project design will include a robust Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning system. The BID and
PHED/QWASA PIUs will have the overall responsibility for project monitoring and evaluation and regular
reporting to the Bank, but will outsource an M&E consultant for support. The Project will establish a MIS
system for both PIUs to facilitate project management and reporting. The Project will also support the
creation of a dedicated WMIS system adapted for QWASA operations.

In the course of project implementation, the SEP will be periodically updated, as necessary, consistent
with the requirements of ESS10, in a manner acceptable to the Bank. Any major changes to the project
related activities and to its schedule will be duly reflected in the SEP. The PIUs will prepare and submit to
the Bank quarterly and annual SEP implementation reports, including the GRM. The quarterly summaries
will provide a mechanism for assessing both the number and the nature of complaints and requests for
information, along with the Project’s ability to address those in a timely and effective manner.
Information on public engagement activities undertaken by the Project during the year will be conveyed
to the stakeholders in following the ways: (i) publication of a standalone annual report on project’s
stakeholder engagement; and (ii) Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) will also be included and monitored
by the project on a regular basis as part of the Community Communication and Outreach Guideline.
Further details will be outlined in the updated SEP, to be prepared within 60 days of effectiveness,
including the establishment of detailed stakeholder’s communication guideline.



Resources for SEP Implementation
It is proposed at this stage that implementation budget of the SEP in lump-sum will be Rs. 100 Million.
However that may further be assessed later on as this SEP will update within 60 days of project
effectiveness with PIUs wise allocation. Therefore, this SEP will include all costs related to ongoing
engagement with stakeholders, information disclosure, grievance redress, and other activities described
in the SEP. The budgetary estimates will also be assessed for the following items to be covered to
effectively implement the SEP.
Table 11: Proposed items for the budget


 Item                                                  Comments


                                                     29
 Stakeholder engagement events (Seminars, dialogues,   Covers all organized events for mass stakeholder
 workshops, and meetings, etc.)                        engagement, and includes location costs, technical
                                                       services, catering, materials, etc.

 Community consultations                               All stakeholder engagement          carried   out   with
                                                       communities in the field


 Mass communications campaigns                         For awareness raising campaigns. Includes ad-space
                                                       costs, printing, technical development of materials, etc.


 SEP and other instruments training activities         Related to training provided to project teams on SEP
                                                       implementation, including GRM training.


 Travel costs                                          For traveling of staff involved in implementing the SEP

 Miscellaneous costs                                   Other miscellaneous or unplanned costs

 Communications Strategy                               Strategy development and implementation

 GRM implementation


6. Grievance Redress Mechanism
A Grievance Mechanism is a system which allows not only grievances, but also queries, suggestions,
positive feedback, and concerns of project-affected parties related to all kinds of project related issues,
including its environmental and social performance, to be submitted and responded to in a timely manner.
Therefore, the project will prepare a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) through which, the project
staff, affected persons, workers, contractors, departmental staff as well as interested persons, local
communities and the general public will be able to raise issues on the project. The GRM will guarantee
privacy and confidentiality on the part of the aggrieved party. Different type of expected grievances can
be foreseen during the project period such as, grievances about the designs of the schemes, acquisition
of lands, acquisition of material from the surroundings local land, labor issues, facilitation issues in the
labor camps, GBV/SEAH issues, security issues, harassments in any form etc. There may be more type of
grievances that can be assessed during the course of actions.


Objectives of GRM:
The main objective of a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) is to assist resolve complaints in a timely,
effective and efficient manner. Project-level GRM can provide the most effective way for people to raise
issues and concerns about project activities that affect them. The project will have two separate GRMs
for Component A and Component B, established in PIU BID and PIU PHED/QWASA, respectively and the
GRMs will be culturally appropriate, effective, accessible and should be known to the affected population.
The PIUs and its partners’ organizations will involve and conduct awareness raising sessions for the


                                                    30
affected persons and communities about the presence of the GRM and inform their right to file any
concerns, complaints and issues they have related to the project and its interventions.
The GRM provides a transparent and credible process for fair, effective and long lasting outcome. It also
builds trust and cooperation as an integral component of broader consultation that facilitates corrective
actions. Specifically, the GRM:
    •   Provides affected people with avenues for making a complaint or resolving any dispute that may
        arise during the project implementation;
    •   Ensures that appropriate and mutually acceptable redress actions are identified and implemented
        to the satisfaction of complainants; and
    •   Avoids the need to resort to judicial proceedings
    •   ensure that the targeted and affected communities/individuals are treated fairly at all times and
        given importance especially whenever they submit the complaints against any works of the
        project which affect them and may not benefit properly.
    •   identify systemic flaws in the operational functions of the project and suggest corrective
        measures; and
    •   ensure that the operation of the project is in line with its conception and transparently to achieve
        the goals for sustainability of the project
GRM System
The existing Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) of the Balochistan Integrated Water Resources
Management and Development Project (BIWRMDP) serves as the foundation upon which we are building
and improving for the Balochistan Water Security and Productivity Improvement Project (BWSPIP). The
BIWRMDP's GRM is comprehensive and functional, with a four-tiered structure that facilitates grievance
submission through various channels, including online forms, written documents, SMS, WhatsApp, and
postal services. Grievances are acknowledged and resolved within a clear 20-day timeframe, managed by
a Grievance Redress Committee (GRC) at the Project Management Unit (PMU) level, and escalated
appeals are addressed by the Project Steering Committee. This well-established system ensures all
complaints are recorded promptly, assessed for relevance, and resolved with due diligence, setting a
robust precedent for the enhanced GRM system we aim to implement for BWSPIP.
Building upon the well-established and functional GRM of the BIWRMDP, the BWSPIP will enhance this
existing system while introducing two separate GRMs for each PIU- one for the Irrigation Department
(BID) and another for the Public Health Engineering Department (PHED/QWASA). Each PIU will
independently manage their complaints, maintaining clear and effective channels for grievance
submission, and reporting to the World Bank.


A. GRM for Component A- implemented by Balochistan ID




                                                    31
Step                Description of process                    Timeframe    Responsibility
GM implementation   The structure will be integrated at       Continuous   PIU Balochistan ID
structure           provincial and local levels with clear
                    reporting lines to the PIU.

                    For Component A, the GRM will be
                    implemented by the Balochistan ID. A
                    Grievance Redress Committee will be
                    formed at the PIU level, including the
                    Project Director, Environmental
                    Compliance Expert, Gender Specialist,
                    Member from District PHE Office,
                    Member from District Forest Office,
                    Member from District Office OFWM,
                    Social Safeguard Specialist, Member
                    Engineer from PISAC and co-opted
                    members from relevant government
                    departments as required. The Social
                    Safeguard Specialist at the PIU will be
                    responsible for the overall operation
                    of the GRM and will be the Grievance
                    Redressal Officer (GRO) of the
                    project.

                    At the district level, Grievance Focal
                    Persons will be appointed in each
                    district.

                    Grievances may be recorded through
                    the available GRM channels, the local
                    level GFPs, or directly with the Social
                    Specialist at the PIU.
Grievance uptake    Grievances can be submitted via the       Upon         PIU GRC
                    following channels:                       submission
                    • Toll-free telephone hotline:
                         [include number] operated by                      Grievance Focal Persons
                         [insert]
                    • Short Message Service (SMS) to
                         [include number]
                    • E-mail to [insert]
                    • In-person through the GFPs, or
                         PIU-GRC.
                    • Grievance or suggestion boxes
                         located at all project locations
                    • Online form on the BID and/or
                         project website
                    • Postal services
                    • WhatsApp number:


                                                     32
Step                  Description of process                     Timeframe         Responsibility
                      Complaints can be submitted in
                      person to the Grievance Focal Persons
                      or via dedicated phone lines, email
                      addresses and suggestion boxes
                      provided at local community centres.
Sorting, processing   The PIU GRC will be responsible to         Upon receipt of   PIU GRO
                      receive, log and investigate               complaint
                      grievances. However, if the GRC is
                      unable to resolve the grievances, the
                      grievances will be referred to the
                      Project Steering Committee (PSC).

                      Any complaint received is logged in an
                      online complaint registration system
                      at the PIU level. The system will pick
                      up relevant complaints from the
                      website and social media, as well as
                      complaints registered on it directly.
                      Grievances are then categorized into
                      the following complaint types: Low;
                      Medium; and High priority.

                      Low priority: these typically involve
                      minor issues that do not significantly
                      impact the overall project or the
                      complainants’ well-being. Examples
                      could include minor administrative
                      errors, delays in non-critical services,
                      or small-scale individual grievances
                      that can be resolved locally, with the
                      GFP, without extensive intervention.

                      Medium priority: these are more
                      serious than low priority complaints
                      but do not pose immediate or
                      significant risks to the project’s
                      success or stakeholders’ rights and
                      interests. These might include
                      disputes over employment terms,
                      moderate environmental impacts, or
                      concerns about project
                      implementation aspects that affect a
                      limited number of stakeholders.




                                                        33
Step                    Description of process                      Timeframe       Responsibility
                        High priority: these are critical issues
                        that require urgent attention and
                        could significantly impact the
                        project’s success and the well-being
                        of stakeholders. Examples could
                        include violation of the law of the
                        land, corruption, GBV, SEAH (sexual
                        exploitation, abuse and harassment),
                        community rights, significant health
                        and safety concerns, allegations of
                        serious environmental harm;
                        complaints regarding minorities,
                        differently abled persons,
                        transgender etc.
Acknowledgement         Receipt of the grievance is                 Within 5 days   Social Specialist at PIU
and follow-up           acknowledged to the complainant by          of receipt
                        the Social Safeguard Specialist at the
                        PIU via acknowledgement letter or
                        email. Depending on accessibility, the
                        Specialist may instruct the relevant
                        GFP to convey acknowledgement
Verification,           Low priority grievances may be              Within 10       Grievance Focal Persons,
investigation, action   investigated and resolved directly by       working days    PIU GRC
                        the GFP, in consultation with the PIU       for low and
                        GRC. If the grievance is unable to be       medium; and
                        resolved, its priority is upgraded to       15 working
                        medium priority.                            days for high
                                                                    priority
                        Medium priority grievances are
                        investigated and resolved by the PIU
                        GRC. The GRC may enlist the relevant
                        GFP to assist in verification and
                        investigation. If the grievance remains
                        unresolved, its priority is upgraded to
                        high priority.

                        High priority grievances are
                        investigated by a special committee if
                        required, with resolutions proposed
                        by the PIU-level GRC. The GRC may
                        enlist GFPs to assist in verification and
                        identification.




                                                          34
Step              Description of process                    Timeframe         Responsibility
                  For all levels of grievance, the
                  proposed resolution is formulated by
                  the overseeing entity (varying
                  depending on the grievance priority),
                  and the resolution is communicated
                  to the complainant by the GRC/GFP
                  where the complaint was first
                  received.
Monitoring and    Data on complaints are collected in a      Quarterly        PIU GRO
evaluation        dedicated grievance management            reporting
                  system at the PIU GRC. Grievance
                  data is reported to the World Bank on
                  a quarterly basis
Provision of      Feedback from complainants                Post-resolution   Grievance Focal Persons
feedback          regarding their satisfaction with
                  complaint resolution is collected
                  through follow-up surveys or
                  interviews after the resolution
                  process.
Training          Training needs for staff/consultants in   Annually or as    PIU
                  the PIU, Contractors and Supervision      needed
                  Consultants are identified and
                  addressed through regular capacity-
                  building workshops and on-the-job
                  training programs, focusing on
                  grievance redress mechanisms, social
                  engagement and environmental
                  compliance.

                  Ongoing training for all levels of the
                  GRM structure on handling grievances
                  effectively and sensitively.
Appeals process   The GRM will also include a system        Within 5 days     PSC
                  for appeals. If a complainant is          of appeal
                  unsatisfied with the resolution of the
                  grievance, they will be able to lodge
                  an appeal with the Project Steering
                  Committee (PSC).



B. GRM for Component B- implemented by Balochistan PHED/QWASA




                                                  35
Step                Description of process                      Timeframe    Responsibility
GM implementation   The structure will be integrated at         Continuous   PIU Balochistan
structure           provincial and local levels with clear                   PHED/QWASA
                    reporting lines to the PIU.

                    For Component B, the GRM will be
                    implemented by the Balochistan
                    PHED/QWASA. A Grievance Redress
                    Committee will be formed at the PIU
                    level, including the Project Director,
                    Environmental Compliance Expert,
                    Gender Specialist, Member from PHE,
                    Social Safeguard Specialist, Member
                    from QWASA, Member Engineer from
                    PSDC and co-opted members from
                    relevant government departments as
                    required. The Social Safeguard
                    Specialist at the PIU will be
                    responsible for the overall operation
                    of the GRM and will be the Grievance
                    Redressal Officer (GRO) of the
                    project.

                    Community Focal Points (CFPs) will be
                    appointed in sub-project areas.

                    Grievances may be recorded through
                    the available GRM channels, the CFPs,
                    or directly with the Social Specialist at
                    the PIU.
Grievance uptake    Grievances can be submitted via the         Upon         PIU GRC
                    following channels:                         submission
                    • Toll-free telephone hotline:
                         [include number] operated by                        CFPs
                         [insert]
                    • Short Message Service (SMS) to
                         [include number]
                    • E-mail to [insert]
                    • In-person through the CFPs, or
                         PIU-GRC.
                    • Grievance or suggestion boxes
                         located at all project locations
                    • Online form on the
                         PHED/QWASA and/or project
                         website
                    • Postal services
                    • WhatsApp number:



                                                      36
Step                  Description of process                     Timeframe         Responsibility
                      Complaints can be submitted in
                      person to the Community Focal Points
                      or via dedicated phone lines, email
                      addresses and suggestion boxes
                      provided at sub-project sites.
Sorting, processing   The PIU GRC will be responsible to         Upon receipt of   PIU GRO
                      receive, log and investigate               complaint
                      grievances. However, if the GRC is
                      unable to resolve the grievances, the
                      grievances will be referred to the
                      Project Steering Committee (PSC).

                      Any complaint received is logged in an
                      online complaint registration system
                      at the PIU level. The system will pick
                      up relevant complaints from the
                      website and social media, as well as
                      complaints registered on it directly.
                      Grievances are then categorized into
                      the following complaint types: Low;
                      Medium; and High priority.

                      Low priority: these typically involve
                      minor issues that do not significantly
                      impact the overall project or the
                      complainants’ well-being. Examples
                      could include minor administrative
                      errors, delays in non-critical services,
                      or small-scale individual grievances
                      that can be resolved locally, with the
                      CFP, without extensive intervention.

                      Medium priority: these are more
                      serious than low priority complaints
                      but do not pose immediate or
                      significant risks to the project’s
                      success or stakeholders’ rights and
                      interests. These might include
                      disputes over employment terms,
                      moderate environmental impacts, or
                      concerns about project
                      implementation aspects that affect a
                      limited number of stakeholders.




                                                        37
Step                    Description of process                      Timeframe       Responsibility
                        High priority: these are critical issues
                        that require urgent attention and
                        could significantly impact the
                        project’s success and the well-being
                        of stakeholders. Examples could
                        include violation of the law of the
                        land, corruption, GBV, SEAH (sexual
                        exploitation, abuse and harassment),
                        community rights, significant health
                        and safety concerns, allegations of
                        serious environmental harm;
                        complaints regarding minorities,
                        differently abled persons,
                        transgender etc.
Acknowledgement         Receipt of the grievance is                 Within 5 days   Social Specialist at PIU
and follow-up           acknowledged to the complainant by          of receipt
                        the Social Safeguard Specialist at the
                        PIU via acknowledgement letter or
                        email. Depending on accessibility, the
                        Specialist may instruct the relevant
                        CFP to convey acknowledgement
Verification,           Low priority grievances may be              Within 10       Community Focal Points,
investigation, action   investigated and resolved directly by       working days    PIU GRC
                        the CFP, in consultation with the PIU       for low and
                        GRC. If the grievance is unable to be       medium; and
                        resolved, its priority is upgraded to       15 working
                        medium priority.                            days for high
                                                                    priority
                        Medium priority grievances are
                        investigated and resolved by the PIU
                        GRC. The GRC may enlist the relevant
                        CFP to assist in verification and
                        investigation. If the grievance remains
                        unresolved, its priority is upgraded to
                        high priority.

                        High priority grievances are
                        investigated by a special committee if
                        required, with resolutions proposed
                        by the PIU-level GRC. The GRC may
                        enlist CFPs to assist in verification and
                        identification.




                                                          38
 Step                 Description of process                    Timeframe         Responsibility
                      For all levels of grievance, the
                      proposed resolution is formulated by
                      the overseeing entity (varying
                      depending on the grievance priority),
                      and the resolution is communicated
                      to the complainant by the GRC/CFP
                      where the complaint was first
                      received.
 Monitoring and       Data on complaints are collected in a      Quarterly        PIU GRO
 evaluation           dedicated grievance management            reporting
                      system at the PIU GRC. Grievance
                      data is reported to the World Bank on
                      a quarterly basis
 Provision of         Feedback from complainants                Post-resolution   CFPs
 feedback             regarding their satisfaction with
                      complaint resolution is collected
                      through follow-up surveys or
                      interviews after the resolution
                      process.
 Training             Training needs for staff/consultants in   Annually or as    PIU
                      the PIU, Contractors and Supervision      needed
                      Consultants are identified and
                      addressed through regular capacity-
                      building workshops and on-the-job
                      training programs, focusing on
                      grievance redress mechanisms, social
                      engagement and environmental
                      compliance.

                      Ongoing training for all levels of the
                      GRM structure on handling grievances
                      effectively and sensitively.
 Appeals process      The GRM will also include a system        Within 5 days     PSC
                      for appeals. If a complainant is          of appeal
                      unsatisfied with the resolution of the
                      grievance, they will be able to lodge
                      an appeal with the Project Steering
                      Committee (PSC).



Responding to GBV/SEA/SH Complaints:
The GRM will also be responsive to GBV/SEA/SH complaints and will follow necessary protocols to ensure
that complaints are made anonymously with a high degree of discretion. Grievances specifically
concerning GBV/SEA/SH will be triaged and referred to GBV/SEA/SH specialists for adequate support and
redress. To cater to all the above mentioned policy statements and its proposed Code of Conduct
primitively, separate GBV committees will be formed in each administrative set up i.e. in the BID and the
PHED/QWASA PIUs for GBV/SEA/SH specific complaints. Similarly, a detailed procedure for GBV/SEAH
                                                  39
complaints will also be prepared as part of the GBV Action Plan and this SEP and GRM will be updated
accordingly.

Workers GRM:
ESS2 mandates that borrowers (organizations or entities involved in the project) must establish a
Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) for workers. This mechanism is designed to address and resolve the
grievances of both direct and contracted workers. Workers need to be informed about the existence of
this Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) at the time of their employment entry and also throughout the
duration of their employment. This ensures that workers have a proper channel to voice their concerns
and seek resolution for any issues they may encounter during their work. Each PIU will have a separate
GRM for workers. Contractors and consultant firms will also be required to establish workers GRMs as per
the requirements of the project. The workers GRM, roles and responsibilities have been detailed in the
project Labor Management Procedures (LMP). The workers GRM will include procedures for receiving and
managing GBV/SEAH complaints as per the requirements of the GBV Action Plan.

Monitoring and Reporting
The project will provide quarterly summaries of the GRM to the World Bank. This will provide a mechanism
for assessing both the number and the nature of complaints and requests for information, along with the
Project’s ability to address those in a timely and effective manner.




                                                  40
Annexure 1: Consultations and Prescription Guide/Questionnaire

Consultations of Component A

                 Feedback and Concerns                           Proposed Measures to address the Stakeholders’ Concerns
❖ Almost the stakeholder of all settlements of the project ❖ The proposed project has been initiated by Irrigation Department to
  area requested that they want water for their life and     give the water for settlements through effective flood management
  their livelihood.                                          and to build the ponds for water storage.

❖ Concerned authorities who will be familiar the ❖ Definitely, all project stakeholders will ensure the community respect
  outcomes of the project and they will ensure to give and safety and will incorporate community's views in the project
  respect with community’s views and concerns.         documents.

❖ Employment opportunities should be provided to local ❖ The contractor will be contractually bound to disclose the
  skilled and unskilled labour in the project, as to improve “Recruitment Policy” that specifically includes a requirement to
  the livelihood of the locals.                              prioritize local employment for unskilled and semi-skilled positions
                                                             that become available.

❖ What is meant by Affected Persons?                       ❖ Any person or household adversely affected by any project related
                                                             change in terms of use of land, water or other natural resources, or
                                                             who loses any asset or property movable or fixed, in full or in part
                                                             including land, with or without displacement or anyone who losses his
                                                             source of livelihoods or means of livelihoods or if he/she may face any
                                                             dimmest in his/her livelihoods or any other person who establishes
                                                             his/her right as an affected person.
❖ What are the objective of this consultation?
                                                           ❖ This consultation process was held with the objectives of sharing
                                                             information with stakeholders on proposed improvement works and
                                                             expected impacts on the physical, biological and socio-economic
                                                             environment; understanding stakeholder concerns regarding various
                                                             aspects of the project; providing an opportunity to the public to
                                                             influence project design in a positive manner; and creating a sense of
                                                             ownership of the proposal in the mind of the stakeholders.
❖ Compensation for the houses and other private/
                                                      ❖ The valuation of built-up structures is based on current market value
  community assets should be fixed in accordance with
                                                        but with consideration of the cost of new construction of the
  current market rates/replacement cost.
                                                        structure, with no deduction for depreciation.
❖ People were also concerned that the workers and
  laborers will be brought by the Contractor from outside ❖ The contractor will be contractually bound to disclose the
  the project area and an opportunity of employment         “Recruitment Policy” that specifically includes a requirement to
  generated locally shall be availed by the people from     prioritize local employment for unskilled and semi-skilled positions
  other areas.                                              that become available.

❖ Access road in the area which is badly affected due to
  flood should be rehabilitated.                         ❖ Contractor will take care during construction not to damage any
❖ Existing roads should not be damaged and new access      roads. If roads will be damaged, Contractor will repair the roads.
  road should be provided.
❖ Is there a grievance redress mechanism system in place ❖ There is a grievance redress mechanism in place which with
  and will it be effective?                                cooperation from the client is expected to handle any issues fairly.
❖ One of the participant told that before start of
  construction activities of the project, The Contractor ❖ Prior to starting of work, the contractor shall prepare a method
  will inform residents of the area about detail of work,  statement for major construction activities and share with all
  likely disturbances and their duration and as to whom    stakeholders. This shall be simple and explain the contractor’s work
  they should address their complaints.                    process that is actually conducted on site, with safety and safeguard
                                                           concerns.

❖ One of the participant said that the safety of the public
  at all stages of the construction will be ensured.        ❖ During the project implementation stage, measures will be prepared
                                                              that will include GRM and institutional arrangements.

❖ Why is compensation given to the Aps encroach the ❖ This project is financed by World Bank and according to the policies
  Government owned RoW and Govt has right to restore       of WB, compensation cost for loss of structure will be paid to the
  their land back by removing the encroachments and it     Affected Persons who have no entitlement of land but their structures
  is not objectionable for us?                             will lose due to site clearance.
❖ Religious and educational structures like mosques,
  madrassas and graveyards should be saved from ❖ Generally, relocation of Mosques, graves, residential structures has
  demolishing as such as possible.                         been avoided except those ones which are unavoidable to relocate.
                                                           However, re-building/ re-settlement of such social, religious
                                                           structures will be ensured.
❖ The rehabilitation of these water resources will be
  beneficial for the entire area and also beneficial for ❖ This project team committed to providing local residents for effective,
  social and a significant environmental enhancement is    comfortable and healthy environment.
  also expected.
❖ It was also mentioned that the relevant Government ❖ During the project implementation stage, measures will be prepared
  personnel must ensure the Contractor staff is                that will include GRM and institutional arrangements.
  cooperative with the general public and maintain the
  right attitude and try to facilitate them instead of being
  confrontational.
❖ The landlords of the area suggested that they are not
  ready to get compensation for the land which will be ❖ World Bank safeguard policies are very clear about the compensation.
  used for drinking water and they want to give land for
  drinking water voluntarily.
❖ Adequate compensation for the loss of land. Payments
  to be made only to the legitimate owners at the ❖ The principles and procedures for the valuation of assets at market
  prevailing market rates.                                     rate will be laid down in the report in detail if needed.
❖ In case of a complaint what a common people can do?
                                                             ❖ Resettlement expert explained the GRM in detail to the local and
                                                               affected people.
❖ Employment        opportunities should be provided to
  local skilled and unskilled labour in the project, as to ❖ Contractors will give preference to the local skilled and unskilled
  improve the livelihood of the locals. At least one third     labour, preference will also be given to the PAPs.
  of the local community, especially PAPs, should be ❖ Irrigation department will also support the local communities to
  engaged in the project related jobs.                         improve their skills in construction activities.
❖ Whether local labour resources will be used during ❖ Defiantly, the contractor will be contractually bound to disclose the
  construction and operation phases of the Project     “Recruitment Policy” that specifically includes a requirement to
                                                       prioritize local employment for unskilled and semi-skilled positions
                                                       that become available.
❖ The stakeholders also expressed the desire to receive ❖ Comment has been incorporated in the ESMP report
  regular updates on the project development from the
  relevant Government departments.

❖ The community perception of the project is good and ❖ The proposed project will be start soon.
  most of the people wish to see immediate
  implementation of the project.

                                                             1
❖ The local representatives of the community requested ❖ Comment has been incorporated in the ESIA report
  to raise awareness about tree plantation.



❖ The local representatives of the community requested ❖ The contractor will be developed and enforced a strict code of
  that the staff of contractor should be cooperate with   conduct for workers to regulate behaviour in the local communities.
  local communities on their cultural norms and values. ❖ To avoid conflicts among local people on employment matter, it is
                                                          proposed that the Contractor employs the locals in cooperation with
                                                          local administration in unskilled and semi-skilled duties. This will
                                                          reduce pressure on existing resources such as housing, schools and
                                                          health facilities.

❖ Privacy and security of local people should not be ❖ Privacy and security of the local residents is the prime responsibility
  disturbed due to construction work.                  of all concerned departments, contractors and the consultants.

❖ The stakeholders requested the concerned authorities ❖ A fully capable Project Team of PMU Irrigation Department has been
  to ensure the project was completed on a fast track    setup to mitigate weaknesses in certain specialized areas, as well as
  basis and hoped it would not suffer any delays.        consultants to further strengthen the team in project preparation and
                                                         implementation.



Consultations of Component B
Consultation with Communities of Quetta:

Findings and recommended actions of consultation with the communities along the proposed surface
water sources are presented as follows;

Overall Findings of the consultations:

The overall region of Quetta Division is water stressed zone. Proper water resources management plays
a crucial role in Quetta’s development and survival as a capital city. Large influx of migrants and refugees
explosively increased population and water demand in the last 30 - 40 years. Coupled with rapidly
dropping groundwater levels, the city and surrounding villages need massive and rapid intervention to
rectify and improve its water supply situation.

Community acceptance and cooperation are most important factors for the feasibility of the selected
short-term sub-projects. Therefore, in this report, great emphasis was put on the social dimensions
associated with the planning, implementation and sustainable operation of the envisioned ensuing sub-
projects.

In general, the social aspects of the reported sub-projects are (i) the beneficiaries of the project are the
citizens of Quetta city; and (ii) the communities settled in the vicinity of the sub-projectsare the owners
of the land or perceived as actual beneficiaries (in term of incremental recharge of groundwater or direct
use for irrigation and domestic use) of the commissioned and under construction dam sub-project are
non-beneficiaries or disadvantaged communities under the proposed withdrawal of raw water for Quetta
city. Therefore, to avoid social conflicts on the sub - projects at the construction stage, the following action
are imperative for the feasibility of the sub- projects;

This is an initial consultation (covered in this report) and in future meaningful consultationwith the legally
entitled land-owning community’s participation;
                                                        2
Signing of formal agreements between B-WASA/PHE or Balochistan Irrigation department and
involvement are important factors towards the feasibility and success of the project; and;

Participatory development processes need to be mainstreamed during the project preparation,
construction and O&M process or its activities.

Overall; the communities’ perceptions the land-owning communities in term of Dam construction and
installation of transmission pipelines for water withdrawal was conditionally appreciative and expressed
their concurrence. They have one concern that in future when the population growth increases and the
demand water would be high, if the complete right of water use is given to BWASA/PHE, they
(communities) will be deprived from the right of water use for drinking and irrigation. The sub-project
wise consultation findings are discussed as follows;

Sra Ghurgai Dam Village

During consultation with the tribal elder Malik Mohammad Khan, it was ascertained that they are willing
to provide Sra Ghurgai Dam reservoir water for Quetta city but have requested for some time to discuss
the matter with the existing village committee (a community-based organization).

It was informed by the tribal elder that in the past B-WASA developed eleven tube wells in their communal
hill terrains situated in north of the village. Consequently, the Thalari Kareze which was major source
of water for drinking and irrigation purposes of the village was dried up. At that time, the villagers were
well aware of the reported negative consequences of the tube wells development at the source of Thalari
Kareze and have signed an agreement with B-WASA to provide drinking water to Sra Ghurgai on first
priority. However, the following actions are proposed for the Sra Ghurgai Dam sub-project;

Meaningful consultation with the respective communities is required and their request for allocation of
proportionate water share for irrigation and drinking needs to be considered.

It was reported that the dam reservoir is silted up due to high sediment load in the river and last year, the
communities pumped water for irrigation and the reservoir was emptied within three days’ time period.

Sra Khula Dam village:

Overall the communities were willing to allow construction of the Dam and withdrawal of water for Quetta
city with some conditions. During consultation, it was informed that there is another existing Dam in the
name Bhaggi Dam commissioned in 1960s and completely silted up. B-WASA installed a tube well in the
reservoir of the Bhaggi Dam in 2007 and a commitment was agreed with the villagers to they will provide
appropriate share of water to the community for irrigation and drinking purposes. But unfortunately,
this agreement was not respected by one of the party, therefore, this tube well is still non- functional.

Based on the past practices which persist in the area, the B-WASA/PHE or Balochistan Irrigation
Department needs to sign a formal agreement with the legally entitled land-owning communities interm
of allocation of proper share of water for drinking and irrigation, provision of regular employment
opportunities (if required for O&M of Dam and transmission pipeline) to the local people.




                                                     3
Kach Dam Village:

During consultation in Malik Shabo village and Sra Ghurgai village, the water rights of the Kach Dam are
claimed by two villages i.e. Malik Payand Killi (also known as Killi Shabak) and residents of the Sra Ghurgai
village. Therefore, it was ascertained that dispute may be raised over the employment and community
water share demanded for drinking and irrigation purposes during construction or after construction of
the project.

During detailed studies, review of the cadastral record it will be required to confirm the legal
ownership of the land. Accordingly, further meaningful consultation needs to be carried out with the legal
owners of the land. An agreement between B-WASA/PHE or Baluchistan Irrigation Department and
legally entitled land-owning communities on the same course of action proposed for Sra Khula is
required. The villagers of the Shabak Killi reported that the land of the under construction Kach Dam is
communal property of the village and the following principal shareholders have land rights.


Annexure 2: Pictures of the consultations meetings




                                          Figure 1-2: Kick off Meeting with PMU.




                                             Figure 1-7 Meeting with QQ-WASA Team




                                                              4
Figure 1-6 Consultation with World Bank teamand PMU for Interventions Figure 1-4 Meeting with Secretary Irrigation,Project Director and
QMES.




         FGD with the Communities of Sra Khula Village                       FGD with the Communities of Sra Khula Village




     Consultation with the Tribal elder MalikMuhammad
               Khan Bazai of Sra Ghurgai village




                                                                  5
