Public Disclosure Authorized
                                          The World Bank
                                          Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (PASBAP) (P179643)



                                      @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                        Project Information Document (PID)

Public Disclosure Authorized



            _For Official Use Only_
                                                       Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 07-Nov-2025 | Report No: PIDA0046




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (PASBAP) (P179643)


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
                          BASIC INFORMATION


                          A. Basic Project Data

                          Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                        Operation ID                  Operation Name
                                                                                                                     Access to Basic Services
                                                         WESTERN AND CENTRAL                                         and Performance
                          Gabon                                                        P179643
                                                         AFRICA                                                      Improvement Project
                                                                                                                     (PASBAP)
                          Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date      Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
                          Investment Project
                                                         07-Aug-2025                   22-Dec-2025                   Water
                          Financing (IPF)
                          Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                          Gabonese Republic,
                                                         Ministry of Universal
                          Ministry of Economy,
                                                         Access to Water and




_For Official Use Only_
                          Finance, Debt, and
                                                         Energy, CN-TIPPEE,
                          Holdings, Responsible for
                                                         Gabonese Energy and
                          Combating the High Cost of
                                                         Water Company (SEEG)
                          Living

                          Proposed Development Objective(s)
                          The PDO is to increase access to water supply, sanitation, and electricity services and improve performance in the
                          water supply and electricity sectors in Gabon.

                          Components
                          Component 1: Water Supply and Sanitation Services
                          Component 2: Electricity Services
                          Component 3: PIR Strengthening for Improved Basic Services
                          Component 4: Project Management
                          Component 5: Contingent Emergency Response Component - CERC

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                          Maximizing Finance for Development

                          Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                    Yes
                          Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?              Yes

                          SUMMARY


                                                                                                                                                Page 1



                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
                                The World Bank
                                Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (PASBAP) (P179643)



                             Total Operation Cost                                                                    150.00

                             Total Financing                                                                         150.00
                                        of which IBRD/IDA                                                            150.00
                             Financing Gap                                                                              0.00

                           DETAILS
                             World Bank Group Financing
                               International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                          150.00




                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
                          Environmental And Social Risk Classification
                          Substantial




_For Official Use Only_
                           Decision
                           The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate




                          Other Decision (as needed)




                                                                                                                          Page 2



                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (PASBAP) (P179643)


                          B. Introduction and Context
                          Country Context
                          1.     Despite being one of only two upper-middle income countries in sub-Saharan Africa, one in five Gabonese is
                          unemployed, and over a third of Gabonese live in poverty due to lack of employment opportunities and income
                          generation. About a third of the country’s youth is disengaged from work, education, or training, leading to a loss in
                          human capital. Insufficient job creation and limited income-generating activities and social protection contribute to
                          poverty. Manufacturers and other industries with improved access to energy and water services tend to generate more
                          jobs,1 while the World Bank (WB) Enterprise Surveys ranked gaps in electricity among the top barriers to business
                          development.2
                          2.     Access to and the quality of basic services need to be improved to drive human capital development and more
                          inclusive economic opportunity through jobs, while reducing preventable health challenges. Gabon’s living standards
                          and access to basic services such as water, electricity, and sanitation are lower than the average of its peer countries. For
                          example, access to at least basic water and sanitation services were at 86.9 percent and 49.9 percent respectively of the
                          population in 2022, compared with an average of 98 percent and 94 percent respectively in upper middle-income
                          countries (UNICEF/WHO). These challenges are intertwined, as a mortality rate of 17.5 per 100,000 people is directly
                          attributed to unsafe water supply, sanitation, and hygiene services, which is more than three times the average in upper
                          middle-income countries.3 Addressing these systemic inequities is critical not only for reducing poverty, but also for
                          building resilience to climate risks, which are increasingly threatening public infrastructure and livelihoods.




_For Official Use Only_
                          Sectoral and Institutional Context
                          3.     Water supply, sanitation, and energy are identified as priority sectors under Pillar 1 (Electricity, Water and
                          Sector Reform) of Gabon’s National Development Plan 2025-2032 (Plan de Développement National, PDN), which
                          seeks to improve living conditions and support economic development. For both water supply and electricity, the PDN
                          places an emphasis on efficiency improvement, especially in transmission and distribution networks, while continuing to
                          expand services and production facilities to address the needs of unserved populations. Complemented by major sectoral
                          reforms such as the separation of water and electricity services into distinct utilities, the PDN aims to address the poor
                          performance of service providers and clarify roles and responsibilities for better sector governance.
                          4.      Despite abundant water resources, poor water supply services and limited coverage of sanitation services
                          hinder Gabon’s human capital and socio-economic development, including job creation. According to UNICEF/WHO,
                          90 percent of the 2.21 million people in cities have access to basic water services, against 55 percent of the 218,000 in
                          rural areas (2022). The near-total absence of sanitation and fecal sludge treatment infrastructure in Gabon results in
                          widespread contamination of surface and groundwater and a heightened risk of waterborne diseases. The relatively high
                          access rate to water in urban areas does not provide the expected benefits because of the poor service quality, with
                          frequent water shortages in large areas of the distribution network and poor quality of delivered water. The sector suffers
                          from years of inadequate investments by the Government of Gabon (GoG), poor management by the Gabonese Energy
                          and Water Company (Société d'Energie et d'Eau du Gabon, SEEG) – evidenced by a non-revenue water (NRW) rate of
                          more than 50 percent4 – and poor governance leading to the billing a fraction of the water delivered and a poor bill
                          collection ratio. This places SEEG in a vicious circle of low-cost recovery, which curtails its capacity to maintain its
                          infrastructure, leading to further degradation of service quality and reliability.



                          1 Esaku, 2020.
                          2 World Bank Global Indicators Briefs No. 32, “Defying Outages: The Struggles and Strategies of Businesses Facing Unreliable Electricity. June 2025.
                          3 Mortality due to unsafe water, sanitation, and hygiene services in 2019. World Health Organization, Global Health Observatory Data Repository.
                          4 NRW is defined as the difference between the volume of system input and billed authorized consumption. NRW includes not only real and apparent losses (that is,

                          physical and commercial water losses), but also unbilled authorized consumption.


                                                                                                                                                                                         Page 3



                                                                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (PASBAP) (P179643)


                          5.      Despite a high national electricity access rate of 94 percent as of 2023, Gabon’s power sector continues to face
                          structural changes that undermine both quality of service and equitable access. Only 29 percent of the rural population
                          has electricity,5 while a high rate of access in urban areas is offset by frequent outages and poor service quality. Electricity
                          supply disruptions negatively affect households and businesses across both urban and rural areas and have often been
                          driven by a combination of inadequate maintenance and reduced hydropower generation due to climate-related
                          variability in rainfall, while the lack of interconnection of Gabon’s four regional power grid networks constrain the
                          efficient use of generation capacity. These challenges reveal systemic weaknesses and the need for urgent investment in
                          generation, transmission, and distribution. As of 2024, Gabon's combined electricity transmission and distribution losses
                          stand at around 28 percent, which result in annual losses of approximately 45 billion CFA francs (US$79 million), severely
                          compromising the power sector‘s financial viability. Currently, 55 out of 148 generation units are out of service,
                          representing a 37 percent unavailability rate, or 304 MW offline. This lack of maintenance increases the risk of technical
                          failures, limits actual system availability, and accelerates asset aging.
                          6.      Gabon’s water, sanitation, and energy sectors are under the purview of the Ministry of Universal Access to
                          Water and Energy (Ministère de l'Acces Universel à l’Eau et à l’Energie, MAUEE), which is tasked with formulating
                          sector policies and strategies, and coordinating the financing of structured investments. The Ministry plays a central
                          role in ensuring alignment between national development goals and the operational mandates of various sectoral
                          agencies and stakeholders including the Water, Electricity, and Sanitation Asset Holding Company (Société de Patrimoine
                          du Service Public de l’Eau Potable, de l’Energie Electrique et de l’Assainissement, SP), SEEG, the National Water and




_For Official Use Only_
                          Electricity Council (Conseil National de l'Eau et de l'Electricité, CNEE), and the Water and Electricity Sector Regulation
                          Agency (Agence de Régulation du Secteur de l'Eau Potable et de l'Energie Electrique, ARSEE). Yet conflicting mandates
                          and capacity and resource constraints limit the efficacy of these institutions.
                          7.      The GoG seeks to address SEEG’s financial and operational deficiencies to improve its ability to ensure reliable
                          services. SEEG’s combined net loss for water and electricity was US$21.6 million in 2022 because of: (i) chronic
                          underinvestment; (ii) a freeze in tariff rates since 2018; (iii) poor operational performance; and (iv) increased staff costs.
                          SEEG has a low consumer billing and collection rate and large arrears of unpaid bills, essentially from the GoG.6 As a
                          result, SEEG has recorded increasing financial losses since the abrupt end of the affermage in 2018. This prevents SEEG
                          from honoring its financial commitments and presents a high risk for any prospective private investment. The absence of
                          financial statements since 2018 prevented adequate financial management.7 The utility also suffered from a significant
                          financial scandal. A 2024 investigation uncovered a vast network of corruption that siphoned at least several billion CFA
                          francs from electricity payments over many years.8 This led to the placement of SEEG under a provisional administration
                          in August 2024, which was lifted on May 28th, 2025. The GoG is now seeking private sector partnerships to improve
                          performance.
                          C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
                          Development Objective(s) (From PAD)
                          8.     The PDO is to increase access to water supply, sanitation, and electricity services and improve
                          performance in the water supply and electricity sectors in Gabon.




                          5 2023 access rate. Source: https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/EG.ELC.ACCS.RU.ZS?locations=GA
                          6 The accumulation of outstanding payments now exceeds one year of turnover amounting to FCFA 230 billion (2021), of which 58.6 percent is held by the State and

                          31.8 percent by individual customers.
                          7 Financial statements post-2018 have recently been retroactively reconstituted as part of the utility’s turnaround efforts.
                          8 https://www.rfi.fr/fr/afrique/20240816-gabon-une-piraterie-informatique-r%C3%A9v%C3%A8le-un-grand-scandale-de-d%C3%A9tournements-%C3%A0-la-

                          soci%C3%A9t%C3%A9-d-%C3%A9nergie


                                                                                                                                                                                     Page 4



                                                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
                                The World Bank
                                Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (PASBAP) (P179643)


                           Key Results
                          9.      130,000 people will be provided with access to piped water through household connections and at least 39,000
                          will be provided with direct access to electricity.
                          10.   Additionally, 370,000 people already connected to SEEG’s water network will benefit from better water pressure
                          and service continuity. Similarly, 500,000 people already connected to SEEG’s electricity network will benefit from
                          improved service quality thanks to improvements in SEEG operational and commercial performance under the Project.
                          11.    40,000 households, or 240,000 people, will benefit from the safe management of fecal sludge, reducing the
                          prevalence of waterborne diseases and the risk of contamination of water resources.
                          12.   The Project will contribute to reductions in technical and commercial losses within SEEG’s water and electricity
                          networks, as well as improved operations and maintenance cost recovery.
                          13.    The Project will also contribute to sector policy, institutional, and regulatory (PIR) strengthening, notably through
                          updating sector strategies, improving the financial equilibrium of SEEG, augmenting the MAUEE’s capacity to plan and
                          monitor sector investments, and equipping ARSEE to fulfill its role as sector regulator.
                          D. Project Description
                          14.     Project activities are organized under five components. Investments to expand access to water supply and
                          electricity services will be implemented either in the same areas to maximize impact, in cities targeted by the Gabon




_For Official Use Only_
                          Urban Development Project (Projet d’Aménagement et de Développement des Infrastructures du Gabon, PADIG,
                          P177372), or in areas with high potential to positively impact SEEG’s financial equilibrium.
                               Component 1: Water Supply and Sanitation Services (US$78.0 million)
                          15.     Component 1 will support investments in water supply and sanitation to: (i) improve service quality, particularly
                          in Greater Libreville; (ii) expand access to basic or improved drinking water services in selected secondary cities and rural
                          areas; and (iii) introduce the safe management of fecal sludge through the construction of Gabon’s first fecal sludge
                          treatment plant in Greater Libreville. SEEG will be supported in improving service quality and financial sustainability
                          through the procurement and installation of smart water meters to connect or improve water connections to large and
                          domestic consumers, thereby addressing commercial losses and increasing water availability through recovered water.
                          Water supply access involves: (i) the construction and/or rehabilitation of production, storage, transmission, and
                          distribution network infrastructure; (ii) the extension and/or upgrade of the water distribution network and the
                          development of associated metered water connections; (iii) the completion of unfinished water supply works from
                          PASBMIR; and (iv) development of mini-grid water supply systems in rural areas not currently served by SEEG.
                               Component 2: Electricity Services (US$50.0 million)
                          16.     Component 2 will support investments in electricity infrastructure to: (i) improve SEEG’s technical and commercial
                          performance and revenues, particularly in Greater Libreville; (ii) expand access to electricity services in select peri-urban
                          and rural areas through grid extension and densification and distributed energy solutions such as solar home systems;
                          and (iii) deploy hybrid systems combining diesel power plants with solar photovoltaic (PV) mini-grids. SEEG performance
                          improvement will be achieved through: (i) the rehabilitation and modernization of its electricity dispatching system to
                          enable real-time monitoring and support efficient, transparent, and accountable execution of its operations and timely
                          response to demand fluctuations and technical disruptions from its command center; and (ii) the implementation of a
                          pilot Revenue Protection Program (RPP) with procurement and installation of smart electricity meters for large
                          commercial, industrial and public sector customers in Greater Libreville.




                                                                                                                                                   Page 5



                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
                                The World Bank
                                Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (PASBAP) (P179643)


                               Component 3: PIR Strengthening for Improved Basic Services (US$11.0 million)
                          17.    This component will support ongoing PIR strengthening efforts by the GoG to improve the quality of its water,
                          sanitation, and electricity services. It will finance: (i) the preparation and implementation of a roadmap for the
                          development of a comprehensive sanitation value chain in Greater Libreville, informed by the WB’s Citywide Inclusive
                          Sanitation (CWIS) Initiative; (ii) the development of curriculum, training material, and technical equipment to enhance
                          training offerings of the Jean Violas Training Center (Centre des Métiers Jean Violas); (iii) tailored capacity building and
                          training activities for MAUEE, SEEG, CNEE, ARSEE and SP staff; (iv) the development and implementation of short- and
                          long-term action plans to operationalize ARSEE, the regulator of both sectors; (v) the procurement of technical equipment
                          to allow SEEG, CNEE, and SP to conduct technical studies, supervise works and maintain infrastructure; and (vi) the
                          equipment of MAUEE’s new physicochemical and isotopic water quality monitoring laboratory. Component 3 will also
                          address SEEG’s cash flow challenges for both water and electricity services through the development of a mobile payment
                          system to improve billing and collections efficiency. Finally, this component will support sector strategy by financing the
                          updating of Gabon’s Master Plan for electricity generation, transmission and distribution to reflect evolving demand,
                          integrate least-cost planning, and inform a national strategy to achieve universal access to electricity.
                               Component 4: Project Management (US$11.0 million)
                          18.    This component will fund the: (i) Operation of the Project Management Unit (PMU), including staff costs,
                          consulting services, workplace facilities, vehicles, and other operational needs to provide it with the means to conduct




_For Official Use Only_
                          necessary activities related to technical, E&S, financial management, procurement, monitoring and evaluation, and
                          communications activities; and (ii) Operating costs of the Steering Committee.
                               Component 5: Contingent Emergency Response Component – CERC (US$0.0 million)
                          19.    Following an eligible crisis or emergency, the recipient may request the World Bank (WB) to reallocate Project
                          funds to support emergency response and reconstruction. This component would draw from uncommitted credit
                          resources under the Project from other Project components to cover emergency response.


                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate
                           Legal Operational Policies                                                           Triggered?
                           Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                          Yes
                           Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                    No


                          Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts

                          20.    The environmental and social (E&S) risks are rated Substantial. For most investments, the exact technical
                          characteristics and/or locations will be determined during Project implementation. The Project is therefore following a
                          Framework approach on E&S. Investments will be implemented in areas with small to medium populations that include
                          Indigenous Peoples in some areas.
                          21.     The Project's environmental risk is rated substantial, particularly concerning Gabon's first FSTP in Greater
                          Libreville, designed to mitigate fecal sludge impacts. The FSTP follows sustainable and circular economic principles and
                          includes biogas production. Other similar infrastructure projects show moderate risk due to stable rural ecosystems and
                          low population density in targeted areas. Urban impacts may include service interruptions and Occupational Health and
                          Safety (OHS) risks. Consistent involvement of qualified specialists and stakeholder training is crucial for effective E&S
                          management. Contractors must submit detailed OHS plans prior to work, and road safety plans are needed for TA

                                                                                                                                                  Page 6



                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                                The World Bank
                                Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (PASBAP) (P179643)


                          activities. Protecting Gabon's biodiversity requires all personnel to follow a Biodiversity Code of Conduct to prevent illegal
                          hunting and logging.
                          22.    Social risks are rated substantial and are related to the potential exclusion of vulnerable peoples, including
                          women, from consultation processes or benefits of the Project if adequate measures are not foreseen; low to medium
                          scale resettlement of mostly economical displacement, temporary disruption of economic activities or access to homes
                          or businesses; poor labor conditions and increased Gender Based Violence: Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/ Sexual
                          Harassment (GBV: SEA/SH) risks in the working environment and from Project’s workers towards communities; and
                          Borrower’s poor track record in managing E&S risks. Activities under Components 1 and 2 may involve land acquisition
                          and result in involuntary resettlement, including temporary disruption of economic activities and access to assets.
                          E. Implementation
                          Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
                          23.     The Project is anchored within the MAUEE, with implementation arrangements structured as follows:
                               a. The Project Steering Committee (PSC), chaired by the General Secretary of the MAUEE and co-chaired by the
                                  General Secretary of the Ministry of Economy, Finance, Debt, and Participations (Ministre de l'Economie, des
                                  Finances, de la Dette et des Participations, chargé de la lutte contre la vie chère, MEFDP), will include key senior
                                  officials from MAUEE (including the Director Generals for Water and Electricity) as well as representatives from
                                  relevant sector institutions (SEEG, the SP, CNEE, and ARSEE). Its role is to provide overall policy guidance,




_For Official Use Only_
                                  strategic direction, and to oversee Project implementation.
                               b. The Project Management Unit (PMU) will be headed by the MAUEE. It will be responsible for overall Project
                                  implementation, resource management, and the preparation of the Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB). It
                                  will coordinate all aspects of Project implementation with the effective involvement of key sector institutions,
                                  namely SEEG, SP, CNEE, and ARSEE, to ensure their adequate consultation and contribution to the decision
                                  making process. In parallel, the National Commission for Public Works and the Promotion of Business and
                                  Employment (Commission Nationale des Travaux d'Intérêt Public pour la Promotion de l'Entreprenariat et de
                                  l'Emploi, CN-TIPPEE), which reports to the MEFDP, will manage fiduciary functions: procurement, financial
                                  management, and E&S risks management:
                               c. Unified management structure. To ensure that the PMU is effectively integrated and functions as one sole
                                  entity, all personnel, whether anchored at the MAUEE or CN-TIPPEE, will operate under a unified management
                                  structure under MUAEE’s leadership, which will endeavor to ensure seamless coordination between technical
                                  oversight and fiduciary functions.
                          24.     Coordination with sector institutions. Given SEEG’s critical role in the operations and management of planned
                          infrastructure, it is critical that it is associated in the day-to-day management of the Project, including investment
                          planning, procurement, and contract supervision. To facilitate such coordination, in addition to the SEEG seconded
                          personnel within the PMU, SEEG will designate focal points to work with the PMU to avoid any asymmetry of information
                          between the two institutions.
                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
                          CONTACT POINT

                          World Bank




                                                                                                                                                   Page 7



                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (PASBAP) (P179643)


                           Michael Thibert
                           Senior Water Specialist

                           Yang Liu
                           Senior Energy Economist

                           Xavier Chauvot De Beauchene
                           Lead Water Specialist

                          Borrower/Client/Recipient
                           Gabonese Republic

                           Ministry of Economy, Finance, Debt, and Holdings, Responsible for Combating the High Cost of Living

                          Implementing Agencies
                           Ministry of Universal Access to Water and Energy




_For Official Use Only_
                           CN-TIPPEE

                           Gabonese Energy and Water Company (SEEG)

                          FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

                          The World Bank
                          1818 H Street, NW
                          Washington, D.C. 20433
                          Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                          Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
                          APPROVAL


                          Task Team Leader(s):                    Michael Thibert, Yang Liu, Xavier Chauvot De Beauchene

                          Approved By

                          Practice Manager/Manager:               Jie Tang                               30-Jul-2025

                          Country Director:                       Cheick Fantamady Kante                 07-Nov-2025




                                                                                                                                         Page 8



                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
