Public Disclosure Authorized                                               FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
                                                                                                                              Report No: PAD00040

                                                   INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

                                                                      PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                                 ON A
                                                                            PROPOSED LOAN

                                                                  IN THE AMOUNT OF EUR 129.7 MILLION
                                                                      (US$150 MILLION EQUIVALENT)

                                                                                    TO THE

                                                                             GABONESE REPUBLIC




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                                    FOR AN

                                                ACCESS TO BASIC SERVICES AND PERFORMANCE IMPROVEMENT PROJECT

                                                                              JANUARY 13, 2026




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                Water Global Practice
                                Western and Central Africa Region

                               This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official
                               duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.
                         CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

              (Exchange Rate Effective November 30, 2025)

                              Currency Unit = EURO
                                   US$1.00 = EUR 0.86449103

                               FISCAL YEAR
                         January 1 - December 31




  Regional Vice President: Ousmane Diagana
Regional Practice Director: Chakib Jenane
         Division Director: Cheick Fantamady Kante
        Practice Manager: Anna Cestari
      Task Team Leaders: Michael David Thibert, Xavier Chauvot de Beauchene, Yang Liu
                               ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AfDB        African Development Bank
AM          Accountability Mechanism
            Agence de Régulation du Secteur de l'Eau Potable et de l'Energie Electrique (Water and
ARSEE
            Electricity Sector Regulation Agency)
BCR         Benefit-Cost Ratio
CCDR        Country Climate and Development Report
CDM         Centre des Métiers Jean Violas (Jean Violas Training Center)
            Commission Nationale des Travaux d'Intérêt Public pour la Promotion de l'Entreprenariat
CN-TIPPEE   et de l'Emploi (National Commission for Public Works and the Promotion of Business and
            Employment)
CNEE        Conseil National de l'Eau et de l'Electricité (National Water and Electricity Council)
CPF         Country Partnership Framework
CWIS        Citywide Inclusive Sanitation
DBOT        Design, Build, Operate and Transfer
DFIL        Disbursement and Financial Information Letter
DG          Direction Generale (General Directorate)
E&S         Environmental and Social
EIRR        Economic Internal Rate of Return
ESCP        Environmental and Social Commitment Plan
ESIA        Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
ESMF        Environmental and Social Management Framework
ESMP        Environmental and Social Management Plan
FA          Financing Agreement
FIRR        Financial Internal Rate of Return
FM          Financial Management
FSTP        Fecal Sludge Treatment Plant
GBV         Gender-Based Violence
GEMS        Geo-Enabling initiative for Monitoring and Supervision
GHG         Greenhouse Gas
GIS         Geographic Information Systems
GM          Grievance Mechanism
GoG         Government of Gabon
GRS         Grievance Redress Service
HEIS        Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support
HV          High Voltage
IFR         Interim Financial Report
IPPF        Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework
LMP         Labour Management Procedures
LV          Low-Voltage
M&E         Monitoring and Evaluation
            Ministère de l'Access Universel à l’Eau et à l’Energie (Ministry of Universal Access to Water
MAUEE
            and Energy)
            Ministre de l'Economie, des Finances, de la Dette et des Participations, chargé de la lutte
MEFDP       contre la vie chère (Ministry of Economy, Finance, Debt, and Participations, charged with
            combatting the high cost of living)
MFD-EP      Maximizing Finance for Development – Enabling Project
MV          Medium-Voltage
NPV         Net Present Value
NRW         Non-Revenue Water
O&M         Operations and Maintenance
            Organisation pour l'Harmonisation en Afrique du Droit des Affaire (Organization for the
OHADA
            Harmonization of Business Law in Africa)
OHS         Occupational Health and Safety
            Projet d'Aménagement et de Développement des Infrastructures Urbaines du Gabon
PADUG
            (Gabon Urban Development Project)
            Projet d’Accès aux Services de Base et d’Amélioration des Performances (Access to Basic
PASBAP
            Services and Performance Improvement Project)
            Projet d'Accès aux Services de Base en Milieu Rural et de Renforcement des Capacités
PASBMIR
            (Access to Basic Services in Rural Areas and Capacity Building Project)
PCE         Private Capital Enabling
PDN         Plan de Développement National (National Development Plan)
PIR         Policy, Institutional, and Regulatory
PMU         Project Management Unit
PPP         Public-Private Partnership
PPSD        Project Procurement Strategy for Development
PSC         Project Steering Committee
PV          Photovoltaic
RP          Resettlement Plan
RPF         Resettlement Policy Framework
RF          Results Framework
SCADA       Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
SEA/SH      Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/ Sexual Harassment
SEEG        Société d'Energie et d'Eau du Gabon (Gabonese Energy and Water Company)
SEP         Stakeholder Engagement Plan
            Société de Patrimoine du Service Public de l’Eau Potable, de l’Energie Electrique et de
SP
            l’Assainissement (Water, Electricity, and Sanitation Asset Holding Company)
SYCEBNL     Accounting System for Non-Profit Entities
SYSCOHADA   Uniform System of Accounting for Companies in the OHADA zone
TA          Technical Assistance
ToR         Terms of Reference
WBG         World Bank Group
The World Bank
Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)



                                                            TABLE OF CONTENTS

DATASHEET ........................................................................................................................... i
I.    STRATEGIC CONTEXT ..................................................................................................... 1
      A. Project Strategic Context .................................................................................................................1
      B. Sectoral and Institutional Context ...................................................................................................1
      C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives ..............................................................................................5
II.   PROJECT DESCRIPTION .................................................................................................. 6
      A. Project Development Objective .......................................................................................................6
      B. Theory of Change and PDO Indicators .............................................................................................7
      C. Project Beneficiaries ........................................................................................................................8
      D. Project Components ........................................................................................................................8
      E. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design....................................................................13
III. PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION ........................................................................................ 14
      A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements ..........................................................................14
      B. Results Monitoring, Evaluation, and Verification Arrangements ..................................................15
      C. Disbursement Arrangements .........................................................................................................15
IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY .................................................................................. 16
      A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis ..................................................................................16
      B. Fiduciary .........................................................................................................................................17
      C. Environmental, Social and Legal Operational Policies ...................................................................20
V. KEY RISKS .................................................................................................................... 22
ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK ........................................................................................ 25
ANNEX 2: ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL ANALYSIS ................................................................ 35
ANNEX 3: TECHNICAL ANNEX .............................................................................................. 39
ANNEX 4: CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION AND MITIGATION.............................................. 40
      The World Bank
      Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padbasicinformation#doctemplate
DATASHEET


BASIC INFORMATION


Project
                         Operation Name
Beneficiary(ies)
Gabon                    Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (PASBAP)
                                                     Environmental and Social Risk
Operation ID             Financing Instrument
                                                     Classification
                         Investment Project
P179643                                              Substantial
                         Financing (IPF)

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padprocessing#doctemplate
Financing & Implementation Modalities
[ ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA)                     [✓] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)
[ ] Series of Projects (SOP)                                   [ ] Fragile State(s)
[ ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs)                        [ ] Small State(s)
[ ] Financial Intermediaries (FI)                              [ ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country
[ ] Project-Based Guarantee                                    [ ] Conflict
[ ] Deferred Drawdown                                          [ ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster
[ ] Alternative Procurement Arrangements (APA)                 [✓] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS)


Expected Approval Date                 Expected Closing Date
13-Feb-2026                            30-Jun-2032
Bank/IFC Collaboration                 Joint Level
Yes                                    Complementary or Interdependent project requiring active coordination


Proposed Development Objective(s)
The PDO is to increase access to water supply, sanitation, and electricity services and improve performance in the
water supply and electricity sectors in Gabon.

Components
 Component Name                                                                                             Cost (US$)

                                                                                                                         i
      The World Bank
      Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)


 Component 1: Water Supply and Sanitation Services                                                 77,750,000.00
 Component 2: Electricity Services                                                                 49,875,000.00
 Component 3: PIR Strengthening for Improved Basic Services                                        11,000,000.00
 Component 4: Project Management and Resettlement Compensation                                     11,000,000.00
 Component 5: Contingent Emergency Response Component - CERC                                                 0.00

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padborrower#doctemplate

Organizations

 Borrower:                       Gabonese Republic

 Implementing Agency:           CN-TIPPEE, Gabonese Energy and Water Company (SEEG), Ministry of Universal
                                Access to Water and Energy



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padfinancingsummary#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                 Yes

Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?           Yes

SUMMARY

  Total Operation Cost                                                                                   150.00

  Total Financing                                                                                        150.00
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                           150.00

  Financing Gap                                                                                              0.00

DETAILS

 World Bank Group Financing
   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                          150.00


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@paddisbursementprojection#doctemplate
Expected Disbursements (US$, Millions)


                                                                                                                    ii
      The World Bank
      Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)


WB Fiscal
Year                2026            2027          2028            2029           2030       2031     2032

Annual              1.50            13.50         25.00           30.00         30.00       30.00    20.00
Cumulative          1.50            15.00         40.00           70.00         100.00      130.00   150.00


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padclimatechange#doctemplate
PRACTICE AREA(S)


Practice Area (Lead)                                          Contributing Practice Areas
Water                                                         Energy & Extractives

CLIMATE


Climate Change and Disaster Screening
Yes, it has been screened and the results are discussed in the Operation Document


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padrisk#doctemplate
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK- RATING TOOL (SORT)


Risk Category                                                               Rating
1. Political and Governance                                                  Moderate
2. Macroeconomic                                                             Substantial
3. Sector Strategies and Policies                                            Substantial
4. Technical Design of Project or Program                                    Moderate
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability              Substantial
6. Fiduciary                                                                 Substantial
7. Environment and Social                                                    Substantial
8. Stakeholders                                                              Moderate
9. Overall                                                                   Substantial


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padcompliance#doctemplate
POLICY COMPLIANCE



                                                                                                              iii
      The World Bank
      Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)


Policy
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects?
[ ] Yes   [✓] No

Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?
[ ] Yes [✓] No



ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL


Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal
E & S Standards                                                                     Relevance
ESS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and
                                                                                    Relevant
Impacts
ESS 10: Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                           Relevant
ESS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                                                 Relevant
ESS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                  Relevant
ESS 4: Community Health and Safety                                                  Relevant
ESS 5: Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement      Relevant
ESS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural
                                                                                    Relevant
Resources
ESS 7: Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved
                                                                                    Relevant
Traditional Local Communities
ESS 8: Cultural Heritage                                                            Relevant
ESS 9: Financial Intermediaries                                                     Not Currently Relevant
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review
Summary (ESRS).

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalcovenants#doctemplate
LEGAL
Legal Covenants
Sections and Description
The Borrower shall establish, not later than one (1) month after the Effective Date and thereafter maintain throughout
the Project implementation period, a Steering Committee with composition, mandate and resources satisfactory to the
Bank, the Steering Committee. (FA, Schedule 2, Section I, A, 1)


                                                                                                                      iv
       The World Bank
       Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)


The Borrower shall: (i) establish, by no later than two (2) months after the Effective Date, and thereafter maintain at all
times during the implementation of the Project, a Project Management Unit (“PMU”) anchored under the MAUEE, with
terms of reference, composition, powers, functions, staffing, facilities and other resources satisfactory to the Bank, to
be responsible for the day to day implementation of the Project, including inter alia, project implementation, resource
management, and the preparation of the Annual Work Plan and Budget, monitoring and evaluation, and reporting; and
(ii) maintain CN-TIPPEE at all times during the implementation of the Project to support the PMU and to be responsible
for the financial management, procurement, environmental and social risk management and M&E implementation. (FA,
Schedule 2, Section I, A, 2 (a))
The PMU shall include, inter alia, a Project coordinator, two water supply specialists, a sanitation specialist, two
electricity specialists, a monitoring and evaluation specialist, and a communications specialist; all such staff to be
appointed by no later than three (3) months after the Effective Date, and all with qualifications, experience and terms
of reference acceptable to the Bank. (FA, Schedule 2, Section I, A, 2 (b))
The CN-TIPPEE shall include, inter alia, a financial management specialist, an internal auditor, a senior procurement
specialist, a junior procurement specialist, an accountant, a monitoring and evaluation specialist, an environmental risk
management specialist, and a social risk management specialist, a gender-based violence specialist; all such staff to be
appointed by no later than three (3) months after the Effective Date, and all with qualifications, experience and terms
of reference acceptable to the Bank. (FA, Schedule 2, Section I, A, 2 (c))
The Borrower shall not later than three (3) months after the Effective Date, maintain throughout the Project
implementation period, an accounting software for the Project acceptable to the Bank. (FA, Schedule 2, Section I, A, 2
(d))
The Borrower shall, not later than six (6) months after the Effective Date, recruit, and thereafter maintain throughout
the Project implementation period, an external auditor for the Project with experience, qualifications and on terms of
reference acceptable to the Bank. (FA, Schedule 2, Section I, A, 2 (e))
Without limiting the foregoing, the Borrower shall adopt and disclose, as applicable, the LMP, the SEA/SH action plan
and code of conduct, the RPF, the IPPF, and the manual for the Grievance Mechanism, by not later than thirty (30) days
after the Effective Date, all in form and substance satisfactory to the Bank and in accordance with the ESCP. (FA,
Schedule 2, Section I, C, 6)

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padconditions#doctemplate
Conditions
Type                           Citation                        Description                    Financing Source
                                                               No withdrawal shall be
                                                               made for payments made
                                                               under Category (1), unless
                                                               and until the Project
                                                               Operations Manual has
                               Schedule 2, Section III, B, 1   been adopted in
Disbursement                                                                                  IBRD/IDA
                               (b)                             accordance with the
                                                               provisions of Section I.B of
                                                               Schedule 2 to this
                                                               Agreement, in form and
                                                               substance satisfactory to
                                                               the Bank.

                                                                                                                        v
The World Bank
Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)




                                                                                          vi
         The World Bank
         Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)


I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT
A. Project Strategic Context
1.      Economic growth in Gabon accelerated to an estimated 2.9 percent in 2024, up from 2.4 percent in 2023, driven
by increased production in the oil sector and significant investments in large public works and government projects.
Rich in natural resources and the fifth largest oil producer in Africa, Gabon largely depends on the oil sector as its main
engine of growth despite efforts to promote economic diversification. While Gabon’s economy is projected to grow by
about 2.4 percent through 2025 to 2027 driven by the mining, wood, and agricultural sectors, prospects of diminishing
oil revenues and rising expenditure pose important risks to the country's public finances. Yet the country should benefit
from improved investor confidence with an elected government in power signaling a return to constitutional order. 1
2.     Despite being one of only two upper-middle income countries in sub-Saharan Africa, one in five Gabonese is
unemployed, and over a third of Gabonese live in poverty due to lack of employment opportunities and income
generation. About a third of the country’s youth is disengaged from work, education, or training, leading to a loss in
human capital. Insufficient job creation and limited income-generating activities and social protection contribute to
poverty. Capital-intensive industries, like oil, do not generate enough jobs, and there is a mismatch between job
opportunities, skills, and people's aspirations. 2 Manufacturers and other industries with improved access to energy and
water services tend to generate more jobs, 3 while the World Bank Enterprise Surveys ranked gaps in electricity among
the top barriers to business development. 4
3.      Significant disparities in living standards and access to basic services persist, with gaps in water, sanitation, and
electricity access contributing to preventable health challenges and economic vulnerabilities. Addressing these
systemic inequities is critical not only for reducing poverty, but also for building resilience to climate risks, which are
increasingly threatening public infrastructure and livelihoods. Gabon is highly vulnerable to climate change impacts,
particularly from flooding, sea level rise, landslides, storms and changing precipitation patterns, which are expected to
primarily affect the water and energy sectors. Gabon is ranked 136 out of 187 countries in the 2023 Notre Dame Global
Adaptation Initiative (ND-GAIN) Country Index for climate vulnerability and readiness to improve resilience. While Gabon
is the 83rd most vulnerable country, it is the 24th least ready country. 5 The adverse effects of climate events on human
health and infrastructure underscore the urgent need to integrate climate adaptation strategies into the planning and
design of public services.
4.     Access to and the quality of basic services need to be improved to drive human capital development and more
inclusive economic opportunity through jobs, while increasing preparedness to climate threats. Gabon’s living
standards and access to basic services such as water, electricity, and sanitation are lower than the average of its peer
countries. For example, access to at least basic water and sanitation services were at 86.9 percent and 49.9 percent
respectively of the population in 2022, compared with an average of 98 percent and 94 percent respectively in upper
middle-income countries (UNICEF/WHO). These challenges are intertwined, as a mortality rate of 17.5 per 100,000
people is directly attributed to unsafe water supply, sanitation, and hygiene services, which is more than three times the
average in upper middle-income countries. 6

B. Sectoral and Institutional Context
5.     Water supply, sanitation, and energy are identified as priority sectors under Pillar 1 (Electricity, Water and
Sector Reform) of Gabon’s National Development Plan 2025-2032 (Plan de Développement National, PDN), which

1 World Bank Gabon Economic Update 2025.
2 World Bank Gabon Economic Update 2025.
3 Esaku, 2020.
4 World Bank Global Indicators Briefs No. 32, “Defying Outages: The Struggles and Strategies of Businesses Facing Unreliable Electricity. June 2025.
5 A measure of a country's ability to leverage investments and convert them to adaptation actions
6 Mortality due to unsafe water, sanitation, and hygiene services in 2019. World Health Organization, Global Health Observatory Data Repository.



                                                                                                                                                       Page 1
        The World Bank
        Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)


seeks to improve living conditions and support economic development. Additionally, the energy sector is intended to
significantly contribute to the Government of Gabon’s (GoG’s) envisioned transition to a green economy through 2032,
particularly by leveraging Gabon’s substantial hydropower potential of more than 10 GW to shift its thermal-heavy energy
mix towards renewables to reduce Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions. 7 For both water supply and electricity, the PDN
places an emphasis on efficiency improvement, especially in transmission and distribution networks, while continuing to
expand services and production facilities to address the needs of unserved populations. Complemented by major sectoral
reforms such as the separation of water and electricity services into distinct utilities, the PDN aims to address the poor
performance of service providers and clarify roles and responsibilities for better sector governance. The GoG also
announced, through an extraordinary Council of Ministers held on June 30, 2025, the creation of five sector funds,
including a National Fund for Energy and Water (Fond National pour l’Energie et l’Eau) aiming to promote and finance
universal access to sustainable water supply and electricity services and modernize existing infrastructures.
6.       Despite abundant water resources, poor water supply services and limited coverage of sanitation services
hinder Gabon’s human capital and socio-economic development, including job creation. According to UNICEF/WHO,
90 percent of the 2.21 million people in cities have access to basic water services, against 55 percent of the 218,000 in
rural areas (2022). The near-total absence of sanitation and fecal sludge treatment infrastructure in Gabon results in
widespread contamination of surface and groundwater and a heightened risk of waterborne diseases. These service
deficiencies disproportionally impact women and girls who often bear the burden for water collection and lack of access
to sanitation. This burden compromises their educational opportunities, income-generating potential, and physical
health. The relatively high access rate to water in urban areas does not provide the expected benefits because of the
poor service quality, with frequent water shortages in large areas of the distribution network and poor quality of
delivered water. The sector suffers from years of inadequate investments by the GoG, poor management by the
Gabonese Energy and Water Company (Société d'Energie et d'Eau du Gabon, SEEG) – evidenced by a non-revenue water
(NRW) rate of more than 50 percent 8 – and poor governance leading to the billing a fraction of the water delivered and
a poor bill collection ratio. This places SEEG in a vicious circle of low-cost recovery, which curtails its capacity to maintain
its infrastructure, leading to further degradation of service quality and reliability.
7.     The GoG took encouraging steps to improve the situation of the water sector, but it will take leadership and
time to implement the most needed reforms to turn the sector around and place SEEG on a path to cost recovery.
Meanwhile, the poor service quality has driven people to supplement or replace water supply through boreholes, which
increases quality concerns and leads to seawater intrusion into coastal aquifers, causing increasing salinity that will soon
make it unsuitable for human consumption. Moreover, expanding rural water service is capital intensive and loss-making,
as Gabon has one of the lowest population densities in Central Africa with only nine people per square kilometer. 9
Furthermore, Gabon’s water sector is vulnerable to climate change, as increasing climate-induced rainfall variability is
compounded by sub-Saharan Africa’s highest urbanization rate and inadequate urban drainage systems. This has led to
recurrent flooding that disrupts livelihoods, hinders economic development and accelerates groundwater contamination.
8.      According to UNICEF/WHO, 50 percent of Gabon’s 2.4 million people lack access to basic sanitation services
(2022), with limited and unimproved sanitation making up 29 percent and 19 percent of the population respectively.
In addition, the country has yet to develop a holistic value chain to address fecal sludge collection, transport, treatment,
and by-product management. The resulting discharge of fecal sludge by largely informal and unregulated private
emptiers into the environment causes significant damage to ecosystems (especially water resources) and habitats,
resulting in the spread of water-borne diseases. Improving access and sustainability of services, particularly for sanitation
and rural water supply, have been challenging due to a lack of clarity in the roles and responsibilities of sector institutions.

7 In 2023, greater than 50 percent of Gabon’s energy generation originated from thermal sources.
8 NRW is defined as the difference between the volume of system input and billed authorized consumption. NRW includes not only real and apparent losses (that is,

physical and commercial water losses), but also unbilled authorized consumption.
9 World Bank, 2020: https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/EN.POP.DNST?locations=GA



                                                                                                                                                         Page 2
        The World Bank
        Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)


Poor sanitation negatively affects menstrual hygiene management for women and girls, limiting their opportunities for
jobs and school attendance. To improve these services, Gabon must undertake key sector reforms, build the capacity of
the actors involved, and develop fecal sludge management infrastructure. With rising climate variability, infrastructure
investments also need to integrate climate considerations to enhance resilience, especially against floods.
9.      Despite a high national electricity access rate of 94 percent as of 2023, Gabon’s power sector continues to face
structural changes that undermine both quality of service and equitable access. Only 29 percent of the rural population
has electricity, 10 while a high rate of access in urban areas is offset by frequent outages and poor service quality. Electricity
supply disruptions negatively affect households and businesses across both urban and rural areas and have often been
driven by a combination of inadequate maintenance and reduced hydropower generation due to climate-related
variability in rainfall. These challenges reveal systemic weaknesses and the need for urgent investment in generation,
transmission, and distribution. Given Gabon’s low population density, achieving universal energy access will require
substantial efforts in developing both renewable off-grid and central grid infrastructure. Expanding solar power
generation through mini-grid or off-grid systems is essential, especially in remote areas with good solar irradiance or
where large hydro projects are not feasible. As of 2024, Gabon's combined electricity transmission and distribution losses
stand at around 28 percent, which result in annual losses of approximately CFA francs 45 billion (US$79 million), severely
compromising the power sector‘s financial viability. Currently, 55 out of 148 generation units are out of service,
representing a 37 percent unavailability rate, or 304 MW offline. Approximately 26 percent of total production is still
derived from diesel generators, which carry a very high unit cost, estimated at CFA francs 200 per kWh, placing a
significant burden on the system’s financial sustainability.
10.     Gabon’s electricity sector faces persistent supply and demand imbalances across its four non-interconnected
regional power grid networks, due to a lack of interconnection and weak transmission infrastructure. These constraints
limit the efficient use of existing generation capacity and deter investment in large-scale hydropower projects. For
example, the reginal power grid network of Libreville has a 55 MW production deficit, while that of Franceville enjoys a
160 MW surplus, largely due to the Grand Poubara Dam. The country’s current least-cost planning developed in 2020
needs updating, and its implementation has been poor. Stopgap measures, such as the Karpowership, have been
deployed to address acute shortages, while IFC-supported investments like the 35 MW Kinguélé hydro plant and Orinko
gas-to-power project offer medium-term relief. In the long term, Gabon‘s rich energy endowment, notably hydro, gas
and solar, provides a strong foundation for a more resilient and diversified power mix. Gabon is part of the Central Africa
Power Pool, and the World Bank plans to support interconnections at both the national and regional levels through a
regional Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) that is currently under preparation.
11.     Gabon’s water, sanitation, and energy sectors are under the purview of the Ministry of Universal Access to
Water and Energy (Ministère de l'Acces Universel à l’Eau et à l’Energie, MAUEE), which is tasked with formulating
sector policies and strategies, and coordinating the financing of structured investments (see Figure A3.1, Annex 3). The
Ministry plays a central role in ensuring alignment between national development goals and the operational mandates
of various sectoral agencies and stakeholders as described below:
       (i) The Water, Electricity, and Sanitation Asset Holding Company (Société du Patrimoine du Service Public de
            l’Eau Potable, de l’Energie Electrique et de l’Assainissement, SP) acts not only as the asset holder of public
            water, sanitation and electricity infrastructure, but is also generally responsible for the operation and
            management of thermal power plants, water supply boreholes in Greater Libreville, and other strategic assets.
            The energy and water produced by SP’s plants are sold either to SEEG for distribution or to select industries.
       (ii) SEEG is the primary operator responsible for the production, transmission, distribution, and marketing of
            electricity and water supply across Gabon within its concession area (primarily urban and peri-urban areas)
            and oversees the operation, maintenance and replacement of infrastructure under its purview. SEEG also

10 2023 access rate. Source: https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/EG.ELC.ACCS.RU.ZS?locations=GA



                                                                                                                           Page 3
        The World Bank
        Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)


             directly operates and manages select power plants. SEEG operates under the regulatory oversight, strategic
             guidance and investment capacity of MAUEE and the Water and Electricity Sector Regulation Agency (Agence
             de Régulation du Secteur de l'Eau Potable et de l'Energie Electrique, ARSEE). The Ministry of Economy, Finance,
             Debt, and Participations, charged with combatting the high cost of living (Ministre de l'Economie, des Finances,
             de la Dette et des Participations, chargé de la lutte contre la vie chère, MEFDP) also plays a role in ensuring that
             SEEG’s service delivery aligns with Gabon’s economic priorities. SEEG’s training center, the Centre des Métiers
             Jean Violas (CDM), was established in 1979 to provide a variety of training programs first to its staff, and then
             to other students. However, limited funding and poor management led to significant reductions in
             programming and attendance in recent years.
        (iii) The National Water and Electricity Council (Conseil National de l'Eau et de l'Electricité, CNEE) oversees the
              Operations and Maintenance (O&M) of public facilities including street lighting, traffic lights, and public water
              points. In the absence of user fee collection, CNEE is funded by a surcharge on the water and electricity bills
              issued by SEEG. Their financial situation depends on the SEEG’s bill collection rate. They are therefore directly
              impacted by SEEG poor performance. On the other hand, CNEE is responsible for covering water tariffs owed
              to SEEG for networked public water points from its budget. Yet these arrangements are not operational and
              CNEE’s budget is dependent upon fiscal transfers from the MEFDP.
        (iv) ARSEE is the national regulatory authority tasked with the supervision of production, transmission, distribution
             and marketing activities of any operator or concessionaire of water or electricity services in Gabon. ARSEE is
             mandated to ensure compliance with service standards, tariffs, and performance benchmarks, although it lacks
             the resources required to fulfill this mandate. It also oversees dispute resolution and sector licenses.
12.      SEEG runs a financial deficit and is unable to ensure reliable water and electricity services in its service area.
SEEG’s combined net loss for water and electricity was US$21.6 million in 2022 because of: (i) chronic underinvestment;
(ii) a freeze in tariff rates since 2018; (iii) poor operational performance; and (iv) increased staff costs. SEEG has a low
consumer billing and collection rate and large arrears of unpaid bills, essentially from the GoG. 11 While the collections
rate is reported to be about 70 percent for electricity, it is below 50 percent for water. As a result, SEEG has recorded
increasing financial losses since the abrupt end of the affermage in 2018. This prevents SEEG from honoring its financial
commitments and presents a high risk for any prospective private investment. The absence of financial statements since
2018 prevented adequate Financial Management (FM). 12 The utility also suffered from a significant financial scandal. A
2024 investigation uncovered a vast network of corruption that siphoned at least several billion CFA francs from
electricity payments over many years. 13 This led to the placement of SEEG under a provisional administration in August
2024, which was lifted on May 28, 2025. SEEG’s continued financial deficit and poor operational performance contribute
to frequent outages in both water and electricity services and a growing discontent among the population.
13.     Achieving sustainable water and energy services in Gabon requires a financially viable national utility and clarity
in the operational mandate of institutions. On January 5, 2022, the State renewed the SEEG’s concession for the
production, transmission and distribution of water supply and electricity for a 20-year period. Subsequently, on March
20, 2024, MAUEE and SEEG signed an objectives and performance contract (Contrat d’Objectifs et de Performance)
addressing seven areas: (i) improvement of governance and transparency; (ii) fight against corruption; (iii) economic
patriotism and national preference; (iv) public service quality; (v) infrastructures and competitiveness; (vi) management
efficiency; and (vii) communications. However, the contract does not specify specific targets, deadlines, or enforcement
mechanisms, nor an action plan that provides for the financial and technical capacity required for its achievement.

11 The accumulation of outstanding payments now exceeds one year of turnover amounting to CFA francs 230 billion (2021), of which 58.6 percent is held by the

State and 31.8 percent by individual customers.
12 Financial statements post-2018 have recently been retroactively reconstituted as part of the utility’s turnaround efforts.
13 https://www.rfi.fr/fr/afrique/20240816-gabon-une-piraterie-informatique-r%C3%A9v%C3%A8le-un-grand-scandale-de-d%C3%A9tournements-%C3%A0-la-

soci%C3%A9t%C3%A9-d-%C3%A9nergie

                                                                                                                                                         Page 4
        The World Bank
        Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)


Beyond such capacity deficiencies, sector institutions are also hamstrung by significant overlaps in their roles and
responsibilities as outlined in various sector policies and strategies. The role of the SP is particularly unclear following a
November 2024 decree that tasks the SP with needs identification, development, and operations of all water, energy,
and sanitation infrastructure up to the point of final consumption, representing a clear overlap with SEEG’s mandate.
14.     In April 2025, SEEG signed a five-year, Euro 200 million performance-based Public-Private Partnership (PPP)
contract with the French group SUEZ to improve water services and strengthen their management in Libreville and key
secondary cities. The PPP includes a partnership with Saint-Gobain PAM for material acquisition. SUEZ is currently in the
process of setting up its Gabon subsidiary in anticipation of attaining financial closure of the contract. This PPP focuses
on improving SEEG’s technical and financial performance in delivering water services. Activities supported under the PPP
contract include improving SEEG’s core management functions (e.g., customer management, Geographic Information
Systems [GIS], billing and collection), building the capacity of SEEG personnel, assessing NRW, and providing funding to
carry out critical NRW-reducing investments. It will assess NRW technical losses on the four water transmission lines
linking N’toum, the primary water production site, to the head reservoirs of Greater Libreville. It will also include activities
in major secondary cities. The PPP contract includes quantified Key Performance Indicators and conditions a portion of
SUEZ’s remuneration to reach or exceed pre-agreed performance targets.
15.    SEEG approached its other historical partner, the French electricity company (Electricité de France, EdF) to
support improving electricity services management. It signed a memorandum of understanding for studies related to
the construction of the Booue hydropower dam, and a Euro 1 million contract for just-in-time Technical Assistance (TA)
support for strategic studies. The actual scope of TA support remains to be agreed.

C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives
16.      The Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (Projet d’Accès aux Services de Base et
d’Amélioration des Performances, PASBAP) is fully aligned with the GoG’s PDN 2025-2032 and the Gabon Country
Partnership Framework (CPF) (FY23-FY27), and will contribute directly to the World Bank Group (WBG)’s corporate
mission of ending extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity on a livable planet. 14 PASBAP is aligned with Pillar
1 (Electricity, Water and Sector Reform) of the GoG’s PDN 2025-2032, which identifies water supply, sanitation, and
energy as priority sectors and explicitly cites many of the included activities in its project priority matrices. Within the
CPF, PASBAP, alongside its predecessor the Access to Basic Services in Rural Areas and Capacity Building Project (Projet
d'Accès aux Services de Base en Milieu Rural et de Renforcement des Capacités, PASBMIR, P144135), is described as the
cornerstone to achieving increased access to basic services (Objective 2), which is one of two objectives contributing to
the high-level outcome of increased household resilience. This objective seeks to close the gap in access between urban,
peri-urban, and rural areas that perpetuate existing deficits in monetary and non-monetary poverty. PASBAP includes
investments to directly bring services to disadvantaged rural and peri-urban areas, while simultaneously augmenting
SEEG performance in urban areas to generate additional revenues to compensate for expansion to loss-making rural
services. Furthermore, PASBAP will support the second higher-level objective of increased employment in the non-oil
private sector through (i) improved urban infrastructure services (Objective 3) by supporting SEEG’s turnaround; and (ii)
facilitating an improved environment for private investment in the non-oil sector (Objective 4) by improving
creditworthiness of SEEG. The project is fully aligned and contributes to the WBG’s Water Strategy to improve water
security by 2030 and the WBG’s Mission 300 initiative to connect people to electricity in Africa by 2030.
17.    PASBAP is coordinated with other World Bank-financed operations. Selection of water and electricity investment
sites will consider complementarity with urban and flood risk reduction infrastructure financed under the Gabon Urban
Development Project (Projet d'Aménagement et de Développement des Infrastructures Urbaines du Gabon, PADUG,
P177372). Electricity investments are complimentary to potential support through the Central African Power Pool


14 Report No 174105-GA.



                                                                                                                         Page 5
      The World Bank
      Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)


Regional Integration Multiphase Programmatic Approach, which, upon GoG’s request, could support interconnecting
provincial grids in Gabon and connecting Gabon’s grid with that of the Republic of Congo, alongside additional grid access
scale-up. Finally, the development of a mobile payment platform for water and electricity services will be conducted in
coordination with similar efforts for the digitalization of public services under the Digital Gabon Project (P175987).
18.     Maximizing Finance for Development (MFD) and Private Capital Enabling (PCE). The project will invest in
strengthening the technical and financial capabilities and efficiencies of the SEEG, as well as improving the overarching
Policy, Institutional, and Regulatory (PIR) environment to build confidence in the sector so it can attract private sector
financing. It will in particular leverage private sector participation and expertise through activities that (1) support and
complement the SEEG-SUEZ PPP for water services (Subcomponent 1.1); (2) structure a long term Design, Build, Operate
and Transfer (DBOT) PPP contract for the Fecal Sludge Treatment Plant (FSTP) (Subcomponent 1.4); and (3) explore
options to expand energy access in off-grid rural areas through solar home systems roll-out and management through
private operators (Component 2). The project has been tagged as MFD-EP. Additionally, PCE activities support: i)
procurement of meters and regularization of connections in the SEEG-SUEZ PPP service area (Subcomponent 1.1), which
are expected to provide greater visibility and transparency to service delivery and enhance technical and financial
performance, facilitating further investment by the private sector to achieve the targets under their contract; and ii)
planned PPP to build and operate the FSTP. The project is tagged as PCE, which will be tracked by an indicator on the
number of PPP contracts signed or under implementation by the relevant contracting party for the delivery of water,
sanitation, and electricity infrastructure or services.
19.     The World Bank, IFC, and MIGA developed a Joint Implementation Plan to structure a One WBG approach to
address the Borrower’s water and energy sector challenges. The project complements broader IFC engagement in the
energy sector, anchoring the operation within a medium-term strategy that supports both supply expansion and service
reliability. In particular, the World Bank and IFC already partnered to structure and finance Gabon’s first power PPP, the
34 MW Kinguélé-Aval hydropower project, currently under construction. Building on that collaboration, IFC will work to
complement PASBAP by: (i) refining SEEG’s Performance Improvement Plan to promote creditworthiness; and (ii) defining
concrete ways in which private sector participation can increase private financing to the sector. A joint World Bank–IFC
team will explore potential support to the GoG to facilitate performance-improving PPPs.

II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

A. Project Development Objective
20.     The PDO is to increase access to water supply, sanitation, and electricity services and improve performance
in the water supply and electricity sectors in Gabon.
21.    Under this project, improving performance means increasing the capacity of the sector and in particular its main
operator SEEG to recover its costs and progress towards reaching financial equilibrium and creditworthiness.




                                                                                                                     Page 6
      The World Bank
      Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)


B. Theory of Change and PDO Indicators
22.   The project’s theory of change is presented in Figure 1.
                                                                 Figure 1: Theory of change




                                                                                                Page 7
         The World Bank
         Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)


23.      Table 1 below summarizes the PDO outcomes and outcome indicators.
                                                      Table 1. PDO outcomes and outcome indicators
PDO outcomes                           Outcome indicators
Increase access to water               • People provided with at least basic water (number of people, disaggregated for female and
supply and sanitation                    youth)*
services                               • Volume of fecal sludge treated by the FSTP constructed under the project (m3/year)
Increase access to                     • People provided with direct access to electricity through new connections (number of people,
electricity services                     disaggregated for female and youth)*
Improve performance in the • Share of O&M costs recovered by SEEG, disaggregating water and electricity (percentage)
water supply and electricity • Total technical and commercial losses for SEEG’s water services in Greater Libreville
sectors                        (percentage)
                             • Total technical and commercial losses for SEEG’s electricity services (percentage)
  *Corporate Scorecard Indicator

C. Project Beneficiaries
24.     The expected total number of beneficiaries is 535,000 people. 15 130,000 people will be provided with access to
piped water through household connections and at least 39,000 people will be provided with direct access to electricity.
Additionally, 370,000 people already connected to SEEG’s water network will benefit from better water pressure and
service continuity thanks to reductions in water losses, increases in water production capacity, and climate-proofing of
existing and new infrastructure. Similarly, 500,000 people already connected to SEEG’s electricity network will benefit
from improved service quality thanks to improvements in SEEG operational and commercial performance through
dispatching services under the project. 40,000 households, or 200,000 people, will benefit from the safe management of
fecal sludge, reducing the prevalence of waterborne diseases and the risk of contamination of water resources. The
project’s focus on access to water, sanitation, and electricity services provides an opportunity to collect data on how
these services benefit women specifically, such as on the reduction of time women spend collecting water. The project
will also contribute to PIR strengthening, notably by updating sector strategies, improving the financial equilibrium of
SEEG, augmenting the MAUEE’s capacity to plan and monitor sector investments, and equipping ARSEE to fulfill its role
as sector regulator.

D. Project Components
25.      Project activities are organized under five components: (i) Water Supply and Sanitation Services; (ii) Electricity
Services; (iii) PIR Strengthening for Improved Basic Services; (iv) Project Management and Resettlement; and
(v) Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC). The project leverages a framework approach, whereby final
investment sites (Subcomponents 1.2, 1.3, 2.2, and 2.3) will be selected through criteria including synergy between water
and electricity services and with PADUG cities, strong potential to positively impact SEEG’s financial equilibrium, and cost-
efficiency in access expansion.
26.      All infrastructure will aim to ensure equitable access and directly address climate risks, namely water scarcity,
floods, and droughts, using a resilient and inclusive design process. They will also include measures for the protection
of water quality to improve public health outcomes by minimizing the threat of water-borne diseases, 16 such as systematic
water treatment and the installation of concrete slabs, fencing and drainage systems. Furthermore, infrastructure will
prioritize renewable energy (principally new solar-powered systems), energy efficiency improvements, and NRW

15 The total number of beneficiaries is voluntarily conservative to avoid double counting people who will benefit from more than one of water, electricity or sanitation

services (connection or service improvement. Estimation assumes an average of five people per household/connection.
16 The incidence of waterborne diseases – such as cholera, schistosomiasis, and other diarrheal diseases – have been shown to increase because of climate change:

heavy rainfall and high temperatures in particular (Levy et al, 2018).

                                                                                                                                                               Page 8
         The World Bank
         Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)


reduction to minimize fossil fuel-dependent energy-related GHG emissions while improving financial performance.
Subcomponents 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, and 2.2 support climate mitigation through substantially lowering GHG emissions. 17
Through building up the capacity of the water supply system to adapt to climate change, project activities will aim to
enhance climate change resilience not only for infrastructure, but also for vulnerable communities.
27.     Total IBRD financing is US$150,000,000. At Gabon’s request, US$375,000 of loan proceeds will finance the front-
end fee; as a result, the disbursable amount for component allocations is US$149,625,000.
        Component 1: Water Supply and Sanitation Services (US$77.750 million equivalent)
28.      Component 1 will support climate-resilient 18 investments in water supply and sanitation to: (i) improve service
quality, particularly in Greater Libreville; (ii) expand access to basic water services in selected secondary cities and
neighboring rural areas; and (iii) introduce the safe management of fecal sludge in Greater Libreville. It is structured to
complement and build on the activities to be implemented under the SEEG-SUEZ PPP. However, if the PPP does not
materialize or falls short of expectations, this component could be restructured to implement critical performance
improvement activities in the water sector.
29.     Subcomponent 1.1: SEEG Performance Improvement in Greater Libreville (US$7.000 million) will support SEEG
in improving service quality and financial sustainability of water supply in Greater Libreville, in synergy with the SEEG-
SUEZ PPP. Improvements will be achieved through the procurement and installation of about 20,000 smart water meters,
small diameter pipes and connection kits to connect or improve water connections to large and domestic consumers,
thereby addressing commercial losses in the area covered by the PPP contract and increasing water availability through
recovered water. This subcomponent contributes to a 45 percent reduction in emissions from systems improvement and
water boiling with charcoal displacement (see Annex 4).
30.      Subcomponent 1.2: Access to Networked Water Supply Services (US$60.750 million) will support the
construction and/or rehabilitation of climate-resilient infrastructure within SEEG’s service area to expand access to low-
carbon water supply in selected secondary cities, peri-urban and rural areas. Key activities include: (i) the rehabilitation
and reinforcement of water production, storage, transmission, and distribution network infrastructure to increase their
resilience to climate change-exacerbated risks; (ii) the extension and/or upgrade of the water distribution network, the
repair of water leaks, and the development of associated metered water connections to expand access to new
households, including the acquisition of meters; and (iii) the completion of unfinished water supply works from PASBMIR
in Bakoumba, Gamba, Lambaréné, and Ndendé, including the acquisition and installation of household water meters, to
ensure that the results expected by the relevant communities are achieved. This subcomponent entails a 73 percent
reduction in emissions (see Annex 4).
31.      Subcomponent 1.3: Access to Water Supply through Rural Mini-Grid Systems (US$5.000 million) includes the
development of climate-resilient mini-grid water supply systems in rural areas not currently served by SEEG. Each system
will be equipped with a solar pump, a reservoir, a distribution network and metered household connections procured and
installed through the project directly lowering emissions by 88 percent including through the displacement of water
boiling using charcoal. They will be managed by SEEG, except for public standposts, which will be managed by
municipalities with CNEE support. The project will involve local SEEG, CNEE, and municipality staff and communities
upfront to ensure ownership and build local capacity to operate and maintain the systems before and during the
infrastructure construction phase.



17 As per the EFA and GHG emissions analysis, the reduction in GHG emissions is above 25 percent.
18 All water supply and sanitation investments will integrate hard and soft measures recommended by the World Bank’s Resilient Water Infrastructure Design Brief,

published in 2020, where relevant. The brief focuses on the three natural hazards most likely to affect WSS infrastructure (droughts, floods, and high winds from
storms).

                                                                                                                                                         Page 9
       The World Bank
       Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)


32.      Subcomponent 1.4: Safely Managed Sanitation Services in Greater Libreville (US$5.000 million) will finance the
construction of Gabon’s first FSTP, in Libreville, to reduce the harmful environmental and health impacts of the current
practice of dumping fecal sludge untreated into the environment. This FSTP is leveraging collaboration with the African
Development Bank (AfDB), which is financing technical and Environmental and Social (E&S) studies. 19 Leveraging private
sector expertise and management through a DBOT approach, it will incorporate climate-resilient, circular economy and
resource recovery principles and will explore the opportunity to introduce for the first time in Gabon: (i) the processing
of fecal sludge to produce biogas and possibly generate electricity; and (ii) the transformation of treated fecal sludge
either as agricultural fertilizer, with the aim of reducing the use of chemical fertilizers, or as biochar, which combined with
sawdust or green waste can be used as a substitute to wood or charcoal for cooking. These technologies will directly
capture and reduce GHG emissions for climate mitigation by about 47 percent as detailed in Annex 4. The construction of
the FSTP will be complemented by Component 3 activities supporting the development of a holistic sanitation value chain
for fecal sludge management and transport to the FSTP.
       Component 2: Electricity Services (US$49.875 million equivalent)
33.     Component 2 will support low-carbon and resilient investments in electricity infrastructure to: (i) improve SEEG’s
technical and commercial performance and revenues, particularly in Greater Libreville; (ii) expand access to electricity
services in select peri-urban and rural areas through grid extension and densification and distributed energy solutions
such as solar home systems; and (iii) deploy hybrid systems combining diesel power plants with solar photovoltaic (PV)
mini-grids. Investments under this component will be guided primarily by the power sector master plan following a least-
cost energy planning approach, their potential to improve energy access and service quality, and synergies with water
and sanitation investments and/or where the PADUG will be implemented.
34.      Subcomponent 2.1: SEEG Performance Improvement in Greater Libreville (US$10.000 million) will support SEEG
in improving its technical and financial performance, particularly in Greater Libreville, and the quality of services for
existing customers. This includes: (i) the rehabilitation and modernization of its electricity dispatching system to enable
real-time monitoring and support efficient, transparent, and accountable execution of its operations and timely response
to demand fluctuations and technical disruptions from its command center (US$5.0 million); and (ii) the implementation
of a pilot Revenue Protection Program (RPP) with procurement and installation of at least 3,000 smart electricity meters
for large commercial, industrial and public sector customers in Greater Libreville, about 14 percent of the 21,000 targeted
customers collectively accounting for approximately 38 percent of SEEG’s total electricity revenue (US$5.0 million).
35.     The upgraded dispatching system will involve renewing critical IT and communication hardware, enhancing the
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) and Energy Management System (EMS) platforms connecting
production sites and substations for real-time electricity network monitoring and deploying a dynamic dashboard with
automated alerts. The system is expected to reduce unserved energy by enabling faster detection and resolution of
network disruptions, thereby reducing GHG emissions and enhancing overall system reliability, including during climate
related outages from floods and wildfires in Gabon. It will also contribute to the reduction of technical losses by improving
real-time monitoring, load management, and system optimization. These upgrades will be linked to capacity building
under Component 3 to establish a skilled field team to reduce outages. They will additionally allow greater renewable
energy integration, supporting Gabon’s target to increase the share of renewables, from 46 percent in 2020 to 87 percent
in 2030, particularly through the growing hydropower pipeline. Supporting back-end technology linked to the smart
meters is designed to be part of a scalable system that includes concentrator units (which act as communication hubs); a
Head-End System, which collects and manages raw data from meters; and a Meter Data Management System, which
processes, stores, and analyzes meter data for integration with SEEG’s customer management and billing systems.



19 Technical studies are being financed for three unassociated FSTPs, with the construction of the other two to be financed by AfDB.



                                                                                                                                       Page 10
         The World Bank
         Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)


Meanwhile, smart meters are intended to reduce commercial losses associated with the distribution network, while
increasing billing and collections rates.
36.     Subcomponent 2.2: Electrification through Grid Extension, Densification and Distributed Energy Solutions
(US$35.175 million) aims to increase access to electricity services by extending Low-Voltage (LV) and Medium Voltage
(MV) network lines. Key activities include extension of the LV and MV networks as well as rehabilitation and installation
of MV/LV substations in selected sites. Overloaded transformers will be upgraded to reduce capacity constraints in the
distribution network, minimize voltage drops, and improve service quality for end-users. These investments will
contribute to reduced distribution network losses by ensuring a more efficient and balanced power flow.
37.     In addition to grid extension and densification, this subcomponent will support distributed energy solutions,
particularly solar home systems, to deliver clean electricity access in off-grid and hard-to-reach areas. This integrated
approach will promote quick wins and support a cost-effective and resilient electrification strategy by combining
traditional grid expansion with decentralized renewable energy solutions. World Bank-executed TA will complement
project activities by supporting the GoG in developing a rural electrification strategy, including site identification and
potential private sector involvement through the design of appropriate business models and partnership approaches. A
pilot may be launched to connect about 1,000 households in remote areas, benefiting approximately 5,000 people, or
about 17 percent of the 30,000 people living in areas suitable for solar home systems.
38.     An allocation will also be made to finalize the electricity component left incomplete under the PASBMIR. This
includes completing infrastructure works to enhance electricity access and reliability in targeted regions, such as the
extension of grid networks along the Oyenano - Sindara axis and capacity reinforcement through the hybridization of
diesel power plants and network expansion, possibly in Aboumi, Ndangui, Batouala, and Güétsou.
39.      Subcomponent 2.3: Hybridization of Diesel Power Plants with Solar PV Mini-Grids (US$4.700 million) involves
the hybridization of existing diesel-powered thermal production plants through the deployment of seven solar hybrid
mini-grids, aiming to provide affordable climate-resilient access to electricity in selected villages. These off-grid systems,
currently managed by SEEG, will primarily rely on solar PV with battery storage, supplemented by optional diesel backup
generators to ensure supply reliability. By reducing diesel consumption, the integration of solar mini-grids is expected to
decrease SEEG’s operating costs for these selected sites by approximately 80 percent, as well as GHG emissions 20, saving
approximately CFA francs 835 million or US$1.5 million annually, particularly in remote areas where fuel logistics
significantly increase generation costs. These measures are expected to enhance climate resilience by enabling
uninterrupted power during disruptions such as flash floods. Where relevant, the extension of the distribution network
around the mini-grids will enable the electrification of hard-to-reach population at least cost.
        Component 3: PIR Strengthening for Improved Basic Services (US$11.000 million equivalent)
40.     This component will support ongoing PIR strengthening efforts by the GoG to improve the quality of its water,
sanitation, and electricity services.
41.    Sanitation value chain. Building on AfDB-funded PIR studies, this component will finance the preparation and
implementation of a roadmap for the development of a comprehensive sanitation value chain 21 in Greater Libreville,
informed by the World Bank’s Citywide Inclusive Sanitation (CWIS) Initiative, developed in partnership with the Gates
Foundation, taking into consideration lessons learned from similar contexts. Studies will also assess potential
management models including private operation for the FSTP as the SP, although responsible for O&M, intends to
delegate this responsibility to the private sector. It will also recommend cost-recovery mechanisms and train associated
personnel on safe FSTP operations. The roadmap will include establishment of registration, licensing and regulation


20 This activity will substantially lower GHG emissions by over 20 percent compared to a baseline with no PV/BESS installation.
21 Spanning the containment, emptying, transport, and treatment of fecal waste.



                                                                                                                                  Page 11
      The World Bank
      Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)


procedures for sanitation and sludge handling businesses, with a particular emphasis on ensuring the safety and dignity
of sanitation workers.
42.      Strengthening of MAUEE, SEEG, CNEE, ARSEE and SP. This component will finance tailored capacity building and
training activities for MAUEE, SEEG, CNEE, ARSEE and SP staff, including activities to address women's low representation
in leadership positions. The project will develop a diagnostic of and implement related short- and long-term action plans
to operationalize ARSEE, the regulator of both sectors, such that it can better investigate and inspect sector facilities and
services. The procurement of technical equipment will allow SEEG, CNEE, and SP to effectively conduct technical studies,
supervise works and maintain infrastructure. This component will additionally equip MAUEE’s new physicochemical and
isotopic water quality monitoring laboratory and set up its electronic archival system.
43.      Mobile payment. This component will finance the development of a mobile payment system for SEEG to improve
billing and collections efficiency and address cash flow challenges related to the dependence on external services. This
activity will be implemented with support from and in coordination with the Digital Gabon Project (P175987).
44.      Rehabilitation of the CDM training center. This subcomponent aims to support the CDM in expanding its role to
support the broader job creation agenda in Gabon through addressing training needs of all categories of existing water
and electricity sector professionals, while also attracting new professionals through programs that encourage the pursuit
of careers in the water and energy sector. It includes a study to refine the specific activities to be financed, including
support to the development of curriculum, training material, and technical equipment to enhance training offerings on
topics including technical skills, sanitation, solar power, health and safety, E&S risk management, and the impacts of
climate change (adaptation, mitigation and resilience). The project will ensure that trainings are adapted to attract and
accommodate women and youth and support placement in internships so they can attain employment and increase their
representation in the sectors’ labor force. In this respect, it will support dedicated programs to help promote SEEG’s
existing female staff to fill technical or other capacity gaps. The CDM will seek partnerships with universities, private sector
organizations and trade associations to reinforce its offerings and create a revenue stream enabling it to become
financially self-sufficient.
45.      Electricity master plan. This component will support MAUEE in updating the master plan for electricity
generation, transmission and distribution to reflect evolving demand, integrate least-cost planning, and inform a national
strategy to achieve universal access to electricity in a sustainable and coordinated manner. The master plan will aim at
improving the overall balance between electricity supply and demand, while promoting cost-efficient investments. It will
include a framework for the interconnection of currently isolated regional power grids to enhance the reliability and
resilience of electricity supply across the country, optimize power systems operation, reduce long-term costs, increase
the share of green energy in the production mix and improve climate-proofing of energy infrastructure (physical
hardening, planned redundancy or operational adjustments). This master plan will contribute to inform project
investments under Component 2.
      Component 4: Project Management and Resettlement Compensation (US$11.000 million equivalent)
46.     Subcomponent 4.1: Project Management (US$7.500 million) will fund : (i) Operating costs of the Project
Management Unit (PMU), including staff costs, consulting services, workplace facilities, vehicles, and other operational
needs to provide it with the means to conduct necessary activities related to technical, E&S, FM, procurement, Monitoring
and Evaluation (M&E), and communications activities; and (ii) Operating costs of the Steering Committee.
47.     Subcomponent 4.2: Resettlement Compensation (US$3.500 million) represents earmarked funding, at the
government’s request, to cover eventual compensation costs associated with the implementation of the Resettlement
Plan (RP) related to project-funded activities. These costs include, as needed, (i) compensation for land, structures, crops,
and income at replacement cost (including fees, taxes, and commissions, without depreciation); (ii) transitional assistance
and travel expenses; (iii) livelihood restoration measures for economically displaced persons; (iv) targeted support to

                                                                                                                       Page 12
      The World Bank
      Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)


vulnerable households; and (v) the costs of preparing and implementing instruments, consultation, the complaints
management mechanism, M&E, and contingencies. The allocated amount is a preliminary estimate and may be revised
through a project restructuring upon request of the GoG following completion of technical studies.
      Component 5: Contingent Emergency Response Component – CERC (US$0.000 million)
48.      A CERC is included in the project in accordance with Investment Project Financing (IPF) Policy, paragraphs 12 and
13, for Situations of Urgent Need of Assistance and Capacity Constraints. This will allow for rapid reallocation of the loan
uncommitted funds in the event of an eligible emergency. To meet CERC activation requirements, the government will
prepare a CERC Manual, submit an Emergency Action Plan (EAP), and meet the E&S requirements agreed in the EAP and
Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP).
                                                   Table 2: Role of Partners
  Name of       Nature of Involvement /Description
  Partner
  AfDB          AfDB is the other primary development partner supporting Gabon’s water-energy nexus. Through the EUR 117.4
                million Libreville Water Supply and Sanitation Program (PIAEPAL), AfDB is financing large-scale network-efficiency
                upgrades and NRW reduction that will directly improve SEEG’s operational readiness for PASBAP investments.
                Feasibility studies for three FSTPs are being financed under PIAEPAL—the proposed project will take forward the
                construction of one of these FSTPs, thereby accelerating AfDB-financed preparatory work. AfDB is currently in the
                early stages of the preparation of a follow-on investment project that is to include water, sanitation, and energy.
  Gates         The project will work with the Gates Foundation in embedding CWIS and circular economy principles in the design
  Foundation    of the FSTP, as well as in structuring the sanitation value chain. The Gates Foundation has significant experience in
                providing such TA to multiple countries around the world.
E. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design
49.     PASBAP builds upon the experience of PASBMIR and comparable World Bank-financed operations which
expand access to water supply and electricity services. Experience shows that integrated, multi-utility projects reap
economies of scope and scale when water and power investments are planned and implemented together. Strengthening
coordination between GoG and utility companies through a joint task force covering both water and electricity will
streamline decision-making and ensure alignment of project goals. Under PASBMIR, late involvement of SEEG and ad-
hoc interaction between the MAUEE, SEEG and the National Commission for Public Works and the Promotion of Business
and Employment (Commission Nationale des Travaux d'Intérêt Public pour la Promotion de l'Entreprenariat et de l'Emploi,
CN-TIPPEE) caused decision-making bottlenecks and blurred accountability during procurement and implementation.
PASBAP is addressing this issue by ensuring the implication of technical staff from SEEG and other sector institutions from
project preparation, allowing them to contribute to defining objectives, setting targets, and developing solutions. This
approach ensures that the project is aligned with sector and institutional priorities, fostering a stronger sense of
ownership and accountability. The project also clarifies the roles and responsibilities of the various members of the PMU.
Namely, CN-TIPPEE will primarily focus on managing fiduciary standards and safeguard policy adherence with technical
specifications and institutional strengthening being delegated to MAUEE and SEEG.
50.    PASBAP’s institutional arrangements reflect an evolution from those of PASBMIR to better ensure the
engagement of sector institutions and technical staff in all aspects of project implementation. PASBAP’s PMU will,
unlike PASBMIR’s, include dedicated full-time fiduciary and E&S staff hosted by CN-TIPPEE. Although not having such
dedicated staff under PASBMIR may seem to have reduced costs, their absence adversely impacted daily PMU operations,
leading to project implementation delays and underperformance. PASBAP also formalizes a high-level Sector Steering
Committee—co-chaired by MAUEE and SEEG and including ARSEE, CNEE and the MEFDP—that clears annual work plans,
procurement packages and policy actions. Finally, the project establishes a clear supervision framework that facilitates


                                                                                                                             Page 13
       The World Bank
       Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)


close field monitoring of project progress in partnership with technical bodies, allowing for the validation of key decisions
and compliance throughout the project lifecycle.
51.     Enhancing the effectiveness of the World Bank's intervention in Gabon's energy and water sector requires
strategic planning, a financially sustainable SEEG, and leveraging the value addition of the private sector. Although
Gabon has relatively high energy and water access rates, low billing and collections combined with high water and energy
losses prevent SEEG from covering its O&M costs with revenue. To ensure long-term project success and service
sustainability, it is essential to improve operational efficiency through loss reduction, better revenue collection, and tariff
adjustments, so that all consumers are customers, and billing and collections ensure the creditworthiness and financial
sustainability of the service provider and its capacity to attract and leverage the private sector. Sustainability-focused
business models and performance-based incentives coupled with PPPs and continuous stakeholder engagement can
drive timely, high-quality results and ensure long-term impact and service reliability.

III. PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
52.     The project is anchored within the MAUEE, with implementation arrangements structured as follows:
      a. The Project Steering Committee (PSC) is to provide overall policy guidance, strategic direction, and to oversee
         project implementation. PSC meetings will be held at least once every year, or more frequently as needed. As
         the GoG is planning to establish a global steering committee for all donor and multilateral financed projects in
         2026, the composition will be designated through a forthcoming legal text. In the event that this steering
         committee is not operationalized at least one month after project effectiveness, a project specific steering
         committee, chaired by the General Secretary of the MAUEE and co-chaired by the General Secretary of the
         MEFDP, will be established and include key senior officials from MAUEE (including the Director Generals for
         Water and Electricity) as well as representatives from relevant sector institutions (SEEG, the SP, CNEE, and
         ARSEE). This committee would then be replaced by the global steering committee upon its establishment.
      b. The Project Management Unit (PMU) will be headed by the MAUEE. It will be responsible for overall project
         implementation, resource management, and the preparation of the Annual Work Plan and Budget. It will
         coordinate all aspects of project implementation with the effective involvement of key sector institutions,
         namely SEEG, SP, CNEE, and ARSEE, to ensure their adequate consultation and contribution to the decision
         making process. In parallel, the CN-TIPPEE, which reports to the MEFDP, will manage fiduciary functions:
         procurement, FM, and E&S risks management. Its composition will, at a minimum, include:
          (i)     MAUEE-based personnel: the Project Coordinator, two water supply specialists (seconded from MAUEE
                  and SEEG to the PMU), a sanitation specialist, two electricity specialists (seconded from MAUEE and
                  SEEG to the PMU), a M&E specialist, and a communications specialist.
          (ii)    CN-TIPPEE personnel: an FM specialist, an internal auditor, a senior procurement specialist, a junior
                  procurement specialist, an accountant, an M&E specialist, an environmental risk management
                  specialist, and a social risk management specialist, a Gender-Based Violence (GBV) specialist, with
                  additional staff and consultants available to support peak workloads.
      c. Unified management structure. To ensure that the PMU is effectively integrated and functions as one sole
         entity, all personnel, whether anchored at the MAUEE or CN-TIPPEE, will operate under a unified management
         structure under MUAEE’s leadership, which will endeavor to ensure seamless coordination between technical
         oversight and fiduciary functions. Roles and responsibilities for each entity and a streamlined decision-making
         process will be codified in the Project Operations Manual (POM).


                                                                                                                       Page 14
      The World Bank
      Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)


53.     Coordination with sector institutions. Given SEEG’s critical role in the O&M of planned infrastructure, it is critical
that it is associated in the day-to-day management of the project, including investment planning, procurement, and
contract supervision. To facilitate such coordination, in addition to the SEEG seconded personnel within the PMU, SEEG
will designate focal points to work with the PMU to avoid any asymmetry of information between the two institutions.

B. Results Monitoring, Evaluation, and Verification Arrangements
54.    Project-level M&E systems will track implementation progress, measure intermediate outcomes, and evaluate
progress on indicators of the results framework. At project inception, a baseline survey will be conducted to establish the
baseline values of indicators in the results framework. Beneficiaries will be surveyed in subsequent years to track changes
in conditions attributable to the project. The PMU will be responsible for monitoring and reporting project
implementation progress and agreed indicators. In addition, activities to be monitored will include timely, efficient, and
transparent supervision of procurement and contract management; effective implementation of the E&S Management
Plan; and successful completion of studies and training activities.
55.     The PMU will prepare quarterly and annual progress reports for the World Bank and will leverage Geo-Enabling
initiative for Monitoring and Supervision (GEMS) tools for activity mapping and data collection. The PMU will collect
and analyze all data and results generated under the project and will prepare progress reports for the World Bank’s
review and approval. Monitoring results and outcomes, in accordance with the results framework (Annex 1), will be
reported in project progress reports. The PMU will have a M&E unit whose responsibility will be to gather and consolidate
data for M&E purposes. If needed, consultants will be hired locally to provide M&E services, including data collection and
analysis for reporting on project results (e.g., indicators, outputs, and outcomes). Finally, PASBAP will use GEMS to map
and monitor project investments to inform decisions on targeting, sector priorities and operational challenges. To the
extent that it is possible, indicators will be disaggregated by gender. The World Bank will supervise the project over its
lifetime. A midterm review will be conducted no later than three years after effectiveness, which will reassess the
periodicity of project implementation reports as may be required.

C. Disbursement Arrangements
56.    Project activities will be financed through two Designated Accounts (DAs) that will be opened in a commercial
bank acceptable to the World Bank and managed by CN-TIPPEE. The DAs will be managed according to the disbursement
procedures described in the Disbursement and Financial Information Letter (DFIL) for the project and CN-TIPPEE’s revised
POM. The ceiling of the accounts will be decided by the disbursement services of the World Bank and should consider
the disbursement capacity of the implementing agency. Disbursements will be made in accordance with the World Bank
Disbursement Guidelines for Projects, dated February 1, 2017, and will be report-based.
57.    Upon effectiveness, a withdrawal application (WA) based on a six-month cash flow forecast will be submitted
to the World Bank. Following WA approval, the World Bank will disburse funds to the DAs. Thereafter, each new WA,
together with an Interim Financial Report (IFR) and a six-month cash flow forecast, will have to be submitted to the World
Bank within 45 days after the end of each calendar quarter period, for funds to be disbursed to the DAs. Further
instructions on the withdrawal of loan proceeds will be outlined in the DFIL, and details on the operation of the DAs will
be provided in the financial and accounting section of the revised CN-TIPPEE’s POM.
58.    The other methods of disbursing the funds (reimbursement, direct payment, and special commitment) will also
be available to the project. The minimum value of the direct payments, reimbursements and special commitments will
be defined in the DFIL. The project will have the option to sign and submit withdrawal applications electronically using
the eSignatures module accessible from the World Bank’s Client Connection website.




                                                                                                                      Page 15
        The World Bank
        Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)


IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY
A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis
      Technical Analysis
59.    Pre-feasibility studies have been completed by SEEG for all electricity works under Component 2. The World
Bank also conducted a rapid diagnostic of SEEG’s technical and financial performance, and its urgent investment needs
in the electricity sector, during the pre-appraisal mission in May 2025. The preparation of preliminary and detailed
designs for water and electricity works under Components 1 and 2 are being procured through a project preparation
advance and a preparation grant from the Grant Facility for Project Preparation (GFPP). The detailed design of the FSTP
under Component 3 is being developed through AfDB financing. The PMU will prioritize updating the national master
plan for electricity and preparing technical studies and bidding documents for major investments. Activities related to
improving performance will be a priority during implementation, to improve the operators’ financial situation to a level
allowing it to absorb the expected operational deficit that extending access to additional peri-urban and rural areas will
represent on its balance sheets.
60.     All water and electricity infrastructure financed under PASBAP will be owned by the SP and transferred to SEEG
for O&M in accordance with the existing concession contract signed on January 5th, 2022. SEEG leadership embarked
on a transformation program to improve its operational and financial performance, to strengthen the sustainability of
services developed under the project, and to improve its creditworthiness to enable private sector participation and
financing for improved and extended access to service. This program involves the SEEG-SUEZ PPP for water supply, and
the development of a Performance Implementation plan for electricity. PASBAP will directly support ongoing efforts
through Subcomponents 1.1 and 2.1 and Component 3. As the public asset holding company, the SP will be responsible
for assuring the O&M of the FSTP. The AfDB is currently financing studies, to be complimented as necessary by studies
under PASBAP, that will support SP in making an informed decision on the management structure of the FSTP, which is
likely to involve the recruitment of a private entity for management through a DBOT contract.
61.    Paris Alignment. The project is aligned with the climate adaptation and mitigation goals of the Paris Agreement.
It supports Gabon’s updated Nationally Determined Contribution by strengthening access to water supply and renewable
energy. The project directly supports the implementation of the Gabon Country Climate and Development Report
(CCDR), 22 which identifies priority actions to enhance Gabon’s climate resilience, including in the water and electricity
sectors. It will specifically contribute to Gabon CCDR’s recommendation to improve SEEG’s performance and optimize
the use of water resources, expanding access to water supply, and improving sanitation through fecal sludge
management.
62.     Assessment and reduction of adaptation risks. Key risks that could impact the project include changing
precipitation, floods, coastal erosion, sea level rise, storms, and extreme heat. The project’s physical infrastructure will
incorporate climate-resilient design. Water supply and sanitation systems will follow the World Bank’s Resilient Water
Infrastructure Design Brief, 23 while electricity distribution networks and solar PV mini-grids will apply location-specific
resilience measures tailored to energy systems. For instance, distribution lines will use climate-resistant materials such
as heat-resistant cables and flood-proofed pylons. For mini-grids and solar home systems, the use of hardened and
waterproofed material will be preferred. See Annex 4 for details. The residual adaptation risk for all activities is therefore
expected to be acceptable, and the project is considered aligned with the Paris Agreement on adaptation and resilience.
63.    Assessment and reduction of mitigation risks. The project activities are not expected to have a negative impact
on the country’s transition to a low GHG emission development pathway nor lead to risks of carbon lock-in. Proposed

22 WBG, November 2025.
23 Relevant measures may include improved siting of system components, more robust construction materials, reinforcement of component design, waterproofing of

electrical components, backup power systems, as well as improvements to O&M, monitoring, and financial stability.

                                                                                                                                                    Page 16
        The World Bank
        Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)


activities financed by the project are all on the Universally Aligned List, including the water supply and sanitation services
under Component 1, electricity distribution infrastructure and solar PV mini-grids under Component 2, and PIR activities
under Component 3. Based on preliminary estimates of project activities’ impacts on GHG emissions (see Annex 4), the
project contributes to GHG net emission reductions: -1.39 million tons of Carbon Dioxide equivalent (tCO2eq) during the
economic lifetime of the project and -58,146 tCO2eq annual average. Therefore, there are no or low mitigation risks and
the operation is considered aligned with the Paris Agreement on mitigation.
      Economic and Financial Analysis
64.     The economic and financial analysis (see Annex 2) was conducted in accordance with World Bank
methodological guidelines, applying a discount rate of 8 percent over the evaluation period. The economic assessment
incorporates quantifiable benefits related to improved access to water and sanitation services, enhanced electricity
distribution, NRW reduction, health benefits, and environmental externalities, including avoided GHG emissions. The
financial analysis assesses the project’s cash flow based on prevailing tariff structures, without considering willingness-
to-pay, thus providing conservative estimates of financial viability.
65.    From an economic perspective, the project demonstrates robust viability, even without considering
environmental externalities. Tables in Annex 2 show the Net Present Value (NPV), Economic Internal Rate of Return
(EIRR) and the Benefit-Cost Ratio (BCR) of the project. Accounting for all quantifiable economic benefits, the project’s
NPV is estimated at between US$133 million and US$168 million, with an EIRR between 22.5 percent and 26.6 percent.
66.     From a financial standpoint, the project demonstrates overall financial profitability, with a Financial Internal
Rate of Return (FIRR) of 7.5 percent and a payback period of 12 years, both within the boundaries of a 25-year loan
with a 5-year grace period. The FIRRs of Component 1 and Component 2 are 5.5 and 10.0 percent respectively the water
and sanitation component. Component 1’s lower FIRR is largely due to water’s consideration as a social service, leading
to increased subsidization.
B. Fiduciary
     (i) Financial Management (FM)
67.    An FM assessment was undertaken to evaluate the adequacy of the project FM arrangements. CN-TIPPEE will
have the overall fiduciary responsibility of PASBAP. The FM arrangements will be based on the existing arrangements in
place for all World Bank-financed projects in Gabon. CN-TIPPEE is familiar with the World Bank FM requirements and is
currently adequately managing three World Bank-financed projects: Digital Gabon Project (P175987), eGabon
(P132824) 24, and Harmonizing and Improving Statistics in West and Central Africa (HISWACA - SOP 2, P180085). CN-
TIPPEE is endowed with an acceptable fiduciary platform (staff, accounting system, manual of procedures under revision,
internal and external audit arrangements). To handle the workload this project will generate one dedicated FM Specialist
and one dedicated Accountant will be competitively recruited based upon Terms of Reference (ToR) acceptable to the
World Bank.
68.    The overall FM risk is considered Substantial. Although the ratings of some components of the FM system have
been upgraded with some mitigation measures, the proposed residual risk is Substantial. Subject to the successful
completion of actions recommended in Table 3 to address the risks identified, the proposed FM arrangements are
considered acceptable to the World Bank in accordance with the FM Manual for World Bank Investment Project Financing
Operations effective on March 1, 2010, and re-issued on September 7, 2021.




24 eGabon Project’s FM performance was rated Moderately Satisfactory following the last SPN mission of September 2024. The external audit for the 2023 for

eGabon was unmodified and its September 30, 2024 interim un-audited financial report was submitted on time with satisfactory quality.

                                                                                                                                                       Page 17
         The World Bank
         Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)


                                                  Table 3. FM Action Plan
Action                                                                  Responsible entity   Deadline and conditionality
Appoint one FM Specialist and one Accountant within CN-TIPPEE.          CN-TIPPEE            No later than three months
                                                                                             after the effectiveness date.
Revise CN-TIPPEE’s POM.                                                 CN-TIPPEE
Customize CN-TIPPEE’s accounting software to handle activities          CN-TIPPEE
financed under the project.
Recruit an independent external auditor acceptable to the World Bank.   CN-TIPPEE            No later than six months
                                                                                             post effectiveness date

69.   Budgeting. The PMU will prepare the project annual work program and budget. The budget execution will be
monitored on a quarterly basis through the IFR and any variances will be explained and remedial measures indicated.
The process to identify the activities to be undertaken and the role of the respective parties in the preparation,
implementation, and monitoring of the budget will be developed in the POM.
70.    Internal controls and Internal audit. The internal controls system and procedures will be detailed in the POM.
The CN-TIPPEE’s internal audit unit risk assessment and annual work program will be updated to include this project. To
reinforce the use of the country system, the government's internal control system could be strengthened by establishing
a close collaboration between the Inspector General of Finances (Inspection Générale des Finances, IGF) and CN-TIPPEE’s
internal audit unit for conducting periodical internal audit review of the project activities.
71.     Accounting Policies and Procedures: Gabon is a member of the Organisation for the Harmonisation of Corporate
Law in Africa (L'Organisation pour l'harmonisation en Afrique du droit des affaires, OHADA), and as such adheres to the
Uniform System of Accounting for Companies in the OHADA zone (SYSCOHADA), the accounting standards in use in the
OHADA country members. SYSCOHADA complies with the generally accepted international accounting standards. CN-
TIPPEE will ensure, within three months after project effectiveness, the proper functioning of its accounting software and
its customization to handle the activities financed under this project. The project code and chart of accounts will reflect
the specific needs of the project in compliance with the Accounting System for Non-Profit Entities (SYCEBNL).
72.   Reporting. The FM team of CN-TIPPEE will be required to prepare an IFR on a quarterly basis. The format and
content of the IFRs was agreed upon with the Borrower during negotiations. The IFR reports will be submitted to the
World Bank no later than 45 days after the end of the quarter to which they are related.
73.     External financial audit. An independent external auditor will be appointed as per the ToR agreed with the World
Bank to carry out the project’s external audit. The shortlist will be reviewed by the World Bank. The audit will comply
with the International Standards on Auditing. In line with the World Bank access to information policy, the audit reports
will be disclosed. The external audit reports will be submitted to the World Bank no later than six months following the
end of the fiscal year. The process leading to the selection of the auditor may be handled by the Supreme Audit Institution
to reinforce the independence of the external auditor.
74.     Transparency, accountability, and anti-corruption efforts will be supported via a complaint handling mechanism;
a communication strategy to inform the public through the media on all aspects of the project; and the publication on
the implementing entity and/or government websites of budgets, financial reports and audited financial statements. CN-
TIPPEE will also address fraud and anti-corruption in accordance with the World Bank Anti-Corruption Guidelines referred
to in the Financing Agreement. Furthermore, the revised CN-TIPPEE’s POM will include a specific safety mechanism that
will enable citizens to denounce abuses or irregularities.
75.     Implementation support plan. Implementation support missions will be carried out at least twice a year and will
also include desk reviews, on-site visits and capacity building.

                                                                                                                        Page 18
         The World Bank
         Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)


     (ii) Procurement
76.    Applicable Regulations and Anti-Fraud Measures. Procurement for the project will be carried out in accordance
with the World Bank’s “Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers for Goods, Works, Non-Consulting and Consulting
Services,” dated July 2016 and revised of September 2025 (Procurement Regulations), and the “Guidelines on Preventing
and Combating Fraud and Corruption in Projects Financed by IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants,” dated October 15,
2006 and revised July 1, 2016, and other provisions stipulated in the Financing Agreement. The project will use the
Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) to plan, record, and track procurement transactions.
77.    Procurement implementation arrangements. Procurement activities for the proposed project will be executed
by the CN-TIPPEE for the fiduciary aspects, while the technical aspects of procurement will be implemented by the PMU
set up within the MAUEE with full involvement of relevant sector institutions – in particular SEEG, ARSEE, CNEE, and SP.
Based on the PASBMIR experience, a dedicated, qualified and experienced procurement specialist and a procurement
assistant within CN-TIPPEE will manage the procurement activities.
78.     Key procurement activities will be implemented in secondary cities and rural areas. They will include work
contracts for: (i) the construction and rehabilitation of mini-grid water supply systems in rural areas; (ii) the reinforcement
and extension of water supply networks in secondary cities and surrounding rural areas; (iii) the development of metered
household connections; 25 (iv) the construction of Gabon’s first FSTP; (v) the rehabilitation and upgrade of overloaded
transformers in the substations; (vi) the roll-out of solar PV mini-grids; (vii) the construction, rehabilitation and
modernization of electrical transformer substations, the rehabilitation of selected sections of transmission lines; (viii) the
consultancy services for institutional strengthening and sector studies, etc. The simplified Project Procurement Strategy
for Development (PPSD) and the initial Procurement Plan for 18 months have been prepared, reviewed, and approved
by the World Bank. The procurement Plan includes 30 activities of a total amount of US$112.7 million. All procurement
activities will be conducted using the World Bank’s Standard Procurement Documents for international competitive
procurement, while Gabon’s national procedures may be used for contracts approaching the national market subject to
World Bank requirements for open advertising, eligibility, and anti-corruption compliance. The PPSD emphasizes grouped
national open Request for Bids to accelerate implementation, promote local SME participation, ensure transparency, and
manage risks effectively through coordinated governance involving the MAUEE, CN-TIPPEE, and SEEG for sustainable
service delivery and project success.
79.     Procurement risks. A procurement risk assessment has been conducted as part of the PPSD. Key risks identified
for previous and similar projects with scattered contracts in different cities to be implemented by two different entities
(CN-TIPPEE as fiduciary unit and PMU as technical unit) and involving relevant sector institutions as beneficiaries and
stakeholders, particularly SEEG, ARSEE, CNEE, and SP, include: (i) lack of capacity/experience in the management of
procurement activities according to the World Bank Regulations by the newly created PMU within the MAUEE; (ii) lack
of ownership by the stakeholders/beneficiaries in the implementation of procurement activities; (iii) interferences in the
procurement process; and (iv) delays in procurement implementation and contract awards. Based on the above, the
overall unmitigated risk for procurement is high. To mitigate these risks, the following measures are proposed: (i) ensure
that CN-TIPPEE appoints experienced and qualified procurement specialists; (ii) involve all actors concerned (CN-TIPPEE,
PMU, SEEG, ARSEE, CNEE, and SP) in the management of procurement and train them in the preparation of technical
specifications/ToRs, bid evaluations and contract management; (iii) ensure that every actor plays its role based on its
responsibility in the procurement management; and (iv) at the request of the government, the World Bank may provide
Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS). The proposed residual risk is Substantial, and the overall fiduciary
risk for the project is also Substantial.



25 To avoid the delays experienced under PASBMIR, the PMU – not SEEG – will directly procure meters per relevant technical specifications to be installed by SEEG.



                                                                                                                                                          Page 19
        The World Bank
        Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)


C. Environmental, Social and Legal Operational Policies

80.    The E&S risks are rated Substantial. The project finances mostly medium-scale, and a few large infrastructure
works, including (i) water and sanitation investments include construction and rehabilitation of mini-grid water supply
systems in rural areas; extension of water supply networks in secondary cities and surrounding rural areas; development
of metered household connections and public standposts; and construction of the FSTP at Igoumie in Libreville; (ii) energy
investments comprise hybrid Solar PV mini-grids; grid extension in rural and peri-urban areas; extension of the MV
network; installation of new MV/LV substations; extension of HV/LV networks and capacity reinforcement through the
hybridization of diesel power plants and network expansion. For most of these investments, the exact technical
characteristics and/or locations will be determined during project implementation. The project is therefore following a
Framework approach on E&S. Investments will be implemented in areas with small to medium populations that include
Indigenous Peoples in some areas.
81.     The project's environmental risk is rated substantial, particularly concerning Gabon's first FSTP in Greater
Libreville, designed to mitigate fecal sludge impacts. The FSTP follows sustainable and circular economic principles and
includes biogas production. The AfDB, with the World Bank, leads the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)
process; final approval may require additional studies if standards aren't met. Other similar infrastructure projects show
moderate risk due to stable rural ecosystems and low population density in targeted areas. Urban impacts may include
service interruptions and Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) risks. Consistent involvement of qualified specialists and
stakeholder training is crucial for effective E&S management. The Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) outlines risk mitigation measures, institutional roles, and budgeting. Contractors must submit detailed OHS plans
prior to work, and road safety plans are needed for TA activities. Protecting Gabon's biodiversity requires all personnel
to follow a Biodiversity Code of Conduct to prevent illegal hunting and logging.
82.     Social risks are rated substantial and are related to the potential exclusion of vulnerable peoples, including
women, from consultation processes or benefits of the project if adequate measures are not foreseen; low to medium
scale resettlement of mostly economical displacement, temporary disruption of economic activities or access to homes
or businesses; poor labor conditions and increased GBV, Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) risks
in the working environment and from project’s workers towards communities; and Borrower’s poor track record in
managing E&S risks. Activities under Components 1 and 2 may involve land acquisition and result in involuntary
resettlement, including temporary disruption of economic activities and access to assets. A Resettlement Policy
Framework, while site-specific RPs will be developed and disclosed once technical designs are finalized and prior to the
start of works. GoG intends to request that resettlement costs be financed under the project. The amount estimated for
this purpose is proposed as a maximum and may be updated on the basis of the RPs.
83.     E&S instruments and measures to mitigate E&S risks. The Borrower has prepared and disclosed the following
instruments: (1) an ESMF on October 30th, 2025; (2) a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) on November 21st, 2025; (3)
an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) on October 30th, 2025; (4) a Labor Management Procedures (LMP) on
November 24th, 2025; (5) a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) with its Grievance Mechanism (GM) redisclosed on
December 15th, 2025; (6) and a SEA/SH action plan on November 21st, 2025. 26 These documents were also disclosed on
the World Bank website. 27 The SEP and the SEA/SH action plan will need to be updated and re-disclosed following local
stakeholder consultations once technical studies have been finalized. The project’s ESCP, negotiated and redisclosed on
December 22nd, 2025, outlines key measures and actions the Government will undertake to manage the project’s E&S
risks, as well as to address institutional capacity gaps. These include targeted training and technical support for E&S
specialists, as well as relevant project stakeholders.


26 Link to disclosed E&S documents: https://www.cntippee-gabon.org/publications.
27 Disclosure on the World Bank website were as follows: ESMF on October 29th, 2025; SEA/SH action plan, IPPF, LMP, RPF, SEP with GM on January 12th, 2026.



                                                                                                                                                       Page 20
        The World Bank
        Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)


84.     The preparation of detailed ESIAs, Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs), and RPs as needed for
specific infrastructure investments to be identified during implementation will be guided by the framework instruments
and ToRs acceptable to the World Bank. A Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment will also be prepared to inform
the Master Plan. The project has also developed a screening tool to assess all subproject sites for risks of physical or
economic displacement, as well as biodiversity risk, particularly in forested, riverine, or other ecologically sensitive areas
where activities may lead to habitat degradation. The ESMF has allocated 5.8 percent of the project's budget to the
management of E&S risks. Given the project's broad scope, consistent use of remote monitoring (GEMS) tools by E&S will
be beneficial. Two HEIS consultants (E&S) hired by the World Bank have supported the Borrower in preparing
Environmental and Social Framework instruments. Extending their support during implementation may also be
considered.
85.     Gender. Traditionally, women have little say in decisions related to electricity, water, sanitation and hygiene
planning and implementation. For this reason, the project’s gender activities, among others, will seek to include women,
girls and people with disabilities in the decision-making of water supply points locations and design and using a
representation quota during meetings to validate local development plans (according to Law No. 9/2016 of September
5, 2016, on quotas, which guarantees 30 percent representation of women and youth in Gabon). Leveraging the World
Bank Water Equal Aqua platform, the project will help ARSEE, CNEE, the MAUEE General Directorates (Directions
Générales, DGs) of Water and Energy, SEEG, and SP in adopting Gender Gap Actions Plan that will focus on activities
aimed at improving the participation and promotion of women in water and electricity-related jobs, for which gender
gaps were identified. The initial assessment revealed that the most significant bottlenecks were related to a lower rate
of recruitment and internal promotion of women in such positions, driven by their lack of technical qualifications and
certifications, as well as soft skills. Therefore, project actions will seek to encourage professional development of early
and mid-career professionals to support their promotion into technical and operational roles through targeted training
provided at the rehabilitated CDM training center. These trainings will impart a mix of technical and soft skills and provide
participants with certifications endorsed by partnering universities/technical institutes, to enhance their chances of
promotion into mid-level and senior technical and operational roles sector institutions. Further actions such as
recruitment drives and apprenticeships targeting final-year STEM students and early graduates will also be supported to
strengthen the recruitment pipeline for technical and operational roles across the water and energy sectors. Candidates
will also receive certification upon completion of the apprenticeship program. By the end of the project, a total of 100
professionals and career aspirants will be trained and supported to obtain sector-relevant certifications through the CDM
annually, of which 35 percent will be women, which is well above the observed participation rate for women in this type
of program. The project will seek to ensure that more women who achieve such certification are subsequently hired or
promoted into technical and operational roles, as tracked through the indicator “Technical and operational positions
occupied by women within sector institutions (ARSEE, CNEE, DG Eau, DG Energie, SEEG, SP)”, with a target increase from
8 percent 28 (88 out of 1,102) to 12 percent by project closure. Furthermore, the project will strengthen institutional
capacity to sustain the above programs beyond its duration and will assist in reviewing HR policies to recommend
improvements that promote women's participation in the sector.
86.     Citizen engagement (CE) is at the core of the project design. In addition to the GM, the proposed project will use
two main CE mechanisms: consultations and client satisfaction surveys during implementation. Consultations will be used
to collect feedback from communities to identify optimal locations for basic infrastructure, including public standposts,
and other water and electricity connection related enhancements at the local level. Additionally, client satisfaction
surveys will be conducted first at an early stage of project implementation, targeting all beneficiaries registered by SEEG
to receive a water and/or electricity connection, and second at mid-term to identify any necessary implementation
corrective measures. That second survey will be key for the PMU to close the feedback loop and integrate beneficiaries’


28 As of October 2025, women occupy 88 out of 1,102 engineering and STEM positions at ARSEE, CNEE, MAUEE DGs of Water and Energy, SEEG and SP.



                                                                                                                                                 Page 21
       The World Bank
       Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)


comments and inputs in project interventions. Awareness raising actions such as promoting the benefits of prepaid water
meters to be introduced through the project will be key for sustaining quality service delivery and behavior change.
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalpolicy#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies                                                               Triggered?
Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                              Yes
Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                        No


87.      The Policy for Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 has been applied to the project. Although the
project is being prepared using a framework approach and the exact locations of the interventions have not yet been
determined, some of the interventions planned under Subcomponents 1.2 and 1.3 of the project (e.g., surface water
intakes and boreholes for increased potable water supply production) may require using groundwater and surface water
resources connected with the Benito/Ntem basin – shared with Equatorial Guinea and Cameroon; the Ogooué basin –
shared with the Republic of Congo, Cameroon and Equatorial Guinea; or within the boundaries of the Nyanga Basin
Aquifer (FY082), the Ogooué Basin Aquifer (FY033), or the Plateaux Aquifer (AF034) – transboundary aquifers shared
with the Republic of Congo. In accordance with the Policy, the three riparian countries were notified. Equatorial Guinea
requested clarification which the World Bank provided. The Republic of Congo expressed its no objection to the project.
Based on the outcome of the notification process and the assessment that the project will not cause appreciable harm,
the Regional Vice President gave his approval to finalize project preparation on December 9th, 2025.
Grievance Redress Services:
88.      Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a project supported by the World
Bank may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance mechanisms or the Bank’s Grievance Redress Service
(GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to address project-related concerns.
Project affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the Bank’s independent Accountability
Mechanism (AM). The AM houses the Inspection Panel, which determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, as a
result of Bank non-compliance with its policies and procedures, and the Dispute Resolution Service, which provides
communities and borrowers with the opportunity to address complaints through dispute resolution. Complaints may
be submitted to the AM at any time after concerns have been brought directly to the attention of Bank Management
and after Management has been given an opportunity to respond. For information on how to submit complaints to the
Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS), visit http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For information on how to submit
complaints to the Bank’s Accountability Mechanism, visit https://accountability.worldbank.org.

V. KEY RISKS

89.  The project’s overall risk rating is Substantial. Based on explanations of risk ratings and proposed mitigation
measures, the residual risks are considered Substantial and will be reassessed during implementation.
90.      Macroeconomic risk is Substantial. Despite a moderate growth path, Gabon’s economy is still dependent on
extractives exports (mainly oil and manganese) and thus remains highly vulnerable to shifts in global demand and oil
prices. Gabon is also subject to high risks such as global tensions, stricter financing conditions, and oil price fluctuations,
which could negatively affect growth, inflation, and the country’s fiscal and external positions. Moreover, an
expansionary spending policy, accumulating debt arrears, lack of transparency, potential high levels of off-budget
operations, underperforming governance, and lack of autonomy of state-owned enterprises all contribute to higher
fiscal risks. Without corrective measures, these conditions may lead to a rapid rise in public debt over 2025-2026, limiting

                                                                                                                        Page 22
      The World Bank
      Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)


the GoG’s abilities to invest in the water and energy sectors and subsidize service provision. To mitigate this risk, the
project includes TA activities towards improving the financial equilibrium of SEEG, therefore reducing dependence on
government funds. It is also of note that the GoG has expressed a strong commitment to economic and public
administration reforms and is implementing a new development plan.
91.    Sector Strategy and Policy risks are Substantial. PASBAP is fully aligned with Gabon’s sector strategy.
Nevertheless, the sector suffers from overlapping mandates and historically limited coordination between the MAUEE,
which is responsible for sector policy, regulation, and licensing, and SEEG, the state‐owned utility charged with service
delivery and operations. If left unaddressed, this institutional fragmentation could lead to regulatory approval delays,
duplication in investment planning, and data sharing gaps that undermine evidence‐based decision making and capacity
to implement the strategy. Component 3 facilitates coordination through improving PIR conditions, updating strategies
and master plans, and developing information systems for informed decision making. The successful implementation of
these activities, including the approval and implementation of key recommendations, depends on continued
commitment of the GoG towards such reforms. Deviating from these strategies and policy reforms would pose a risk to
the successful implementation of the project and the sustainability of investments. However, this risk is mitigated by
the high priority given to reform in the water and energy sectors by the highest levels of the GoG, notably the Presidency.
92.     Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability risk is Substantial. Within the PMU, CN-TIPPEE
brings strong experience of previous World Bank‑funded projects, robust procurement processes, sound FM, and
diligent safeguards compliance. Nevertheless, a lack of project-dedicated staff, result of a policy of mutualization led to
significant delays in the implementation of previous projects. To mitigate this risk, PASBAP will recruit dedicated core
specialists. Additionally, insufficient SEEG engagement during the implementation of PASBMIR and a lack of
coordination between MAUEE and SEEG resulted in the non-achievement of its objectives. To mitigate this risk, the
project includes various coordination mechanisms, including through the PSC and the inclusion of both seconded staff
and focal points from SEEG in the PMU. Targeted capacity-building will strengthen integrated resource planning, joint
development and monitoring of sector indicators, and a unified M&E framework. The PSC will ensure continuous
oversight and prompt corrective action should any inter‐agency gaps arise. Sustainability risks arising from SEEG’s
financial constraints—stagnant tariffs, high NRW and deferred maintenance—will be mitigated through TA activities,
investments in information systems, and technical and commercial loss reduction programs both through PASBAP and
SEEG’s recently-agreed PPP arrangement with SUEZ and nascent partnerships on the electricity side. The project takes
a flexible approach wherein performance improvement-related activities will be adjusted during implementation based
upon sector developments. The project will also seek to engage stakeholders in acquiring hands-on experience with
infrastructure during project implementation, helping to foster local ownership and effective oversight.
93.     Fiduciary risk is Substantial. Key procurement risks include: (a) several stakeholders at different levels of
government, which has led to difficulties and delays in previous projects; (b) lack of capacity and experience of the newly
created PMU in the management of procurement activities according to World Bank Regulations; (c) non-involvement
of the stakeholders in the implementation of the project; (d) lack of ownership of the activities by the beneficiaries;
(e) interferences in the procurement process; and (f) delays in procurement implementation and contract awards. To
mitigate these risks, the following measures are proposed: (a) ensure that CN-TIPPEE appoints project-dedicated and
experienced qualified procurement specialists; (b) involve all the actors concerned (PMU staff, focal points within the
ministries and municipalities, and stakeholders/beneficiaries) in the management of procurement and train them in the
preparation of technical specifications, bid evaluations and contract management; and (c) at the request of GoG, the
World Bank may provide hands-on implementation support. Further procurement controls are outlined in the PPSD.
94.    E&S risks are Substantial, given the scope of small‑ to medium‑scale infrastructure works, including
rehabilitation or construction of mini-grid water supply systems, water supply network rehabilitation and extensions,
MV and LV grid extensions, substations, hybrid solar PV mini‑grids, and the construction of the first FSTP in Gabon, much
of which will be defined during implementation. The FSTP construction activities may lead to significant E&S risks, such
                                                                                                                    Page 23
      The World Bank
      Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)


as noise and vibration, soil erosion, sedimentation of waterbodies, air emissions, solid waste, hazardous materials,
occupational health, and safety issues, and impacts community health and safety, including traffic safety. Moreover,
social risks and impacts from project activities relate to involuntary resettlement of affected persons, exclusion of
indigenous peoples, and vulnerable groups, SEA/SH incidents in project communities and among workers, labor influx,
and other labor issues, including child/forced labor, and inadequate participation of project communities and
beneficiaries.
95.     While the E&S risks are expected to be largely temporary, predictable, and reversible, they encompass potential
habitat disturbance, OHS hazards, air and water pollution, biodiversity impacts (notably from the FSTP), involuntary
resettlement, and labor influx‑related SEA/SH and GBV concerns, as well as community exclusion from consultations.
The GoG prepared and disclosed a suite of mitigation instruments, including an ESMF with a 5.8 percent budget
allocation, a SEA/SH Plan, a RPF, an IPPF, a LMP, a SEP with GM, and an ESCP. These will guide site‑specific ESIA/ESMPs,
RPs, and technical choices via clear ToR and are complemented by institutional capacity‑building measures to address
past E&S performance gaps.




                                                                                                                 Page 24
        The World Bank
        Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP)(P179643)


ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padannexresultframework#doctemplate
PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes

   Baseline                                                                                 Closing Period
   Increase access to water supply and sanitation services
   People provided with at least basic water (Number of people) CRI
   Dec/2025                                                                                 Dec/2031
   0                                                                                        130,000
     People provided with at least basic water - Female (Number of people) CRI
   Dec/2025                                                                                 Dec/2031
   0                                                                                        65,000
     People provided with at least basic water - Youth (Number of people) CRI

   Dec/2025                                                                                 Dec/2031
   0                                                                                        23,400
   Volume of fecal sludge treated by the Fecal Sludge Treatment Plant constructed under the Project (Cubic meters/year)
   Dec/2025                                                                                 Dec/2031
   0                                                                                        73,000
   Increase access to electricity services
   People provided with direct access to electricity through new connections (Number of people) CRI
   Dec/2025                                                                                 Dec/2031
   0                                                                                        39,000
     People provided with direct access to electricity through new connections - Female (Number of people) CRI
   Dec/2025                                                                                 Dec/2031
   0                                                                                        19,500
     People provided with direct access to electricity through new connections - Youth (Number of people) CRI
   Dec/2025                                                                                 Dec/2031
   0                                                                                        7,020
   Improve performance in the water supply and electricity sectors
   Share of operations and maintenance costs recovered by SEEG (Percentage)
   Dec/2024                                                                                 Dec/2031



                                                                                                                          Page 25
        The World Bank
        Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP)(P179643)


   82                                                                                         85
     Share of O&M costs recovered by SEEG for water services (Percentage)
   Dec/2024                                                                                   Dec/2031
   77                                                                                         84
     Share of O&M costs recovered by SEEG for electricity services (Percentage)
   Dec/2024                                                                                   Dec/2031
   83                                                                                         85
   Total technical and commercial losses for SEEG's water services in Greater Libreville (Percentage)
   Dec/2024                                                                                   Dec/2031
   57.80                                                                                      53.80
   Total technical and commercial losses for SEEG's electricity services (Percentage)
   Dec/2024                                                                                   Dec/2031
   29.40                                                                                      27.90


Intermediate Indicators by Components

   Baseline                                                                               Closing Period
   Component 1: Water Supply and Sanitation Services
   Smart water meters installed (Number)
   Dec/2025                                                                               Dec/2031
   0                                                                                      20,000
   Water production capacity constructed or rehabilitated (Cubic meters/year)
   Dec/2025                                                                               Dec/2031
   0                                                                                      4,000,000
   New piped household water connections (Number)
   Dec/2025                                                                               Dec/2031
   0                                                                                      26,000
   Existing piped household water connections benefiting from rehabilitation works undertaken (Number)
   Dec/2025                                                                               Dec/2031
   0                                                                                      74,000
   Length of water network constructed or rehabilitated (Kilometers)
   Dec/2025                                                                               Dec/2031
   0                                                                                      50




                                                                                                           Page 26
     The World Bank
     Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP)(P179643)


Component 2: Electricity Services
Renewable energy capacity enabled with direct support (Megawatt) CRI
Dec/2025                                                                                  Dec/2031
0                                                                                         1.20
Smart electricity meters installed (Number)
Dec/2025                                                                                  Dec/2031
0                                                                                         10,000
Substations constructed or rehabilitated (Number)
Dec/2025                                                                                  Dec/2031
0                                                                                         98
Length of LV and MV lines constructed or rehabilitated (Kilometers)
Dec/2025                                                                                  Dec/2031
0                                                                                         500
New household electricity connections (Number)
Dec/2025                                                                                  Dec/2025
0                                                                                         7,000
Hybrid mini grids constructed (Number)
Dec/2025                                                                                  Dec/2031
0                                                                                         6
Solar home systems installed (Number)
Dec/2025                                                                                  Dec/2031
0                                                                                         800
Component 3: PIR Strengthening for Improved Basic Services
Technical and operational positions occupied by women within sector institutions (ARSEE, CNEE, DG Eau, DG Energie, SEEG, SP) (Percentage)
Nov/2025                                                                                  Dec/2031
8                                                                                         12
People obtaining sector-relevant certification through the Jean Violas Training Center per year (Number of people)
Dec/2025                                                                                  Dec/2031
49                                                                                        100
  Women obtaining sector-relevant certification through the Jean Violas Training Center per year (Number of people)
Dec/2025                                                                                  Dec/2031
2                                                                                         35
Bill collections ratio for SEEG's water services (Percentage)
Dec/2024                                                                                  Dec/2031


                                                                                                                                            Page 27
     The World Bank
     Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP)(P179643)


50                                                                                      65
Bill collections ratio for SEEG's electricity services (Percentage)
Dec/2024                                                                                Dec/2031
90                                                                                      95
PPP contracts signed or under implementation by the relevant contracting party for the delivery of water, sanitation, and electricity infrastructure or services (Number)
Dec/2025                                                                                Dec/2031
0                                                                                       2
Component 4: Project Management and Resettlement Compensation
Grievances registered and addressed within the GM timeframe (Percentage)
Dec/2025                                                                                Dec/2031
0                                                                                       90
Component 5: Contingent Emergency Response Component - CERC




                                                                                                                                                                            Page 28
       The World Bank
       Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)



Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes
 Increased access to water supply and sanitation services
 People provided with at least basic water (Number of people) CRI
                                     Cumulative number of people who benefited from at least basic water services (improved source
 Description                         within 30‑min roundtrip) that have been constructed through the Project. Assumes 5 people per
                                     household connection.
 Frequency                           Quarterly
 Data source                         SEEG customer registry
 Methodology for Data
                                     • Count new basic service connections from SEEG developed through the Project.
 Collection
 Responsibility for Data
                                     SEEG M&E Unit; PMU M&E Specialist
 Collection
       People provided with at least basic water - Female (Number of people) CRI
                                     As above, with disaggregation by gender. Assumes 50 percent of beneficiaries are female based
 Description
                                     upon national demographics.
 Frequency                           Quarterly
 Data source                         SEEG customer registry
 Methodology for Data                • Count new basic service connections from SEEG developed through the Project, and
 Collection                          disaggregate based upon female population share.
 Responsibility for Data
                                      SEEG M&E Unit; PMU M&E Specialist; Social/Gender Specialist
 Collection
       People provided with at least basic water - Youth (Number of people) CRI
                                     As above, with disaggregation by youth (15–24). Based upon AfDB Africa Gender Data
 Description                         (https://dataportal.opendataforafrica.org/), approximately 18 percent of Gabonese within this
                                     age range.
 Frequency                            Quarterly
 Data source                          SEEG customer registry
 Methodology for Data                • Count new basic service connections from SEEG developed through the Project, and
 Collection                          disaggregate based upon youth population share.
 Responsibility for Data
                                      SEEG M&E Unit; PMU M&E Specialist; Social Specialist
 Collection
 Volume of fecal sludge treated by the Fecal Sludge Treatment Plant constructed under the Project (Cubic meters/year)
 Description                         Total volume of fecal sludge treated in a calendar year by the FSTP.
 Frequency                           Annual
 Data source                         FSTP operational data
 Methodology for Data
                                     Volume is properly tracked.
 Collection
 Responsibility for Data
                                     MAUEE M&E Unit; PMU M&E Specialist
 Collection
 Increase access to electricity services
 People provided with direct access to electricity through new connections (Number of people) CRI
                                     Number of people in households newly connected to grid or off‑grid electricity through the
 Description
                                     Project. Assumes 5 people per household connection.
 Frequency                            Quarterly
 Data source                          SEEG customer registry
 Methodology for Data
                                     • Count new electricity connections developed through the Project.
 Collection
 Responsibility for Data
                                     SEEG M&E Unit; MAUEE M&E Unit; PMU M&E Specialist
 Collection



                                                                                                                                     Page 29
      The World Bank
      Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)


         People provided with direct access to electricity through new connections - Female (Number of people) CRI
                                  As above, with disaggregation by gender. Assumes 50 percent of beneficiaries are female based
Description
                                  upon national demographics.
Frequency                         Quarterly
Data source                        SEEG customer registry
Methodology for Data              • Count new electricity connections developed through the Project, and dissagregate based upon
Collection                        female population share.
Responsibility for Data
                                   SEEG M&E Unit; MAUEE M&E Unit; PMU M&E Specialist; Social/Gender Specialist
Collection
      People provided with direct access to electricity through new connections - Youth (Number of people) CRI
                                  As above, with disaggregation by youth (15–24). Based upon AfDB Africa Gender Data
Description                       (https://dataportal.opendataforafrica.org/), approximately 18 percent of Gabonese within this
                                  age range.
Frequency                         SEEG customer registry
Data source                       SEEG age‐profile data; Survey
Methodology for Data              • Count new electricity connections developed through the Project, and dissagregate based upon
Collection                        youth population share.
Responsibility for Data
                                  SEEG M&E Unit; MAUEE M&E Unit; PMU M&E Specialist; Social Specialist
Collection
Improve performance in the water supply and electricity sectors
Share of operations and maintenance costs recovered by SEEG (Percentage)
Description                       Aggregated percentage of annual operations and maintenance costs covered by revenue.
Frequency                         Annual
Data source                       SEEG data and annual reports
                                  • Calculate total operations and maintenance costs during the calendar year.
Methodology for Data              • Track the revenue collected during the calendar year, and confirm through annual reports
Collection                        • Calculate the ratio of revenue to costs.
                                  • Validate via independent technical audit where applicable.
Responsibility for Data
                                  SEEG M&E Unit; SEEG Finance Department
Collection
      Share of operations and maintenance costs recovered by SEEG for water services (Percentage)
                                  Aggregated percentage of annual operations and maintenance costs covered by water-related
Description
                                  revenue.
Frequency                         Annual
Data source                       SEEG data and annual reports
                                  • Calculate total water-related operations and maintenance costs during the calendar year.
                                  • Track the water revenue collected during the calendar year, and confirm through annual
Methodology for Data
                                  reports
Collection
                                  • Calculate the ratio of revenue to costs.
                                  • Validate via independent technical audit where applicable.
Responsibility for Data
                                  SEEG M&E Unit; SEEG Finance Department
Collection
      Share of operations and maintenance costs recovered by SEEG for electricity services (Percentage)
                                  Aggregated percentage of annual operations and maintenance costs covered by electricity-
Description
                                  related revenue by SEEG.
Frequency                         Annual
Data source                       SEEG financial statements; SEEG annual reports
                                  • Calculate total electricity-related operations and maintenance costs for the calendar year.
Methodology for Data
                                  • Track electricity revenue collection during the same period.
Collection
                                  • Calculate the ratio of revenue to costs.



                                                                                                                                   Page 30
       The World Bank
       Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)


                                   • Validate via independent audit reports and internal SEEG documentation.
 Responsibility for Data
                                  SEEG M&E Unit; SEEG Finance Department
 Collection
 Total technical and commercial losses for SEEG's water services in Greater Libreville (Percentage)
                                  Total volume of non-revenue water in Greater Libreville, including physical losses and commercial
 Description
                                  (billing) losses, expressed as a percentage of total volume of water produced.
 Frequency                        Annual
 Data source                      SEEG operational data
 Methodology for Data             • Calculate the percentage of the total volume billed compared with the total volume produced.
 Collection                       • Validate calculations through water audit reports.
 Responsibility for Data
                                  SEEG M&E Unit; SEEG Water Operations Division
 Collection
 Total technical and commercial losses for SEEG's electricity services (Percentage)
 Description                      Combined percentage of electricity lost due to technical faults and non-payment or theft.
 Frequency                        Annual
 Data source                      SEEG SCADA system; billing and metering data
 Methodology for Data             • Compare electricity generated/purchased versus electricity billed.
 Collection                       • Use data reconciliation audits for validation.
 Responsibility for Data
                                  SEEG Electricity Division; SEEG M&E Unit
 Collection


Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: Intermediate Results Indicators by Components
 Component 1: Water Supply and Sanitation Services
 Smart meters installed (Number)
 Description                     Cumulative number of smart water meters installed through the Project.
 Frequency                       Quarterly
 Data source                     SEEG meter installation logs
 Methodology for Data
                                 SEEG extracts installation records; cross-check with vendor delivery notes.
 Collection
 Responsibility for Data
                                 PMU M&E Specialist; SEEG M&E Unit; SEEG Metering Division
 Collection
 Water production capacity constructed or rehabilitated (Cubic meters/year)
 Description                     Total water production capacity constructed or rehabilitated under the Project.
 Frequency                       Quarterly
 Data source                     Contractor completion certificates; SEEG operational records
 Methodology for Data            Calculate the total of production facility plant capacity additions or restored capacity; verify with
 Collection                      as-built data.
 Responsibility for Data
                                 PMU M&E Specialist; MAUEE M&E Unit; SEEG M&E Unit; SEEG Works Department
 Collection
 New piped household water connections (Number)
 Description                     Cumulative number of new household water connections installed under the Project.
 Frequency                       Quarterly
 Data source                     SEEG connection registry
 Methodology for Data
                                 SEEG extracts quarterly connection data and validates against Project completion reports.
 Collection
 Responsibility for Data
                                 PMU M&E Specialist; SEEG M&E Unit; SEEG Metering Division
 Collection
 Existing piped household water connections benefiting from rehabilitation works undertaken (Number)



                                                                                                                                         Page 31
      The World Bank
      Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)


                                  Number of pre-existing connections benefiting from improvements in service quality, either
Description
                                  through increased average hours of service per day or improved water quality.
Frequency                         Quarterly
Data source                       SEEG operational data; Field inspections
                                  • SEEG compiles data on service quality metrics (continuity and water quality) within service areas
Methodology for Data
                                  impacted by the Project, and totals number of impacted connections.
Collection
                                  • PMU and SEEG conducts spot inspections in sample zones.
Responsibility for Data
                                   PMU M&E Specialist; SEEG M&E Unit; SEEG Works Department
Collection
Length of water network constructed or rehabilitated (Kilometers)
                                   Total kilometers of water transmission and distribution lines constructed or rehabilitated through
Description
                                   the Project.
Frequency                          Quarterly
Data source                        Contractor completion certificates; SEEG network GIS
Methodology for Data
                                   Aggregate GIS-mapped line work; cross-check with contractor logs.
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                                   SEEG Works Department; PMU M&E Specialist
Collection
Component 2: Electricity Services
Renewable energy capacity enabled with direct support (Megawatt) CRI
Description                        Cumulative MW of renewable generation capacity developed through the Project.
Frequency                          Annual
Data source                        Contractor completion certificates; MAUEE and SEEG operational records
Methodology for Data
                                   Calculate the total of renewable generation capacity constructed; verify with as-built data.
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                                   PMU M&E Specialist; MAUEE M&E Unit; SEEG M&E Unit; SEEG Works Department
Collection
Smart electricity meters installed (Number)
Description                        Cumulative number of smart electricity meters installed through the Project.
Frequency                          Quarterly
Data source                        SEEG meter installation logs
Methodology for Data
                                   SEEG extracts installation records; cross-check with vendor delivery notes.
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                                   PMU M&E Specialist; SEEG M&E Unit; SEEG Metering Division
Collection
Substations constructed or rehabilitated (Number)
Description                        Total number of substations constructed or rehabilitated through the Project.
Frequency                          Quarterly
Data source                        Contractor completion certificates; MAUEE and SEEG operational records
Methodology for Data
                                   Verify contractor completion certificates; SEEG asset register update.
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                                   PMU M&E Specialist; MAUEE M&E Unit; SEEG M&E Unit; SEEG Works Department
Collection
Length of LV and MV lines constructed or rehabilitated (Kilometers)
                                   Total kilometers of low-voltage and medium-voltage distribution lines constructed or rehabilitated
Description
                                   through the Project.
Frequency                          Quarterly
Data source                        Contractor completion certificates; SEEG network GIS
Methodology for Data
                                   Aggregate GIS-mapped line work; cross-check with contractor logs.
Collection


                                                                                                                                        Page 32
      The World Bank
      Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)


Responsibility for Data
                                 SEEG Works Department; PMU M&E Specialist
Collection
New household electricity connections (Number)
Description                      Cumulative number of new household electricity connections installed under the Project.
Frequency                        Quarterly
Data source                      SEEG connection registry
Methodology for Data
                                 SEEG extracts quarterly connection data and validates against Project completion reports.
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                                 PMU M&E Specialist; SEEG M&E Unit; SEEG Metering Division
Collection
Hybrid mini grids constructed (Number)
                                 Number of standalone mini-grid systems combining renewable and conventional generation
Description
                                 commissioned under the Project.
Frequency                        Quarterly
Data source                      Project completion reports; SEEG energy database
Methodology for Data
                                 Confirm commissioning of each mini-grid with technical acceptance certificates.
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                                 PMU M&E Specialist; MAUEE M&E Unit; SEEG M&E Unit; SEEG Works Department
Collection
Solar home systems installed (Number)
Description                      Number of solar home systems installed under the Project.
Frequency                        Quarterly
Data source                      Contractor completion certificates; Project completion reports
Methodology for Data
                                 Confirm commissioning of each solar home system with technical acceptance certificates.
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                                 PMU M&E Specialist; MAUEE M&E Unit
Collection
Component 3: PIR Strengthening for Improved Basic Services
Technical and operational positions occupied by women within sector institutions (ARSEE, CNEE, DG Eau, DG Energie, SEEG, SP)
(Percentage)
                                 Percentage of engineering and other Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM)
Description                      positions occupied by women within the following sector institutions or their successor institutions:
                                 ARSEE, CNEE, MAUEE DGs of Water and Energy, SEEG, and SP.
Frequency                        Annual
Data source                      ARSEE, CNEE, MAUEE, SEEG, and SP, or successor institutions, HR records
                                 • Total the number of women in technical and operational positions in each of the subject
                                 institutions.
Methodology for Data
                                 • Compare with the overall number of people in technical and operational posititions in each of the
Collection
                                 subject institutions.
                                 • Express as a percentage.
Responsibility for Data
                                 PMU M&E Specialist; ARSEE, CNEE, MAUEE, SEEG, and SP HR Departments
Collection
People obtaining sector-relevant certification through the Jean Violas Training Center per year (Number of people)
                                 Number of professionals and career aspirants trained and supported to obtain sector-related
Description
                                 certifications through the Jean Violas Training Center per year.
Frequency                        Annual
Data source                      Training attendance records; certificates; SEEG HR records
Methodology for Data             • Track annual number of participants through training and certification records.
Collection
Responsibility for Data          PMU M&E Specialist; Jean Violas Training Center



                                                                                                                                         Page 33
      The World Bank
      Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)


Collection
       Women obtaining sector-relevant certification through the Jean Violas Training Center per year (Number of people)
Description                          As above, disaggregated by gender.
Frequency                            Annual
Data source                          Training attendance records; certificates; SEEG HR records
Methodology for Data                 • Track annual number of participants that are women through training and certification records.
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                                     PMU M&E Specialist; Jean Violas Training Center; PMU Gender Specialist
Collection
Bill collections ratio for SEEG's water services (Percentage)
                                     Ratio of revenue collected for water services compared with amount billed for water service,
Description
                                     expressed as a percentage.
Frequency                            Annual
Data source                          SEEG billing and collections database
                                     • Extract total billed amount for the period.
Methodology for Data
                                     • Compare with amount collected.
Collection
                                     • Express as a percentage.
Responsibility for Data
                                     SEEG Finance Department; SEEG M&E Unit
Collection
Bill collections ratio for SEEG's electricity services (Percentage)
                                     Ratio of revenue collected for electricity services compared with amount billed for electricity
Description
                                     service, expressed as a percentage.
Frequency                            Annual
Data source                          SEEG billing and collections database
                                     • Extract total billed amount for the period.
Methodology for Data
                                     • Compare with amount collected.
Collection
                                     • Express as a percentage.
Responsibility for Data
                                     SEEG Finance Department; SEEG M&E Unit
Collection
PPP contracts signed or under implementation by the relevant contracting party for the delivery of water, sanitation, and
electricity infrastructure or services (Number)
                                     Number of PPP contracts in the water supply, sanitation, and electricity sectors signed or under
Description
                                     implementation that are facilitated or complimented by Project activities.
Frequency                            Annual
Data source                          PMU
Methodology for Data
                                     • Track number of qualifying PPP contracts signed or under implementation.
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                                     PMU M&E Specialist
Collection
Component 4: Project Management and Resettlement Compensation
Grievances registered and addressed within the GM timeframe (Percentage)
                                     Percentage of grievances submitted through the Project's GM that are resolved within the
Description
                                     stipulated time.
Frequency                            Quarterly
Data source                          GM database maintained by PMU
                                     • Track total number of grievances received.
Methodology for Data
                                     • Monitor number addressed within the designated timeframe.
Collection
                                     • Calculate as a percentage.
Responsibility for Data
                                     PMU Social Specialist; SEEG Safeguards Unit
Collection



                                                                                                                                        Page 34
        The World Bank
        Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)


                                    ANNEX 2: ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL ANALYSIS

Introduction
1.     This annex presents the economic and financial analysis of the project, focusing on cost-benefit assessments and
expected returns.
Cost-Benefit Analysis
2.       The cost-benefit analysis (CBA) of PASBAP evaluates its financial and economic viability by comparing projected
capital and operating costs to monetized benefits over the project's lifetime (25 years). The assessment includes capital,
O&M, and direct implementation expenditures. Benefits are estimated based on improved service delivery, efficiency
gains, and loss reduction. A discount rate is applied to calculate the present value of future benefits, allowing for the
computation of the NPV, Cost-Benefit Ratio (CBR), and Internal Rate of Return (IRR). The economic and financial analysis
is based on current tariff structures – excluding willingness-to-pay assumptions – thus providing conservative cash flow
estimates. A sensitivity analysis is conducted by varying the discount rate to test the robustness of project viability.
3.      The analysis covers only the components that exhibit quantifiable economic benefits. The institutional
strengthening and capacity-building components (Components 3 and 4) are not included in the economic analysis due to
the lack of reliable metrics to assess their direct impacts. Results are presented separately for the water and sanitation
and electricity components and then consolidated at the overall project level.
Estimation of Benefits
4.       The economic analysis of PASBAP is based on the estimation of three categories of benefits: (i) direct benefits
related to expanded access to services, reduced technical and commercial losses, lower operating costs, improved service
quality, and sanitation fee revenues; (ii) climate-related benefits resulting from avoided GHG emissions; and (iii) health
and environmental benefits associated with the water and sanitation components, including reductions in waterborne
diseases, productivity gains, and decreased environmental pollution. These benefits are quantified by component based
on the project's technical and economic assumptions.
Water and Sanitation Sector
5.     The water supply and sanitation component targets improved services for 100,000 households, including 26,000
new connections and 74,000 existing connections. The main quantified benefits are:
    ▪   Access: new connections valued at US$0.65/m³, generating a present value of US$82.6 million.
    ▪   Loss reduction: NRW reduction from 58 percent to 53 percent, valued at marginal supply cost (US$0.22/m³),
        yielding US$22.9 million, while reducing commercial losses (approximately 20 percent of sales) through 20,000
        smart meters and better registration (approximately 30 percent) adds US$20.9 million, for a total of US$30.9
        million.
    ▪   Cost savings: 15 percent reduction in O&M and energy costs (US$0.36/m³), producing US$14.5 million in present
        value.
    ▪   Service improvement: 15 percent consumption increase among 74,000 existing users, valued at US$35 million.
    ▪   Higher collection efficiency: The installation of 20,000 smart meters is expected to improve billing accuracy and
        increase the collection rate from 50 percent to 90 percent for impacted clients, resulting in an additional benefit
        estimated at US$20.5 million.
    ▪   FSTP revenues: discharge fees (US$1/m³) applied to an estimated annual volume of 70,000 m³, corresponding to
        a treatment capacity of 250 m³/day, yield a present value of US$1.6 million.


                                                                                                                     Page 35
        The World Bank
        Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)


    ▪   Health and environmental externalities: 30 percent reduction in waterborne diseases (1 case/person/year
        baseline), plus productivity gains and avoided pollution, totalizing US$74.2 million, of which US$40.5 million are
        linked to improved water access.
    ▪   GHG reduction: 414,640 tCO₂ avoided, valued at US$12.6 –25.3 million depending on carbon price scenario
        (low/high SPC).

Electricity Sector
Investments target access expansion, performance improvements, and mini-grid deployment. Key benefits include:
    •   Access: 7,000 new customers (4,000 kWh/year), valued at US$0.18/kWh, yield US$61.4 million.
    •   Technical and commercial Loss reduction: via dispatching center upgrades and 3,000 smart meters for large
        industrial and commercial consumers, plus lower losses from extension and densification of distribution lines to
        support new connections. A combined 1.5 percentage point reduction in technical and commercial losses in
        Greater Libreville results in energy savings valued at US$0.14 per kWh, generating a present value benefit of
        US$61.3 million.
    •   Fuel and O&M cost savings: solar hybrid mini-grids (1.2 MW; 25 percent load factor) generate approximately 2,628
        MWh per year, replacing diesel-based generation. This results in annual fuel savings of about 788,400 liters,
        significantly reducing operating and fuel costs. The corresponding economic benefit is estimated at US$14.8
        million in NPV.
    •   GHG reduction: 718,333 tCO₂ avoided, valued at US$22.0–44.0 million depending on carbon price scenario
        (low/high SPC).

Financial and Economic Viability Outcomes
6.       At a discount rate of 8 percent, total discounted benefits reach US$322.2 million, slightly above total costs of
US$298.3 million. The largest gains come from increased access (US$143.6 million) and reduced technical and commercial
losses (US$92.1 million). Other benefits include better service quality, cost reduction, and improved collection efficiency.
Including CO₂ reduction benefits, the EIRR is 14.4-18.2 percent. When health, productivity, and environmental
externalities are also considered, it reaches 22.5-26.6 percent. These results confirm the project’s robust economic
viability.
Economic and Financial Analysis Results
7.       Table A2.1 presents the consolidated results of the cost-benefit analysis for the water and sanitation and
electricity components of PASBAP under a high shadow price of carbon (SPC). Key indicators such as NPV, IRR, BCR, and
avoided emissions are disaggregated by sector and at project level.
8.      PASBAP demonstrates solid economic viability across all scenarios. In the base case excluding externalities, the
project yields an NPV of US$23.9 million, an EIRR of 10.7 percent, and a BCR of 1.1. Including avoided GHG emissions, the
NPV increases to US$58.7–93.6 million, depending on the shadow price of carbon, with EIRR rising to 14,4–18.2 percent
and BCR to 1.2–1.3. These improvements reflect strong climate mitigation benefits, with 1,132,983 tCO₂ avoided over the
project’s lifetime. Accounting for health and environmental benefits from water and sanitation further boosts the NPV to
US$132.8–167.7 million and the EIRR to 22.5–26.6 percent, with a BCR of 1.4–1.6.
9.       Financially, the project yields an FIRR of 7.5 percent and a payback period of 12.2 years, exceeding the assumed
cost of capital (5 percent). The electricity component performs better, with a FIRR of 10.0 percent and a payback of 11.1
years, supported by stronger cost recovery, 100 percent collection (prepaid metering), and operational efficiency. The


                                                                                                                      Page 36
        The World Bank
        Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)


water and sanitation component shows a lower FIRR of 5.5 percent and a payback of 13.1 years, reflecting slower revenue
recovery and a 90 percent collection rate.
                                   Table A2.1: Summary of Economic Analysis Outcome




Sensitivities
10.      The analysis uses one-at-a-time stress tests to assess the marginal impact of key assumptions on project indicators.
Aggregating all variations yields a sensitivity range from –US$46 million to +US$62 million in NPV, reflecting an extreme
scenario where all favorable or unfavorable changes occur simultaneously. Most downside risks are operational and
manageable, including losses, billing efficiency, PV performance, and revenue collection. These can be mitigated through:
(i) performance-based contracts; (ii) strong governance and institutional support; and (iii) enhanced monitoring systems.
Rather than predicting outcomes, this analysis helps identify risk concentration areas and inform strategies to maximize
returns within a controlled risk framework, strengthening the case for investment and disciplined implementation.




                                                                                                                       Page 37
        The World Bank
        Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)


               Table A2.2: Stress Test Results: NPV, EIRR, FIRR and Payback under Parameter Deviations




Summary of Economic and Financial Findings
11.     PASBAP is financially and economically viable. With robust IRR and BCR values above the threshold under multiple
scenarios, the intervention justifies public investment and external financing. The benefits span across social, health,
economic, and environmental dimensions, providing a strong case for implementation under a results-oriented delivery
framework. Furthermore, the project demonstrates overall financial viability. The electricity component reinforces the
project’s financial strength, while the water and sanitation component, with slower revenue recovery, may require
complementary support to maintain balance. Sustained financial performance will rely on stronger governance within
SEEG as the foundation for effective cash flow monitoring, cost control, and operational improvements, including loss
reduction, billing efficiency, and maintenance. This must be supported by adequate human resource capacity to ensure
long-term service delivery.




                                                                                                                  Page 38
The World Bank
Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)


                                           ANNEX 3: TECHNICAL ANNEX

                  Figure A3.1: Organization of the Electricity and Water Sectors in Gabon




    Source: World Bank, 2023, based on 2019 sector institutional assessment and subsequent institutional modifications.




                                                                                                                          Page 39
              The World Bank
              Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)


                                           ANNEX 4: CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION AND MITIGATION
1.       Gabon is highly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change, with flooding, erratic rainfall, and drought posing
major risks. Most cities are prone to pluvial and fluvial flooding and some are at risk of sea-level rise and coastal flooding.
Direct flood losses and damage are estimated at US$135 million AAL (annual aggregate loss) and are expected to increase
1.7 times to US$230 million under future climate conditions (2050-2095). 29 At the same time, erratic rainfall and prolonged
dry periods are becoming more frequent. Longer dry spells and unpredictable rainfall patterns are straining water
availability and leading to more frequent water shortage, especially in cities such as Libreville where water infrastructure
is already under pressure. Rising temperatures—projected to increase the number of days above 35°C by up to 75 percent
by 2060—will further stress water systems and public health. 30 Droughts, though variable across regions, are emerging as
a serious threat. On average, 21,000 people are affected by drought annually, with economic losses estimated at US$185
million—figures expected to increase significantly by 2050. 31 These climate change risks will have cascading effects on
water supply, livelihoods, food security, and electricity generation, exacerbating the challenges of Gabon’s fragmented
water and energy sector governance. This project aims to address these climate vulnerabilities through improving sector
performances, supporting climate-resilient investment in water supply and sanitation infrastructure, and expanding low-
carbon and resilient investments in electricity infrastructure.
2.       Component 1 will focus on climate-resilient investments in water supply and sanitation infrastructure, all of which
will integrate climate measures recommended in the World Bank’s Resilient Water Infrastructure Design Brief, for
example, waterproofing and reinforcing the distribution system appurtenances, using corrosion-resistant materials to
reduce degradation due to extreme weather conditions. 32
         a. Subcomponent 1.1 supports the reduction of water losses through the installation of smart water meters. This
            subcomponent will lead to -22,902 tCO2e in net GHG emissions, or 45 percent reduction from baseline emissions.
         b. Subcomponent 1.2 focuses on the rehabilitation and reinforcement of water infrastructure. Flooding in Gabon
            has led to system failures, equipment breakdowns and widespread service interruptions in water supply. As such,
            the rehabilitation works are primarily aimed at reducing the physical climate risk and building adaptive capacity
            of the water system. This subcomponent will lead to -144,908 tCO2e in net GHG emissions, or a 73 percent
            reduction from baseline emissions when combined with the displaced GHG emissions of boiling 1 liter of water
            per person per day for the 127,706 (new) beneficiaries that otherwise treated water locally.
         c. Subcomponent 1.3 will develop solar-powered and climate-resilient mini-grid water supply systems. This
            subcomponent will lead to -6,014 tCO2e in net GHG emissions, or an 88 percent reduction from baseline
            emissions when combined with the displaced GHG emissions of boiling 1 liter of water per person per day for the
            2,294 (new rural) beneficiaries that otherwise treated water locally.
         d. Subcomponent 1.4 will construct Gabon’s first FSTP that incorporates the circular economy and resource
            recovery principles. It aims to introduce technology to generate biogas and use it for electricity in the FSTP, as
            well as treatment technology using biogas digestion as agriculture fertilizer or biochar for clean cooking. This
            subcomponent will lead to -240,815 tCO2e in net GHG emissions, or a 54 percent reduction from baseline
            emissions.




29
     CIMA, UNISDR (2018). Gabon Disaster Risk Profile.
30 The World Bank Group. 2023. Climate Change Knowledge Portal - Gabon Profile.
31 CIMA, UNISDR (2018). Gabon Disaster Risk Profile.
32 World Bank (2020). Resilient Water Infrastructure Design Brief.




                                                                                                                         Page 40
         The World Bank
         Access to Basic Services and Performance Improvement Project (ABSPIP/ PASBAP) (P179643)


3.       Component 2 will support low-carbon and resilient investments in electricity infrastructure. Specifically, by
developing off-grid systems and, enhancing the utility’s technical and commercial performance while increasing access to
electricity, the project will cover key part of the energy value chain in Gabon.
     a. Subcomponent 2.1 will help the local utility both modernize and better manage its network by decreasing
        technical and commercial losses using SCADA and the deployment of smart meters. This subcomponent will lead
        to –541,702 tCO2e in net GHG emissions, or 7 percent reduction from baseline emissions.
     b. Subcomponent 2.2 will focus on the extension of medium and low-voltage lines as well as the rehabilitation of
        some key substations and the pilot distribution of solar home systems. The rehabilitation works will lead to a 35
        percent reduction in distribution network losses, and contribute to GHG emission reductions. This subcomponent
        will lead to –133,926 tCO2e in net GHG emissions, or 19 percent reduction from baseline emissions
     c. Subcomponent 2.3 will invest in solar PV mini-grids to hybridize the existing diesel-powered thermal production.
        The solar mini-grids will enhance climate resilience by enabling uninterrupted power during climate-induced
        disruptions such as flash floods. This subcomponent will lead to –42,705 tCO2e in net GHG emissions.
4.      Under Component 3, a comprehensive evaluation of the water and electricity sector performance will identify
and assess the impact of climate change on the infrastructure. The capacity building activities will improve the capacity to
design and maintain climate-resilient infrastructure, and the information management system will support strategic
planning to address climate-induced water shortage problems.
                                              Table A4.1: Ex-ante GHG Emissions Analysis
                                                                   Project
                                                                               Baseline      Net         Net Average      Net Emissions
                                                                    Gross
                Total Emission by Category                                    Emissions   Emissions    Annual Emissions    Reduction
                                                                  Emissions
                                                                              (tCO2eq)    (tCO2eq)        (tCO2eq)        (Percentage)
                                                                  (tCO2eq)
 1.1: SEEG Performance Improvement in Greater Libreville           28,387     51,289       -22,902           -916             -45%
                              Emissions from Water Utilities       28,387     51,289       -22,902           -916
 1.2: Access to Networked Water Supply Services                    54,044     198,952     -144,908          -5,796            -73%
                              Emissions from Water Utilities       54,044     24,559       29,485            1,179
                               Emissions from Boiling Water          0        174,393     -174,393          -6,976
 1.3: Access to Water Supply through Rural Water Supply
                                                                                                                              -88%
 Mini-Grid Systems                                                  826        6,840       -6,014            -241
                                  Emissions for Water Utilities     826         411         415               17
                                 Emissions from Boiling Water        0         6,429       -6,429            -257
 1.4: Safely Managed Sanitation Services in Greater Libreville    268,710     509,525     -240,815          -9,633            -47%
                            Emissions for Wastewater Utilities    268,710     509,525     -240,815          -9,633
 Component 1: Total Emissions                                     351,967     766,606     -414,639         -16,586            -54%
 2.1 SEEG Performance Improvement in Greater Libreville
 (Activity: Modernization of the dispatching center and Smart     7,379,284   7,920,986   -541,702         -21,668            -7%
 meters)
 2.2: Electrification through Grid Extension, Densification and
                                                                  589,556     723,482     -133,926          -5,357            -19%
 Distributed Energy Solutions
 2.3: Hybridization of Diesel Power Plants with Solar
                                                                     0         42,705      -42,705          -1,708           -100%
 photovoltaic (PV) Mini-Grids
 Component 2: Total Emissions                                     7,968,840   8,687,173   -718,333         -28733             -8%

 Project Total Emissions                                          8,320,806   9,453,779   -1,132,972       -45,319            -12%




                                                                                                                                    Page 41
