Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Guinea Water and Sanitation Project (P179017)




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                         Project Information Document (PID)



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                        Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 27-Mar-2023 | Report No: PIDC35600




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Mar 27, 2023                                                                                         Page 1 of 11
         The World Bank
         Guinea Water and Sanitation Project (P179017)


  BASIC INFORMATION


  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE

  Country                                        Project ID                   Parent Project ID (if any)   Project Name
  Guinea                                         P179017                                                   Guinea Water and
                                                                                                           Sanitation Project
                                                                                                           (P179017)
  Region                                         Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date         Practice Area (Lead)
  WESTERN AND CENTRAL                            Nov 13, 2023                 Feb 28, 2024                 Water
  AFRICA
  Financing Instrument                           Borrower(s)                  Implementing Agency
  Investment Project Financing                   Ministère de l'Energie, de   Societe des Eaux de Guinee
                                                 l'Hydraulique et des         (SEG)
                                                 Hydrocarbures (MEHH)

   Proposed Development Objective(s)

    The development objective is to increase access to improved water services in Greater Conakry and to support the
    implementation of water and sanitation policy and institutional reforms.

    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

   SUMMARY-NewFin1

   Total Project Cost                                                                                                      200.00
   Total Financing                                                                                                         200.00
                             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                             200.00

   Financing Gap                                                                                                              0.00

   DETAILS     -NewFinEnh1




   World Bank Group Financing

       International Development Association (IDA)                                                                         200.00
          IDA Credit                                                                                                       200.00




  Environmental and Social Risk Classification                                Concept Review Decision



Mar 27, 2023                                                                                                             Page 2 of 11
         The World Bank
         Guinea Water and Sanitation Project (P179017)


  High                                                               Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to
                                                                     continue



  Other Decision (as needed)



  B. Introduction and Context

  Country Context

 1. Guinea is a low-income country in West Africa with a population of around 13.1 million and is one of the poorest
    countries in the world. Economic growth in Guinea averaged 4.6 percent (2.2 percent in per capita terms) between
    2000 and 2020, a rate slightly above the average for sub-Saharan Africa (4.2 percent) during the same period. Prudent
    fiscal management has helped support Guinea’s macroeconomic stability. Nevertheless, there has been little impact
    in terms of poverty reduction and shared prosperity in recent years and the poverty rate declined just one percentage
    point per year from 48.5 percent in 2014, to 43.7 percent in 2018) (World Bank, 2021). The COVID-19 pandemic
    exacerbated this fragility, with deep economic, poverty and health impacts.

 2. The human capital needs in Guinea are substantial but current efforts are not enough to support the most vulnerable
    people. Guinea’s human capital index is 0.4 as of 2020, which means a person born in Guinea today will be 40 percent
    as productive as if they enjoyed full education, health, and employment. The rating is particularly low for women
    (0.36). Marginalized groups such as the urban youth and women (particularly in agricultural areas or in the poorest
    quintiles) are some of the most vulnerable groups in Guinea. Guinea ranks near the bottom of the list of countries on
    the gender equality index (118 on 146 countries in 2022). Gender gaps start early, with girls less likely to attend school,
    and to drop out due to early marriage or pregnancy, while persistent gender-based violence (GBV) in many forms
    reduce women’s opportunities and agency. They require targeted engagement to ensure their priorities and voices
    are heard, and community-level mechanisms to monitor and mitigate local tensions and conflicts. Guinea has adopted
    several legal instruments and has ratified the majority of international legal instruments that integrate dimensions
    related to gender and GBV. However, gender inequality is still pronounced in Guinea across a range of socioeconomic,
    health, and education outcomes. All of these outcomes are aggravated by lack of reliable water supply, as women
    have to resort to collecting or paying for water through other sources e.g. going to neighbors who have private
    boreholes to fill buckets of water multiple times a day.

  Sectoral and Institutional Context

 3. Guinea is a water rich country, endowed with 1,165 rivers spread over 23 watersheds, 14 of which are shared with its
    neighboring countries, including the Niger, Senegal and Gambia rivers. While Guinea is a member of regional river
    basin authorities, including the Niger Basin Authority (ABN), Organisation pour la Mise en Valeur du Fleuve Senegal
    (OMVS) and Organisation pour la Mise en Valeur du Fleuve Gambie (OMVG), it needs to boost its capacity to
    participate in these transboundary platforms in order to benefit fully from its position as an upstream riparian and
    mobilize its surface water resources for multiple uses. There are also significant groundwater resources (an estimated
    13,000 billion m3), but they have not been well managed, with significant gaps in knowledge about the state of the
    resource, as well as weak institutional capacity to monitor and exploit groundwater in a sustainable manner. While


Mar 27, 2023                                                                                                         Page 3 of 11
         The World Bank
         Guinea Water and Sanitation Project (P179017)


     some groundwater modeling studies have been undertaken, there is little understanding of the dynamics of the
     proliferation of private boreholes in major urban areas and the potential impact on water resources. These challenges
     in terms of knowledge and institutional capacity apply for surface water management as well. Indeed, the 1,165 rivers
     referred to above are from a very old data and no systematic assessment of the Guinea surface water potential has
     been undertaken in the recent 20 years.

 4. Water is a key aspect of Guinea’s strategy for adapting to climate change. The National Water Policy (Politique
    Nationale de l’Eau) was approved in 2018 and aims to develop an integrated approach to water resources throughout
    the country and address the challenges of climate change. Guinea is facing a decrease in precipitation as well as
    increased variability of rainfall; an increase in temperatures observed since the 1990s and an increase in extreme
    weather events. The National Adaptation Plan (Plan National d'Adaptation) includes an indicator related to the
    percentage of the population potentially exposed to water stress.

 5. Climate risks are projected to affect the sustainability of water resources and associated infrastructure in the future.
    Since 1970, and particularly during the 1980s and early 1990s, the main river basins in Guinea have faced a significant
    decrease of basin runoff, from which they have not yet fully recovered. Projections of the future climate for the region
    suggest that temperatures in the region would increase compared to the reference period 1995 – 2014 by about 0.7
    0C by 2030 and by 1.4 0C by 2050, while precipitation may increase by a few percentage points (even though the
    variability across multiple model-scenario combinations is large suggesting that the future may either become drier
    or wetter than the present). The most plausible combined impact of these climate changes is a future with a stable
    runoff regime. Despite this either futures with higher or lower basin runoff and groundwater resources may occur as
    well, albeit being less plausible. Drought periods as occurred during the 1970 – 1995 period will likely repeat
    themselves at some point of time in the future. Instances of heavy flooding are equally plausible. Hence, there is the
    need to protect the country and its population better against flooding, while diversifying the available water sources
    and ensure water security for all usages.

 6. The water sector is under the titular authority of the Ministry of Energy, Water and Hydraulics (MEHH), which sets
    policy related to water resources and water supply. The Ministry is comprised of several key departments, including
    the National Directorate of Hydraulics (Direction National de l’Hydraulique or DNH), which is responsible for planning
    and monitoring of water resources and integrated water resources management (IWRM) implementation. Despite
    this important role, DNH lacks a critical mass of technical staff and also lacks tools for the systematic monitoring of
    surface and groundwater resources. The Service National d’Aménagement des Points d’Eau (SNAPE) is responsible for
    water services in rural areas, while the Société des Eaux de Guinée (SEG), the national water utility in charge of
    providing services in urban areas.

 7. While SEG has some good attributes, several factors have hampered its ability to fulfill its mandate. SEG is a public
    establishment of the Republic of Guinea created in December 2001, responsible for the distribution of drinking water
    to urban centres throughout the country. Tariffs have not been adjusted since 2013 and as a result, SEG does not have
    sufficient revenue to cover its operating costs. About 62% of water consumption is derived from administrative
    customers, 34% from individual household connections, 2% from industry, 0.3% from standposts and 2% from other
    customers (ASPA, 2020). However, administrative customers do not pay their bills consistently, which impacts SEG’s
    operating cost ratio. While SEG undertakes some infrastructure works, it does so through donor funding and needs
    significant technical assistance to contract and supervise works. Its commercial operations are out of date, with paper
    billing, door-to-door bill collection and insufficient equipment.

 8. Access to water supply in Guinea has stagnated over recent years due to under-investment in water production and


Mar 27, 2023                                                                                                      Page 4 of 11
         The World Bank
         Guinea Water and Sanitation Project (P179017)


     supply. The drinking water supply of the city of Conakry is 85% provided by surface water and 15% by groundwater
     consisting of different industrial drilling sites located in various municipalities of Greater Conakry (Table 1). In 2010,
     around 63% of the national population had access to at least basic water services and as of 2020, that number was
     64%, showing that there was barely any increase in access to clean water. The stagnation can be explained by the lack
     of investment in new production in the sector. In Conakry, for example, the last major water production was
     completed in 2009 and there has not been any new investments since. At the same time, rapid urbanization
     (estimated at 2.8 percent per year in the project area) has resulted in many new settlements in the municipalities
     around Conakry, and some do not have any water services at all, forcing residents to resort to drilling private boreholes
     and purchasing costly water from tanker trucks. Lastly, until recently, there were no investment planning tools to
     forecast demand, identify infrastructure projects and mobilize needed finance to start tacking the water supply
     challenge. A 2019 Water Master Plan, developed through the IDA-funded Guinea Urban Water Project (P157782),
     estimated investment needs of 1.2 billon USD between 2020 and 2040, with a first tranche of $500 million to be
     mobilized to close the water deficit in Greater Conakry. A second and third phase is expected to keep up with growing
     demand.

 Table 1. Overview of the Greater Conakry Area in the Project Zone




 Source: Water Masterplan for the Greater Conakry Area to 2040, unpublished
 NB: the proposed project will only focus on the Kindia region, particularly the Coyah (Coyah-centre and Kouriya) and
 Dubreka (specifically Dubreka-centre) prefectures.

 9. There is an urgent need to enhance water supply in order to relieve the burden of inadequate water on vulnerable
    populations. Because cooking and laundry require a fuel source and water, they impose double burdens on women
    and girls, who are primarily responsible for fetching wood, charcoal and water. Women and girls also
    disproportionately bear the burden of fetching water for households. A study by the Women’s Fund for Gender
    Equality found that one of the main reasons that women worked less than men was because they were already
    dedicating 82 hours a week to housework, childcare and fetching wood and water (UN Women, 2017). While the
    maternal mortality ratio in Guinea has improved from 1,020 in 2000 to 576, it is still higher than its regional average,
    534 (WB, 2017). Improving water services is expected to contribute to economic growth and long-term human
    resources enhancement by allowing children (especially girls) to attend school, and adults (especially women) to
    engage in additional productive activities instead of spending several hours each day searching for water.

 10. A rapid climate and disaster risk screening assessment will be prepared during Project preparation, highlighting the


Mar 27, 2023                                                                                                         Page 5 of 11
         The World Bank
         Guinea Water and Sanitation Project (P179017)


     risks linked to the exposure of project locations to climate hazards and possible impacts on the project’s physical
     infrastructure. Urban and coastal flooding are medium to high risks in the coastal region of the Conakry and Kindia
     Regions, as well as extreme heat and wild fires. Water security may overall not be at risk, but this will be confirmed
     through a rapid climate risk assessment. During the preparation phase, environmental and social assessments will be
     conducted with the implementing agencies to verify their capacity to integrate climate mitigation and adaptation
     measures and capacity reinforcement measures will be put in place as needed.

 11. The energy and water regulator has focused mostly on energy up to now but could do more on water. While there is
     a water and energy regulator, the Autorité de la Regulation de l’Energie et Eau (AREE), which is tasked with developing
     tariffs for Cabinet’s approval, it has only been operational since 2018 and does not have sufficient capacity and sway
     to monitor and report on SEG’s performance and service delivery outcomes. A recent change has put the AREE under
     the authority of the Presidency, rather than MEHH, but the implications of this change have yet to be seen.
     Nevertheless, given SEG’s operational challenges, there is a need to consider how the sector regulator can be a catalyst
     for improved sector performance and accountability. AREE has already benefited from technical assistance and
     support from the IDA-funded Electricity Access Project but this support was limited to the energy sector. There is a
     need to build on this initial capacity reinforcement to expand the regulator’s interventions in the water sector.

 12. Existing sanitation infrastructure needs significant investments to ensure adequate services for the population, and
     the service delivery model needs to be revised. The wastewater treatment system in Guinea comprises a non-
     functional and rudimentary sewerage network in a few districts of the capital Conakry and a degraded onsite
     sanitation system comprised of household latrines and septic tanks that requires improvements and the construction
     of fecal sludge treatment stations. Sanitation (onsite and wastewater) are under the authority of the Ministry of
     Housing, Urbanization and Territorial Development (Ministère de l’Habitat, l’Urbanisme et d’Aménagement de
     Territoire, MUHAT) while solid waste is under the Ministry of Decentralization. DATU (Direction Nationale de
     l’aménagement du territoire et de l’Urbanisme), a department within MUHAT, is responsible for setting policy and
     provides oversight of the sector. However, there is no entity that has the capacity to leads on asset management,
     capital investment and service delivery. There is a need to better manage the sanitation service chain, particularly
     onsite sanitation. Currently, households build latrines and septic tanks on their own initiative and private septic
     emptiers collect fecal sludge from septic tanks and depose of the waste in nature or close to residential areas. There
     is limited regulation of these actors.

 13. Significant reforms are needed to meet the challenge of providing universal access to water and sanitation by 2030
     and beyond. In particular, water tariffs have not been adjusted since 2013 and sanitation tariffs have also stagnated,
     with lack of regulation of onsite regulation. A first generation of water reforms between 1989 and 1999 led to a
     management contract for SONEG, the previous public company responsible for asset management, investments and
     debt services and SEEG, the public company in charge of the operation and maintenance of water services, billing and
     customer relations. However, after some successful results, negotiations for the contract renewal for SEEG failed after
     a lack of tariff increases and that for SONEG was also not renewed due to disagreements about the company’s
     operating performance. Since 2001, there was a return to public management, with the previous functions of SEEG
     and SEG merged under a new entity, SEG, and with the state once again responsible for financing investments and
     servicing sector debt and SEG responsible for covering its own operating costs.

  Relationship to CPF

 14. The proposed project is fully aligned with the current Guinea CPF (2018 – 2023) Objective 7: Better access to energy
     and water through improved management of utilities under Pillar 3, Agricultural Productivity and Economic Growth.


Mar 27, 2023                                                                                                       Page 6 of 11
         The World Bank
         Guinea Water and Sanitation Project (P179017)


     The interventions to support SEG through infrastructure investments, technical assistance and organizational
     transformation interventions all address the CPF’s objective of improving the operational performance of SEG. The
     project’s proposed support for the establishment of a new sanitation office is also aligned with CPF objective 7, as it
     builds on the sanitation strategy proposed under this pillar.

  C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

 15. The development objective is to increase access to improved water services in Greater Conakry and to support the
     implementation of water and sanitation policy and institutional reforms.

  Key Results (From PCN)

 16. The following is a long list of proposed PDO indicators, which will be refined during project preparation:

 •   Number of people provided with access to improved water sources under the project (target: )
 •   Number of people with access to enhanced water supply services under the project (target: )
 •   Number of direct project beneficiaries (of which female)
 •   Water storage capacity built under the project (cubic meters (m3))
 •   Percentage of SEG’s operating costs that are covered by revenues
 •   Hours of water supply in areas with existing household connections (number)
 •   Proportion of actions in SEG’s 10 part utility transformation plan completed (percentage)
 •   Annual sector report produced with key performance indicators validated by the sector regulator (yes/ no)
 •   Adoption of legal decrees defining sanitation sector modalities (yes/ no)

  D. Concept Description

 17.       The proposed Water and Sanitation Project in Guinea (PEAG) aims to reduce the water deficit facing the Greater
 Conakry area. SEG has a water production capacity of 150,000m3/day for a peak day requirement of about
 370,000m3/day, so it has a deficit of 220,000m3/day. Under PUEG (P157782), a Water Master Plan was developed in 2019
 for Greater Conakry with detailed analysis of existing infrastructure, demand forecasts and a proposal of investments up
 to 2040. It estimated investment needs of 1.2 billion USD between 2020 and 2040, with a first tranche of $450 million to
 be mobilized to increase water production up to 200,000m3/day to reduce significantly the water deficit in Greater
 Conakry. A second and third phase is expected to keep up with growing demand. The government of Guinea has secured
 $170 million for water infrastructure and these funds are expected to be allocated to funding the upstream works under
 the first tranche of the Master Plan, i.e. the raw water intake at Grandes Chutes dam and the 44km raw water transmission
 network to Yessoulou IV treatment plant (Figure 1). The IDA project will finance water treatment production of
 200,000m3/day to reduce significantly – but not completely eliminate – the water deficit in Greater Conakry. The
 remaining 20,000m3 of water production needed to completely reduce the water supply deficit will be addressed through
 other sources of finance and the Bank will support the government to identify financing partners. The proposed IDA
 project will also water treatment, distribution and household connections. The IDA project’s investments will ensure that
 the current water deficit is significantly reduced. In addition to the Master Plan, the feasibility studies and bidding
 documents for the planned investments are already available and the environmental and social impact assessment (ESIA)
 and resettlement action plan (RAP) for the first tranche will be undertaken under PUEG.

 Figure 1. Overview of planned works under the Water Masterplan for Greater Conakry



Mar 27, 2023                                                                                                       Page 7 of 11
         The World Bank
         Guinea Water and Sanitation Project (P179017)




 18.      The increased investments in the water sector necessitate a stronger emphasis on service delivery mechanisms,
 including utility reforms, cost recovery for operations and maintenance and implementation arrangements. While PUEG
 provided some needed capacity reinforcement of SEG, a more fundamental transformation of the utility is needed to
 enable it to operate and maintain the infrastructure over the long term and provide quality services to its customers. The
 proposed IDA funded project will support measures to strengthen SEG’s governance model and internal functions –
 drawing on the experiences of other countries in the sub-region who have undertaken successful utility reforms. In
 addition, PEAG will support the government and SEG to apply the recommendations of the tariff study and financial model
 – currently under preparation under PUEG - to ensure enough revenues for continued operations and maintenance of the
 built infrastructure.

 19.       While the proposed operation will not undertake investments in sanitation, there will be scaled up support to the
 sector relative to the current operation. PUEG included a small ($1 million) component on sanitation that funded a
 diagnostic of sanitation infrastructure and services; a national sanitation strategy and a Sanitation Master Plan but no
 financing of civil works. These studies – as well as study tours organized for the authorities in Senegal – have highlighted
 that the institutional arrangements for sanitation service delivery need a fundamental rethink. There is no sanitation office
 or utility and service delivery is monitored by a ministerial department, DATU, under the Ministry of Housing, Urbanism
 and Territorial Development (MUHAT). There is growing recognition that it will not be possible to execute investment
 projects outlined under the Sanitation Master Plan without reforming the current service delivery model, which includes


Mar 27, 2023                                                                                                        Page 8 of 11
         The World Bank
         Guinea Water and Sanitation Project (P179017)


 several private actors (fecal sludge emptiers) in the onsite sanitation segment. Under the proposed project, support will
 be provided to set up a dedicated entity for sanitation; professionalize existing service providers; and pilot the construction
 of one or two fecal sludge treatment stations if possible.

 20.     As for implementation, PEAG will draw lessons from PUEG but with other donor-funded and government-led
 operations in terms of implementation and project management. The implementation arrangements for PUEG, based on
 a single project implementation unit (PIU) that undertook all the functions related to procurement, safeguards
 implementation, reporting and coordination, have shown their limits. At the same time, the modalities for the
 implementing agencies – SEG in particular – and the titular ministries (MEHH and MUHAT) also need to be revised.
 Consultations with various donors active in the sector have revealed similar challenges in project implementation and the
 Government is aware of the need for improvements in the next generation of sector investments. As described in this
 note, careful attention will be taken to ensure strong project management at all cycles of the operation. The instrument
 adopted is an IPF with performance-based conditions (PBCs), which will provide greater incentives for national authorities
 to undertake the above mentioned reforms.

 21.       The proposed project builds on the Guinea Urban Water Project (PUEG), the first IDA financed water operation in
 Guinea, which was approved in 2017 and is expected to close in December 2023. PUEG, with $30 million in financing, is
 focusing on enhancing the distribution network in SEG’s service areas and improving the commercial functions of the
 utility in order to reduce water losses, improve water supply to existing customers, connect up to 24,000 new customers
 and improve bill collection through metering and a new digital customer management system. PUEG also funded
 important studies and capacity building related to groundwater resources and strategic studies for the water sector,
 including a tariff study, financial model and new sector policy letter. PEAG will support the application of many of the
 recommendations of these studies.

 22.      The table below summarizes the main components of the new project.

 Table 2. Summary of Main Project Components

  Component 1: Increasing and improving water services in Greater Conakry ($160 million)
  Component 1.1           Remedial equipment and upgrades to improve         $10 million
                          dam safety at Grandes Chutes and Baneah dams
  Component 1.2           Increasing the volume of water supply in Greater $80 million
                          Conakry
  Component 1.3           Storage and Distribution of treated water          $70 million
  Component 2: Reforms for Sanitation Service Delivery Arrangements ($5 million)
  Component 2.1           Strengthening sanitation governance                $5 million
                          arrangements and strengthening service delivery
  Component 3. Support for Water Institutional and Policy Reforms ($20 million)
  Component 3.1           Support for SEG’s Transformation Plan              $15 million
  Component 3.2           Support Measures for Applying the                  $2 million
                          Recommendations of the Tariff Study and
                          Financial Model
  Component 3.3.          Strengthening the Knowledge and Monitoring of      $3 million
                          Groundwater Resources
  Component 4. Project Implementation Support ($15 million)
  Component 4.1           Technical Assistance to Implementation Agencies $10 million

Mar 27, 2023                                                                                                          Page 9 of 11
           The World Bank
           Guinea Water and Sanitation Project (P179017)


     Component 4.2          Project management                              $5 million
     Component 5. Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)
     Component 5            CERC                                            $0 million
                                    TOTAL                                   $200 million




     Legal Operational Policies                                                   Triggered?
     Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                  No
     Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60                                           No

     Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
     .




 .
     CONTACT POINT


     World Bank
     Dambudzo Josephine Muzenda, Karamoko Sanogo
     Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist


     Borrower/Client/Recipient
     Ministère de l'Energie, de l'Hydraulique et des Hydrocarbures (MEHH)




     Implementing Agencies

     Societe des Eaux de Guinee (SEG)
     Aboubacar Camara
     Directeur General de la SEG
     abscamara@outlook.fr




Mar 27, 2023                                                                                   Page 10 of 11
         The World Bank
         Guinea Water and Sanitation Project (P179017)


  FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
  The World Bank
  1818 H Street, NW
  Washington, D.C. 20433
  Telephone: (202) 473-1000
  Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects



  APPROVAL

  Task Team Leader(s):                     Dambudzo Josephine Muzenda, Karamoko Sanogo

  Approved By
  APPROVALTBL
  Country Director:                        Coralie Gevers                    08-May-2023




Mar 27, 2023                                                                               Page 11 of 11
