Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                                              STAKEHOLDER
                                                                                          ENGAGEMENT PLAN (SEP)
                                                                                                March 20 2025




                               Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)
                                 Balochistan Water Security and
                                Productivity Improvement Project




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                            (P179227)

                               Balochistan Irrigation Department (BID) AND Quetta Water
                                           and Sanitation Authority (QWASA)
     Table of contents
1.  Project Description ............................................................................................................... 3
2.  Rationale and Objective of Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) ........................................ 7
  The overall Objective of the SEP ............................................................................................ 7
3. Stakeholder Identification and Analysis ................................................................................ 8
  Methodology ........................................................................................................................... 9
  Affected Parties .....................................................................................................................10
  Other Interested Parties.........................................................................................................10
  Disadvantaged/Vulnerable Individuals or Groups ..................................................................12
4. Stakeholder Engagement Plan .......................................................................................... 13
  Summary of Stakeholder Engagement During Project Preparation ........................................13
  Institutional/Secondary Consultations ....................................................................................15
  Summary of Project Stakeholder Needs, Methods, and Tools for Stakeholder Engagement .18
  Purpose and Timing of Stakeholder Engagement Program ...................................................23
  Proposed Strategy for Information Disclosure and consultation process ................................24
  SEP Summary Table .............................................................................................................25
  Proposed Strategy to Incorporate the View of Vulnerable Groups .........................................27
  Reporting Back to Stakeholders ............................................................................................28
5. Resources and Responsibilities for Managing SEP Activities ............................................. 28
  Project Implementation ArrangementS ..................................................................................28
  Project Steering Committee (PSC) ........................................................................................29
  Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements .................................................................29
  Resources for SEP Implementation .......................................................................................29
6. Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM).............................................................................. 30
  Objectives of GRM: ...............................................................................................................30
  Existing GRM System ............................................................................................................31
    Responding to GBV/SEA/SH Complaints: ..........................................................................41
    Workers GRM: ...................................................................................................................42
    Monitoring and Reporting ...................................................................................................42


LIST OF TABLES

TABLE 1: AFFECTED PARTIES AND ITS IMPACT WISE ANALYSIS .....................................10

TABLE 2: OTHER INTERESTED PARTIES AND ITS IMPACT WISE ANALYSIS ....................10

TABLE 3: DISADVANTAGED/VULNERABLE GROUPS AND ITS IMPACT WISE ANALYSIS .13

TABLE 4: PRIMARY STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATION FOR COMPONENT A (KACHCHI
   PLAIN AREAS) ..................................................................................................................14

TABLE 5: SUMMARY OF OF PARTICIPANTS OF VILLAGE LEVEL FGDSFGD AT SHABAL
   VILLAGE QUETTA ............................................................................................................14

TABLE 6: CONSULTATION WITH INSTITUTIONAL STAKEHOLDERS ...................................15

TABLE 7: CONSULTATIONS ALONG WITH ITS DATES TO STAKEHOLDER DEPARTMENTS
    ..........................................................................................................................................17



                                                                       1
TABLE 8: SUMMARY OF PROJECT STAKEHOLDER NEEDS, METHODS, AND TOOLS FOR
   STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT ......................................................................................19

TABLE 9: OVERVIEW OF LANGUAGE AND OTHER SPECIFIC NEEDS ................................20

TABLE 10: SEP SUMMARY TABLE .........................................................................................25

TABLE 11: PROPOSED ITEMS FOR THE BUDGET................................................................29



List of Annexes

ANNEXURE 1: CONSULTATIONS AND PRESCRIPTION GUIDE/QUESTIONNAIRE .............43

ANNEXURE 2: PICTURES OF THE CONSULTATIONS MEETINGS .......................................48




                                                          2
1.    Project Description

Balochistan's water resources are crucial to its development and livelihood. The Province
experiences extended droughts and heavy flooding, yet resources are insufficient to handle both.
Although 96 percent of water comes from surface flows, predictable and managed water
availability is becoming scarce. The focus has been on developing scarce (4 percent)
groundwater resources. This has caused critical situations in most Province basins. In reaction to
extended droughts, population growth and urban migration increase water demand. Balochistan's
government prioritizes water resource development to ensure enough water availability for
domestic and agricultural use.

Balochistan's population traditionally gets drinking water from streams and floodwater in distant
villages and mainly groundwater in urban areas. There are many kilometers of streams which are
used by the households near them for drinking water. Villages have floodwater ponds for annual
drinking water needs. When water runs out or floods arrive late, some towns' residents migrate
or must bring water from far flung areas. Balochistan often experiences severe drought conditions
with a 4–5-year cyclical frequency. The long dry spells take a heavy toll on the livelihood patterns
of the local population as irrigation and potable water resources dry up1. Water availability is
drastically reduced during extended droughts. The rural poor is the most vulnerable to water
scarcity in Balochistan. Crop, fruit farming and livestock rearing are extremely important
occupations in rural Balochistan, and key sectors of the economy, but are facing the major
challenge of access to reliable sources of water. The groundwater in Balochistan’s aquifers
provide a buffer against drought for crop production, and for livestock and human needs.
However, inefficient water management practices and excessive groundwater use created severe
economic, social, and environmental challenges for the province. Improving rural livelihoods and
stimulating economic growth require vastly improved management of the scarce water resources
of the province.

The Balochistan Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) Policy (2024) of the
Government of Balochistan recognizes the role of surface water supplies in meeting the growing
needs of various sub-sectors of water use and recharging depleted aquifers. The Policy prioritizes
Sailaba agricultural and storage dams to generate surface waters for command area expansion
and groundwater recharge. The newly approved BIWRM Policy 2024 and the Water Act
(approved in February 2025), these two documents lead to key improvements in the water sector
including (i) O&M of infrastructure; (ii) Improved control of groundwater use (iii) improved
watershed management, (iv) enhanced management of floods and droughts; (v) increased
attention to water quality issues. The legal reform will create a more enabling environment for the
integrated water resources management in the province and will help the implementation of this
proposed operation.
The Balochistan Water Security and Productivity Improvement Project (BWSPIP) is designed to
tackle water security challenges exacerbated by climate change – droughts, floods, and rising
temperatures. It is envisioned that through this this project, the Government of Balochistan will be
supported in developing a credible long-term program to improve water security for production
and public health and enhance the productivity of key water-related sectors of the economy to
create jobs and improve livelihoods following an IWRM approach. The project will strengthen
relevant institutions to adapt their IWRM capacity and better position them for the implementation



1 Kakar, Z., Khair, S. M., Khan, M. Z., & Khan, M. A. (2016). Socio-economic impact of water scarcity on the economy of Pishin Lora Basin in

Balochistan. Journal of Applied and Emerging Sciences, 5(2), pp90-96.



                                                                        3
of Balochistan Water Policy and the Balochistan Water Act. The Project will directly benefit over
80,000 people with improved climate resilience management and climate resilience infrastructure
in the Nari, Talli, and Lehri river basins, including (a) flood protection infrastructure, (b) watershed
management interventions, (c) irrigation infrastructure; and (d) CSA capacity building. In addition,
the BWSPIP will benefit over 500,000 people in QWASA service area through (a) service quality
improvements derived from investments related to the operational and financial performance of
QWASA and improved customer orientation, and (b) access to safely managed water supply
through public standpipes in low-income areas. BWSPIP will have the following Components:

Component A: Flood protection, agricultural water and watershed management

This component aims at improving water security in the Kachhi plains by protecting populations
from floods and by improving access to water for productive use thereby reducing water security
challenges. The component will achieve this objective through a combination of structural and
non-structural solutions. The structural solutions will include a mix of grey infrastructure (flood
dispersal structures and associated canals) and green infrastructure (targeted revegetation of the
watershed). The non-structural solutions will include adequate planning especially at community
level, and strengthening the capacity of local water management and government institutions. By
doing so, this component will significantly contribute to strengthening the climate resilience and
sustainability through multiple pathways (i) enhanced opportunities for productive farming
activities through access to multiple sources of water throughout the year (as soil moisture,
groundwater and ponds); (ii) diversification of farming activities to enable both crop farming and
livestock breeding; and (iii) a combination of larger and smaller structures ensuring better
sediment management and improved flood risk mitigation. The component includes three sub-
components (i) Sub-component A1: Water Infrastructure; (ii) Sub-component A2: Watershed
Management and (iii) Sub-component A3: Improvements of on-farm water productivity. The
project will engage with local NGOs and Women Water Network such as Aurat Foundation in
Quetta to ensure female participation in consultations and ensure women’s voice is heard for the
flood protection, agriculture productivity and watershed management activities.

Sub-component A1: Flood protection and dispersal water infrastructure. This sub-
component will finance the development of priority flood protection and water utilization
infrastructure to protect people and properties from floods and ensure year-round water
availability for agriculture and limited domestic uses. Moreover, the infrastructure itself will be
made resilient to floods, droughts, and high winds.2 The activities under this sub-component will
include: (i) Construction of flood dispersal structures; (ii) Embankment Protection Works; and (iii)
auxiliary infrastructure including canals, gauges, regulation and measurement systems. This set
of “grey infrastructure” will be complemented by nature-based solutions described in sub-
component A2.

Sub-component A2: Watershed Management. This sub-component will finance a combination
of watershed management and conservation interventions aimed at limiting erosion, promoting
groundwater recharge, increasing carbon stock and providing increased feed and fodder supply
for livestock. This sub-component includes the activities related to: (i) afforestation; (ii) erosion
check and control structures; (iii) land leveling; (iv) water detention structures/ponds; and (v) water




2 The World Bank’s Resilient Water Infrastructure Design Brief, published in 2020, guides users on how resilience can be built into

the engineering design of their project. It focuses on the three natural hazards most likely to affect water and sanitation
infrastructure—droughts, floods, and high winds.


                                                                4
and soil conservation. The sub-component will also finance a technical assistance enabling
participatory approach to the watershed management.

Sub-component A3: On-farm water productivity. The sub-component will finance activities to
improve on-farm water management to increase productivity of agriculture, horticulture, livestock,
and fisheries. It will support on-farm infrastructure, climate-smart agricultural water use
technologies, and technical assistance. On-farm infrastructure will include the
construction/rehabilitation of small water channels, small rainwater harvesting structures and
access roads. Climate-smart agricultural water use technologies will include improved irrigation
efficiency and climate resilient technologies (including contour bunds) enabled through matching
grants to eligible beneficiaries. The technical assistance will offer training to farmers for on-farm
water management techniques and practices and support the creation of water user associations`
(WUAs) that will have responsibility in the O&M of infrastructure. The project will ensure women’s
representation and leadership in the WUAs by establishing a quota of X% for decision-making
positions held by women and providing women in these positions, and more broadly female
members in WUAs, with training in leadership and negotiation, as well as in technical skills such
as financial management and O&M. Separate trainings will also provide to women on agricultural
productivity, climate smart agriculture, horticulture, livestock, and kitchen gardening and income
generation activities to improve their resilience to climatic shocks.

Sub-component A4: Project Management. This sub-component will finance the project
management, monitoring and evaluation and studies for component A. The component will also
finance expenditures associated with the component implementation, including incremental costs
associated with the Project Implementation Unit (PIU), Project Supervision and Implementation
Assistance (PSIA) consultants, M&E consultants, and implementation of Management Plans and
Strategic Studies including the Environmental Management Plan (EMP), the Social Mitigation
Plan and the Gender Action Plan (GAP). Study tours will also be included with piloting of new
technologies and others that may be identified during project implementation, as well as feasibility
studies for other river basins (that do not include international waterways as defined in OP7.50).

Component B: QWASA; Service Delivery Strengthening

This component aims to improve water security in Quetta by improving water supply and
sanitation services delivered by QWASA and increasing sustainability of groundwater use through
increased recharge. This will be achieved through a combination of priority infrastructure
investments, strengthening of QWASA, and application of circular economy principles to water
supply and sanitation systems. The project will finance a diverse set of activities that are all
aligned with the objective of enhancing the efficiency, resilience, and sustainability of QWASA’s
operations to deliver improved, safe, reliable, and inclusive services. These interventions are well
aligned with the priorities identified in the diagnostic and plans developed for QWASA through the
Utility of the Future (UoF) Program and through UNICEF Climate Resilient WASH Roadmap.

Sub-component B1: Planning strengthening and investment readiness. This sub-
component will finance strategic activities to define a medium-term vision for QWASA driven by
strengthened planning capabilities for water resource management and service delivery in
QWASA’s service area, and performance improvements. Activities under this sub-component will
include: (a) preparation and implementation of the performance agreement between the GoB and
QWASA, including the definition of QWASA strategic vision, corresponding investments with
clearly identified resources (financial, human, and equipment), key performance indicators, and
M&E arrangements; (b) deployment of a QWASA Water Management Information System
(WMIS), including a customer management information system; (c) preparation of the Water


                                                 5
Supply, Wastewater, and Reuse Master Plan for the Quetta District (including identification of
alternative, sustainable water resources, and watershed practices); (d) feasibility studies for
conveyance infrastructure for surface water from existing dams; (e) hydraulic modeling to support
water planning; and (f) operationalization of a dedicated unit within QWASA in charge of
wastewater and reuse.

Sub-component B2: Sustainable groundwater management. This sub-component will finance
a comprehensive program to monitor groundwater resources, improve tube well performance,
explore sustainable groundwater locations that could bridge the supply-demand gap, and
contribute toward aquifer recharge, thus increasing QWASA’s adaptation capabilities to climate
shocks. Activities under this sub-component will include: (a) deployment of an integrated
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) in about 40 tube wells for improved water
supply management and water resource protection; (b) installation of tube well flow meters; (c)
groundwater exploration; and (d) detailed designs for groundwater recharge in highly vulnerable
locations.

Sub-component B3: Operational and financial performance improvement. This sub-
component will support improvement in QWASA’s operational and financial performance,
improving service quality, including quality of water, hours of service, water pressure, leakage
repair, and energy efficiency. Also, it will finance activities to extend access to safety-managed
water and public toilets to the poorest settlements in the QWASA service area. Activities will
include: (a) construction and rehabilitation of ground and pumping stations and reservoirs; (b)
construction of 10 filtration plants and rehabilitation of 95 filtration stations; (c) replacement of 82
pumps by energy efficient pumps, accompanied by replacement of outlived transformers (after
relevant audits are completed), and equipment; (d) establishment of pilot district metered areas
for pressure control, leakage detection, and repair campaigns in selected district of the QWASA
service area (including works related to reservoirs, pumping stations, and equipment such as bulk
water meters and leak detection instruments); (e) establishment of customer facilitation centers
in each of the QWASA sub-districts; (f) operationalization of a dedicated unit within QWASA in
charge of improving access to water and sanitation in low-income areas; and (g) construction of
standpipes and public toilets, designed in an inclusive and accessible way for people with
disabilities and the elderly, in selected low-income areas. The design and implementation of
activities (f) and (g) will be based on the results of the research concluded by the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) in Quetta City low-income areas in June 2024.

Sub-component B4: Project management. This sub-component will finance Component B’s
management activities, including: (a) incremental costs associated with the QWASA-PIU; (b)
PSIA consultants; (c) M&E costs, including consultants, and GEMS and PMIS deployment; (d)
E&S management, including implementation of the QWASA GRM, Environmental Management
Plan, and the Social Mitigation Plan;3 and (e) capacity-building activities for the QWASA-PIU.

Component C: Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)

This component will support preparedness for, and rapid response to climate and natural
disasters, emergency, and/or catastrophic events as needed. The provisional zero cost for this
component will allow for rapid reallocation of credit proceeds from other components under
streamlined procurement and disbursement procedures. A CERC annex will be included in the



3 Land acquisition and compensation-related expenses are to be financed by counterpart funding.




                                                             6
project operations manual outlining the process for activation, criteria for eligible crisis,
implementation arrangements, fiduciary and safeguards aspects and a positive list of activities
that may be financed.

2.       Rationale and Objective of Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)

The Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) recognizes the importance of open and transparent
engagement between the Borrower and project stakeholders as an essential element of good
international practice. Effective stakeholder engagement can improve the environmental and
social sustainability of projects, enhance project acceptance, and make a significant contribution
to successful project design and implementation. Stakeholder engagement is an inclusive process
conducted throughout the project life cycle. Where properly designed and implemented, it
supports the development of strong, constructive, and responsive relationships that are important
for successful management of a project’s environmental and social risks.

The overall Objective of the SEP

The overall objective of this SEP is to define a plan of action for stakeholder engagement,
including technically and culturally appropriate approach to public consultation and information
disclosure, throughout the entire project cycle. The SEP outlines ways in which the project team
will communicate with stakeholders and includes a mechanism by which people can raise
concerns, provide feedback, or make complaints about project activities.

The involvement of different stakeholders, including the local population is essential to the
success of the project to ensure smooth collaboration between project staff and local
communities. This SEP will be reassessed and updated throughout the project life as a live
document.

The SEP will:

     •   Establish a systematic approach to stakeholder engagement that will help Borrowers
         identify stakeholders and build and maintain a constructive relationship with them, in
         particular project-affected parties.
     •   Assess the level of stakeholder interest and support for the project and to enable
         stakeholders’ views to be considered in project design and environmental and social
         performance.
     •   Promote and provide means for effective and inclusive engagement with project-affected
         parties throughout the project life cycle on issues that could potentially affect them.
     •   Ensure that appropriate project information on environmental and social risks and impacts
         is disclosed to stakeholders in a timely, understandable, accessible, and appropriate
         manner and format.
     •   Provide project-affected parties with accessible and inclusive means to raise issues and
         grievances and allow Borrowers to respond to and manage such grievances.

The environmental and social risk of the project is rated as ‘Substantial’.

Environment: The Potential environmental impacts from civil works include spoil and dust
generation from excavation activities and running of Project vehicles on unpaved roads/tracks, air
emissions released by construction machinery and vehicles, soil and ground/surface water
contamination caused by the release of contaminants at the worksites and discharge of domestic
sewage and other wastewaters from temporary facilities, solid waste generation, clearing of


                                                 7
natural vegetation and trees; community health and safety (CHS) risks associated with movement
of heavy machinery, dump trucks, and deep excavations; occupational health and safety (OHS)
risks related to the construction works, unsafe and unhealthy working conditions, security of
workers and equipment, and concerns related to river water quantity and quality. In the case of
flood water detention and water harvesting under Component A, flood surface water flows are
likely reduced during the rainy season for lower riparian areas. Component B's potential negative
impacts include traffic congestion in urban settings, temporary disruption in water supply, and
related health and safety risks during implementation. Most of these negative impacts are
temporary, site-specific, and largely reversible and can be managed and mitigated through
appropriate screening and mitigation measures. As the BWSPIP activities will be carried out in
the built or already transformed environment, the adverse impacts on biodiversity and forests are
not likely.

Social: The Project will have significant positive social impacts derived from flood protection,
access to improved water quality and quantity, and support to some of Balochistan's poorest
farmers and households. Moderate to large-scale civil works may cause adverse social impacts
if not managed promptly and correctly. Associated social risks with the civil works may include
impacts on land, labor management, OHS, and CHS. There is a risk of exclusion of women under
Component A from benefiting from on-farm water productivity activities due to the lack of inclusion
of women in WUAs. Inter and intra-tribal conflicts may also impact equity and targeting, a primary
social risk associated with Component A. Security challenges in Project areas under Component
A may also risk Project staff and labor. The Project will capitalize on the BIWRMDP’s extensive
experience in Balochistan, which has built trust through constant engagement with tribes of the
Nari and Porali basins. Activities under Component B on rehabilitation of water supply
infrastructure in the densely populated and congested areas of Quetta City carry risks of
temporary economic and physical displacement of people and businesses (including informal
settlers) during civil works. Road closures disrupted access for civilians, and labor influx for the
replacement of water and sewage lines may also carry risks of CHS and gender-based violence
(GBV)/ sexual exploitation and abuse/sexual harassment (SEA/SH). Improved water supply in
Quetta may also carry equity risks in water supply and quality and ensure access to increased
water. Identified risks for land, CHS, and equitable benefits will be further amplified for Project
activities conducted in low-income areas. Based on this risk classification, requisite institutional
strengthening measures and GRMs to address social risks (including those related to GBV and
SEA/SH) are incorporated into the Project design. SEA/SH risk assessment tools for civil works
and social protection were applied for the Project’s civil works under Components A and B.
SEA/SH risks are considered moderate as women and children may be exposed to labor and
Project workers during the civil works and the Project’s capacity-building activities at the
community level.

3.   Stakeholder Identification and Analysis
Stakeholder analysis identifies and determines the likely relationship between the project and the
different stakeholders. Stakeholders are directly or indirectly affected by a project, as well as those
who may have interests in a project and/or the ability to influence its outcome, either positively or
negatively. It is a useful tool for managing communication between the project team and
stakeholders. Project stakeholders are defined as individuals, groups, or other entities who:
     •   Are impacted or likely to be impacted directly or indirectly, positively, or adversely, by the
         Project (also known as ‘affected parties’); and,




                                                   8
   •   May have an interest in the Project (‘other interested parties’). They include individuals or
       groups whose interests may be affected by the Project and who have the potential to
       influence the Project outcomes in any way.
In all phases of the project, cooperation and negotiation with stakeholders is required. Persons
within the groups who act as legitimate representatives of their respective stakeholder group and
entrusted by their fellow group members will be identified in the process of engagement.
Community representatives may provide helpful insight into the local settings and act as main
means for dissemination of the Project information and as a primary communication/liaison link
between the Project and targeted communities and their established networks. Legitimacy of the
community representatives can be verified by talking informally to a random sample of community
members and heeding their views on who can be representing their interests in the most effective
way.

Methodology

Stakeholder analysis helps to know the perceptions, interests, need, and influence of actors on
the project. Identifying the appropriate consultation methodology for each stakeholder throughout
the project lifecycle is necessary. To meet best practice approaches, the project will apply the
following principles for stakeholder engagement:
       •   Openness and life-cycle approach: public consultations for the project will continue
           during the whole project lifecycle. Stakeholder engagement will be free of
           manipulation, interface, coercion, and intimidation;
       •   Informed participation and feedback: information will be provided throughout project
           duration and widely distributed among all stakeholders in an appropriate format;
           conducted based on timely, relevant, understandable and accessible information
           related to the project; opportunities provided to raise concerns and assure that
           stakeholder feedback is taken into consideration during decision making;
       •   Inclusiveness and sensitivity: stakeholder identification will be undertaken to support
           better communications and building effective relationships. The participation process
           for the projects is inclusive. All stakeholders are always encouraged to be involved in
           the consultation process. Equal access to information is provided to all stakeholders.
           Sensitivity to stakeholders’ needs is the key principle underlying the selection of
           engagement methods. Special attention is given to vulnerable groups, particularly
           women-headed households, youth, elderly, and the cultural sensitivities of diverse
           ethnic groups.
For the purposes of effective and tailored engagement, stakeholders of the proposed project can
be divided into the following core categories:
   1. Affected Parties: persons, groups and other entities within the Project Area of Influence
      that are directly influenced (actually or potentially) by the project and/or have been
      identified as most susceptible to change associated with the project, and who need to be
      closely engaged in identifying impacts and their significance, as well as in decision-making
      on mitigation and management measures.
   2. Other Interested Parties: individuals/groups/entities that may not experience direct
      impacts from the Project but who consider or perceive their interests as being affected by
      the project and/or who could affect the project and the process of its implementation in
      some way




                                                 9
   3. Disadvantaged/Vulnerable Individuals or Groups: persons who may be disproportionately
      impacted or further disadvantaged by the project(s) as compared with any other groups
      due to their vulnerable status,5 and that may require special engagement efforts to ensure
      their equal representation in the consultation and decision-making process associated
      with the project.

Affected Parties

Affected Parties are those groups of people that are directly influenced (actually or potentially) by
the project and/or have been identified as most susceptible to potential risks and impacts
associated with the project and who need to be closely engaged including local community
members and other parties that may be subject to direct impacts from the Project. Specifically,
the following individuals and groups fall within this category:

Table 1: Affected parties and its impact wise analysis

     Sector                    Affected Parties                           Impact Level
 Community            1. Villagers and residents of towns                         1. High
                         and villages                                             2. High
                      2. Agriculture farmers and workers                          3. High
                      3. Farmers Organizations/ Water                             4. High
                         Users Associations                                       5. High
                      4. Community Based Organizations
                      5. Farming community
  Government          1. Balochistan Irrigation Department                   1.       High
                         (ID)                                                2.       High
                      2. Quetta Water and Sanitation                         3.       High
                         Authority (QWASA)                                   4.       High
                      3. PIU Staff Balochistan ID                            5.       High
                      4. PIU Staff QWASA                                     6.       High
                      5. QWASA Staff                                         7.       High
                      6. Project Design and Supervision
                         Consultants
                      7. Monitoring and Evaluation
                         Consultants

Other Interested Parties

Other parties interested in the Project are identified as individuals, groups, or organizations who
may not be directly affected by the Project but who can help play a role in identifying potential
risks, impacts, and opportunities for the Borrower to consider and address in the assessment
process and throughout project preparation. The following Other Interested Parties (OIPs) have
been identified as stakeholders of the Project:

Table 2: Other Interested Parties and its impact wise analysis

           Sector                  Other Interested Parties                 Impact Level
                                              (OIPs)



                                                 10
Government   1.  National Disaster           1. Low
                 Management Authority        2. High
                 (NDMA)
                                             3. High
             2. Provincial Disaster
                 Management Authority        4. Low
             3. Pakistan Meteorological      5. Low
                 Department                  6. Low
             4. Forest and Wildlife          7. Medium
                 Department                  8. Medium
             5. Politicians (local           9. High
                 leadership in targetted
                 areas)                      10. High
             6. Social Welfare               11. Low
                 Department, Balochistan     12. Low
             7. Police Department
                                             13. Low
             8. Balochistan
                 Environmental Protection
                                             14. Low
                 Agency
             9. Revenue Department,          15. High
                 Balochistan
             10. Agriculture Department      16. Medium
             11. Livestock and Fisheries
                 Department                  17. Low
             12. Food Department
                                             18. High
             13. Health Department
             14. Local Government            19. High
                 Department
             15. Education Department
             16. PandDDs
Community         1.   General Public        1. High
                  2.   Local NGOs            2. Low
                  3.   Donor organizations   3. Medium
                  4.   Charity groups        4. Low
                  5.   Contracted workers,   5. High
                       consultants
Others            1. The All                 1. Low
                     Balochistan Fruit and   2. Low
                     Vegetable Exporters,    3. Medium
                  2. Quetta Flour Mills      4. High
                     Association
                                             5. High
                  3. Private sector
                                             6. Low
                     companies providing
                     agriculture inputs/     7. Medium
                     support:                8. Low
                  4. Construction            9. Medium
                     contractors             10. Low



                               11
                                   5. Construction material        11. High
                                       suppliers                   12. Medium
                                   6. Insurance companies          13. Low
                                   7. Goods Transporters           14. Low
                                       Association                 15. Medium
                                   8. Sindh Balochistan Rice       16. Low
                                       Millers and Traders
                                                                   17. Low
                                       Association
                                                                   18. Medium
                                   9. Traders Associations
                                   10. Shop Keepers
                                   11. Daily wage earners
                                   12. Artisans of rural
                                       markets
                                   13. Micro-Finance
                                       Institutions
                                       (Banks/NGOs)
                                   14. UN Agencies (e.g.,
                                       WHO, WFP, UNICEF)
                                   15. Media Groups
                                   16. Balochistan Culture
                                       Department
                                   17. Cultural Organizations,
                                       writers, archeologists
                                   18. Universities and
                                       research institutions,
                                       e.g., Balochistan
                                       University, BIUTEMS
                                       Agriculture University;

Disadvantaged/Vulnerable Individuals or Groups

Disadvantaged or vulnerable individuals or groups are those peoples or groups highly vulnerable
to potential project impacts and often do not have a voice to express their concerns or understand
the impact and risk of the project. They may disproportionately be impacted or further
disadvantaged by the project as compared with any other groups due to their vulnerable status,
and usually require special arrangement to ensure their equal representation in the consultation
and decision-making process associated with the project. Their vulnerability may stem from
person’s origin, gender, age, health condition, disability, economic deficiency and financial
insecurity, disadvantaged status in the community (e.g., ethnic and religious minority groups,
Indigenous peoples), and dependence on other individuals or natural resources.
Awareness raising and stakeholder engagement with disadvantaged or vulnerable individuals or
groups on the project must consider such groups or individuals’ sensitivities, concerns and cultural
differences to ensure a full understanding of project activities and benefits. Engagement with
these vulnerable groups and individuals often requires the application of specific measures and
assistance aimed at the facilitation of their participation in the project related decision making so
that their awareness of and input to the overall process are commensurate to those of the other
stakeholders.



                                                 12
Within the proposed Project, the vulnerable or disadvantaged groups may include, but not limited
to, the following:

Table 3: Disadvantaged/Vulnerable Groups and its impact wise analysis

 Sector          Disadvantaged/Vulnerable Individuals or Impact Level
                 Groups
                                                                      1.    High
 Community          1. Women agriculture and livestock
                                                                      2.    High
                        farmers
                                                                      3.    High
                    2. Ethnic/religious/gender minorities
                                                                      4.    High
                    3. Elderly people in hard-hit areas and
                                                                      5.    High
                        facing food shortages.
                                                                      6.    High
                    4. Female headed households
                                                                      7.    High
                    5. Children and youth heads of
                                                                      8.    High
                        households
                                                                      9.    Medium
                    6. Agriculture labor dependent on share-
                                                                      10.   High
                        cropping
                                                                      11.   High
                    7. Communities practicing subsistence
                                                                      12.   Low
                        farming
                                                                      13.   Low
                    8. People with special needs such as
                                                                      14.   Low
                        Pregnant women, children, those in
                                                                      15.   High
                        poor health.
                    9. Illiterate persons
                    10. Women Artisans (handicraft makers
                        etc.)
                    11. Differently abled/physically challenged
                        people.
                    12. Casual/Informal        labor       force
                        (construction workers, skilled and un-
                        skilled labours etc.)


Vulnerable groups within the communities affected by the project will be further confirmed and
consulted during project preparation.

4.   Stakeholder Engagement Plan

Summary of Stakeholder Engagement During Project Preparation

The Irrigation Department of Balochistan Government acquired the services of M/S MM Pakistan
and Techno Pakistan Consultants to study the detailed feasibility reports, including all necessary
aspects covering technical, institutional and economics, social/environmental assessments,
procurement, and financial management with spatial demarcation through advanced
technological methods etc. required for approval by the Government and the international funding
institution including the World Bank.
Two separate consultations for the BWSPIP were organized by these consultants from January
to October 2023. The consultations were done in two sessions. Consultations mainly in form of
“Focus Group Discussions” (FGD) with all Primary and Secondary Stakeholders at public places
or offices especially in those communities which is within the project area or nearby with it are


                                               13
done. It was helpful to create a strong foundation for long-lasting and trustful relationships
between the client and the stakeholders. Representatives of the communities, potential vulnerable
groups such as women and youth has been consulted to understand their specific issues and
concerns. This has enabled the teams in meaningful participation. The findings and
recommendations have been discussed and disclosed openly and transparently with the
communities to solicit their comments and suggestions in the studies.
Participants were first briefed about the Project objectives and major interventions associated with
the Project implementation. Afterward, people were asked to express their views regarding the
proposed Project. In general participants appreciated the Project and offered comments and
suggestions to enhance the expected environmental and social benefits and to mitigate the
adverse impacts. The community perception of the Project is very good but most of the people
wish to implement the Project through sustainable and safety manner. For the summary of the
feedback of the consultations see Annexure 1, and for details of the consultations with primary
stakeholder are provided below:

Table 4: Primary Stakeholder Consultation for Component A (Kachchi Plain Areas)

 Sr.                                                                       Number of
                     Settlement                 Tehsil     District
 No.                                                                      Participants
  1.    Talli                                                                  30
  2.    Bokha Ghulam Bolak                                                     22
  3.    Ghulam Bolak                                                           07
  4.    Qasir Gahramzai                                                        06
  5.    Mall Gahramzai                                                         17
  6.    Juma Kash                                Sibi        Sibi              08
  7.    Goth Chandia                                                           09
  8.    Sultan Kot                                                             14
  9.    Arbab Chachar                                                          12
 10     Mal Gorgage                                                            10
 11.    Sibi City (Women Consultation)                                         08
 12.    Theri Barmani                                                          07
 13.    Ralo Mian Khan                                                         12
 14.    Ralo Gulib                                                             10
 15.    Hujo Machta                                                            05
 16.    Lehri                                                                  05
                                                 Lehri       Sibi
 17.    Goht Haji Tuma Khan                                                    04
 18.    Khairwah                                                               08
 19.    Basti Kashmir (Sherkal)                                                08
        Bakhtiar Abad (Women
  20.                                                                          09
        Consultation)
  21.   Haji Jabalana                                                          06
  22.   Jalal Khan                                                             10
                                                 Bagh      Kachhi
  23.   Rehanzai New                                                           07
  24.   Mogari                                                                 05
  25.   Dhadar City (Women Consultation)       Dhadar      Kachhi              07

Table 5: Summary of of participants of Village Level FGDsFGD at Shabal village Quetta



                                                14
  S. No              Village Name                              Number of Participants

       1.            Shabal Village, Quetta                9 Male

       2.            Khula Dam Village, Quetta             11 Male

Institutional/Secondary Consultations

The consultant's environmental and social teams, along with technical teams of consultants,
visited various stakeholders’ organizations and offices located in the districts and provincial levels
for information disclosure and to get feedback. Institutional stakeholder consultations were more
formal as they involved government personnel and non-governmental organization, who were
consulted. They were briefed on the proposed Project, its proposed interventions and the potential
negative and positive impact of the Project on the areas of social and environment.
The public sector representatives of the different line departments expressed their complete
support and efforts towards the Project development. They mentioned the intent to ensure the
Project was completed at the earliest to the highest quality standards. In addition, these officials
expressed the commitment to ensuring the support. They would adhere to all environmental and
social compliance standards with no leniency in this regard to be expected from the relevant
Government line departments. The digest of comment and suggestions received is given as
under, whereas complete list of offices visited, official consulted, and feedback received is
provided below:

Table 6: Consultation with Institutional Stakeholders

 Sr.
             Department/Organization                       Designation
 No

                                          Project Director

                                          Social Safeguard Specialist
  1.        PMU
                                          Environment Specialist

                                          M&E Specialist

  2.        A.C Bagh                      Assistant Commissioner

            Agriculture     Department,
  3.                                      Director General
            Quetta

                                          Conservator/P.D 10 Billion Tree Project

            Forest Department, Quetta     CF M&E
  4.
                                          Media coordinator

                                          Assistant Director
            PCRWR, Quetta
  5.                                      Scientific officer



                                                      15
  6.   Forest Department, Sibi            Conservator

  7.   Wildlife Department, Sibi          Assistant Conservator

  8.   Agriculture Department, Sibi       Agriculture Officer

                                          Deputy Director

       OFWM, Sibi                         Sub-Engineer
  9.
                                          Water Management Officer

                                          S.D.O
       Irrigation   Department,    Haji
 10.   Shahr
                                          Gate Supervisor

                                          D.F.O
 11.   Forest Department, Dhadar
                                          D.F.O

Coordination with and inclusion of the needs of all stakeholders are essential for successful
project implementation. The Project in-hand is particularly of social nature and requires due
participation and opinion sharing from the related stakeholders. In Quetta under Water Supply
Component B of the QWASA, the stakeholders directly involved and handling the system are
Q-WASA, Irrigation Department, MES, Forest Department, and Environmental Protection
Agency. One each meeting and joint field visits were held with the professionals,’ officials of
these departments/organizations to know about the existing conditions and challenges.
Main water resources stakeholders have also been given due heed to understand the project
objectives, goals, margin for water supply improvement, limitations, and challenges. Weekly
meetings and quarterly presentations have been a ritual throughout the project timeline.
Q-WASA staff accompanied to several pumping stations and explained the operational issues
being faced by them due to various technical and administrative factors affecting the overall
performance of Q-WASA. Similarly, joint field visits with forest department officers were very
useful as they indicated suitable sites for watershed management interventions, these sites
were studied and evaluated by the Consultant team apart from examining the other potential
sites.
The Irrigation Department plays a key role in managing water resources, particularly those
related to surface water. Meetings and discussions with Irrigation Department professionals
helped finalize the selection of interventions for the priority package and future development
options.
Meeting with Other Stakeholders
The Consultant's teams also visited the other stakeholders of the project area to extract useful
information and to discuss the project-related matters related to their jurisdiction. In this regard
following departments were visited throughout the project timeline.
   ▪   Agriculture Department
   ▪   Quetta Development Authority
   ▪   Urban Planning and Development Department



                                                     16
   ▪     Quetta Metropolitan Corporation
   ▪     Local Government Body

Table 7: Consultations along with its dates to stakeholder departments


  Date               Venue                  Participants              Agenda / Discussion

 February      16, Project                 BIWRMDP Team           Component-B Sub- Projects
 2023              Directorate                                    Introductory meeting
                                                                  Component-B Sub-Projects
 February      21, WASA Office             MD QWASA           and Introductory meeting
 2023                                      Team
                                                                     Component-B Sub-Projects
 February      22, Secretariat             Secretary of Irrigation   Introductory meeting
 2023
                                                                     Component-B Sub-Projects
 February      22, Urban Planning          Urban Planning and        Introductory meeting
 2023              and                     Development Dept.
                   Development

                    Dept Office
                                                                  Component-B Sub-Projects
 February      22, Urban Local             Urban            Local Introductory meeting
 2023              Government              Government

                    Office
                                                                     Component-B Sub-Projects
 February      23, Pearl                   World Bank                Introductory meeting
 2023              Continental
                                                                     Component-B Sub-Projects
 February      23, ACE            Quetta QMES and Irrigation         Introductory meeting
 2023              Cantt.                Department
                                                                     Component-B Sub-Projects
 March 01, 2023     Agriculture            Agriculture               Introductory meeting
                    Department             Department

                    Office
 March 13, 2023                                                      Progress     update    and
                    Project                World         Bank,       discussion over PC-I
                    Directorate            BIWRMDP       Team,
                                           TCI, MMP
                                                                     Discussion over PC-I
 March 14, 2023     Secretariat            Secretary of Irrigation
                                                              Data      collection          and
 March 14, 2023     WASA Office            Managing Director, discussion over PC-I
                                           QWASA
 March 14, 2023     Forest                 Forest Department  Data      collection          and
                    Department                                discussion over PC-I
                    Office
                                                                     Data      collection   and
 March 16, 2023     WASA Office            Chief Engr., QWASA        discussion over PC-I



                                                  17
 March 21, 2023    Project              World         Bank,     Discussion over PC-I
                   Directorate          BIWRMDP       Team,
                                        TCI, MMP
                                                              Update on Progress and
 March 28, 2023    Project              World           Bank, presentation
                   Directorate          BIWRMDP         Team,
                                        TCI, MMP

Summary of Project Stakeholder Needs, Methods, and Tools for Stakeholder Engagement

The Project has materialized and been designed at the request of the main stakeholders,
including the government and local populations of the Kachchi Plain areas and Quetta district. In
this regard, the Project will rely heavily on stakeholder feedback and engagement throughout its
life.
Strong citizen and community engagement are preconditions for the effectiveness of the project.
Accordingly, different tools, techniques, and methods will be used for engagement to cover
different needs of the stakeholders. Given the nature of the project, the strategy for stakeholder
engagement is heavily focused on ongoing information disclosure and dissemination that is
efficient, transparent, and addresses the needs of different stakeholders.
For consultations with rural and urban communities of Kachchi Plain areas and Quetta city and
vulnerable individuals and groups the following are some considerations for selecting channels of
communication:
   •   Diversify means of communication and rely more on social media. Where possible and
       appropriate, create dedicated online platforms and chat groups appropriate for the
       purpose, based on the type and category of stakeholders.
   •   Employ traditional channels of communications (TV, newspaper, radio, dedicated phone-
       lines, and mail) when stakeholders to do not have access to online channels or do not use
       them frequently. Local Balochistan tv/radio channels and newspapers will be preferred.
       Traditional channels like PTV Bolan, PTV National, and Balochistan TV can effectively
       convey information to stakeholders and receive their feedback.
   •   Where direct engagement with project beneficiaries is necessary, identify channels for
       direct communication with each household via a context specific combination of email
       messages, mail, online platforms, dedicated phone lines with knowledgeable operators.
   •   Each of the proposed channels of engagement should clearly specify how feedback and
       suggestions can be provided by stakeholders.
   •   Information based feedback as a channel of communication will be received through local
       media, charity groups/individuals and local NGOs. Women, elderly and children have
       special needs that are mostly similar in all areas which should also be included in the
       communication channel.
   •   Government Officials: Senior officials (particularly those who are directly involved in
       disaster management) of Relevant Departments will be consulted by using structured
       interview tools such as questionnaires (to gather quantitative data) and key informant
       interviews or consultative workshops (for qualitative information) .
   •   NGOs/Civil Society: Senior managers and field workers of the NGOs/Civil Society groups
       who are directly involved in disaster response work will be interviewed by using structured
       interview tools such as questionnaires (to gather quantitative data) and key informant
       interviews or consultative workshops (for qualitative).
   •   Village Communities: Communities in the affected areas specially those who have limited
       access to information for being cut off due to flood, will be consulted in-person through



                                               18
       multiple methods e.g., Focus Group Discussions, individual interviews of physically
       challenged people, women in special needs (pregnant, lactating), elderly people and
       transgender.
   •   Occupational groups such as farmers, fisher people, laborers will be consulted through
       separate focus group discussions
   •   In order to reach out to all these groups of stakeholders a team will be engaged. Cultural
       norms will be fully respected. For participation of communities and other local
       stakeholders, information of these consultation sessions will be disseminated through
       local contacts, social media and other means of local communication.
   •   Consultations will be conducted by experienced experts having understating of local
       context. All discussions/interviews with local stakeholders will be conducted in the local
       language. Women team members will consult women to ensure their comfort.
   •   All consultations will also be recorded with prior permission of the concerned stakeholders.
       Formal permission will be sought before taking photographs
   •   To assess more specific needs of different communities in different areas stakeholders’
       consultations will be conducted. The following methods and tools will be used:

Table 8: Summary of Project Stakeholder Needs, Methods, and Tools for Stakeholder
Engagement

Engagement Approach             Appropriate application of the approach

Correspondences (Phone Distribute information to Government officials, NGOs, Local
and IVR systems, Emails) Government, private sector and other organizations/agencies
                                Invite stakeholders to meetings and follow-up

Focus group meetings            For communities, farmers’ organizations/groups, women
                                beneficiaries, disadvantaged/vulnerable individuals/groups
                                Present Project information to a group of stakeholders
                                Allow stakeholders to provide their views on targeted baseline
                                information
                                Build relationships with communities
                                Record responses

Project website                 Present project information and progress updates
                                Disclose ESIA, ESMP and other relevant project documentation

Visibility/signage              Share information door-by-door, respecting social distancing, on
                                project activities; project investment location; project disclosure;
                                Educational materials

Project leaflet                 Brief project information to provide regular update
                                Site specific project information




                                                19
 Mass media (TV, radio, print Communication channels with the public to disseminate
 and electronic newspapers, situation reports, latest information on floods, and project
 social media                 activities. Local Baloch media will also be used for mass
                              communication.

The table below provides an overview of the language and other specific needs of the various
groups of stakeholders for the Project:

Table 9: Overview of language and other specific needs

 Stakeholder Type            Characteristics            Language needs             Specific needs

 Balochistan Government      Government                 Engagement        using    Engagements should
 stakeholders,               departments/collectives    Urdu, Pashto, Balochi ,    be in person, and in
 associations and CSOs       and likely to have         Brahvi, Balochi and        FGD format when
                             diverse membership         Sindhi will be more        consulting with large
                                                        important            for   groups.
                                                        consultation with these
                                                        groups
                                                                                   Supplemental
                                                                                   engagement through
                                                                                   project       website,
                                                                                   leaflets, mass media,
                                                                                   and mobile phones

 Other Influential Parties   Stakeholders         not   For      national  level   Correspondence      via
                             directly involved in or    institutions/groups,       email and phone, and
                             affected by project        Urdu is appropriate.       in-person individual or
                             activities, but may be                                small            group
                             consulted for technical                               interviews/meetings
                             support or collaboration   For sub-district level     are appropriate
                             during the design and      institutions,
                             implementation of the      engagement should be
                             project.                   conducted in Pashto,
                                                        Balochi, Brahvi or
                                                        Seraiki.

 Disadvantaged/vulnerable    Women,      differently-   Urdu, Pashto, Balochi,     Engagement should be
 individuals      directly   abled people, elder        Brahvi, Balochi and        conducted     in     a
 involved    in    project   people, women heading      Sindhi (or other local     culturally appropriate
 implementation              households,      ethnic    language depending         manner.
                             minorities.                on area) will be used
                                                        for consultations
                                                                                   Female interviewers/
                                                                                   facilitators should be
                                                                                   employed          when
                                                                                   respondents are also
                                                                                   female.
                                                                                   Interviews should be
                                                                                   conducted at Union
                                                                                   Council,       revenue
                                                                                   village, village and
                                                                                   household level.



                                                  20
Stakeholder Type           Characteristics            Language needs            Specific needs


                                                                                Interviewees     should
                                                                                not be obliged to travel.
                                                                                Physical accessibility
                                                                                requirements          of
                                                                                interviewees should be
                                                                                considered        before
                                                                                organizing interviews.


                                                                                Supplemental
                                                                                engagement through
                                                                                project website, GRM

Farmers/small   business   Farmers/small business     Consultations should      Local cultural contexts
owners                     owners that have been      be held in local          must be considered
                           affected by the floods     language appropriate      prior to engagement.
                                                      to the area

                                                                                When           possible,
                                                                                engagements should
                                                                                be timed to avoid
                                                                                disruption of livelihood
                                                                                activities (e.g., not
                                                                                during morning hours
                                                                                when they are busy in
                                                                                their fields).


                                                                                Face-to-face
                                                                                interviews           are
                                                                                preferable.


                                                                                Awareness     raising
                                                                                through   appropriate
                                                                                signage,     leaflets,
                                                                                mobile phone, and
                                                                                mass media.

Women farmers and farm     Women who are directly     Consultation       with   Local cultural contexts
labor                      or indirectly engaged in   these groups should       must be considered
                           agricultural activities.   be in local language      and respected. Female
                                                      such    as,    Pashto,    interviewers should be
                                                      Brahvi, Balochi, Sindhi   used.
                                                      and Urdu depending
                                                      on the area)
                                                                                Interview     locations
                                                                                should be flexible to
                                                                                ensure representation.
                                                                                Participants should not




                                                21
Stakeholder Type            Characteristics            Language needs          Specific needs
                                                                               be obliged to travel
                                                                               long distances.
                                                                               Face-to-face
                                                                               interviews should be
                                                                               preferred        when
                                                                               possible,           as
                                                                               telecommunication
                                                                               access       can  vary
                                                                               significantly between
                                                                               stakeholders.
                                                                               Awareness     raising
                                                                               through   appropriate
                                                                               signage,     leaflets,
                                                                               mobile phone, and
                                                                               mass media.

Illiterate people           Individuals   who    are   Consultations    with   Outreach, awareness
                            illiterate                 these groups should     raising, and capacity
                                                       be held in local        building        activities
                                                       language such as,       involving this group
                                                       Pashto,       Brahvi,   should be sensitive to
                                                       Balochi, Sindhi and     their literacy needs.
                                                       Urdu depending on the
                                                       area)
                                                                               Engagement should be
                                                                               face-to-face   when
                                                                               possible.


                                                                               Awareness         raising
                                                                               should not require
                                                                               literacy, preference to
                                                                               be given to voice
                                                                               phone calls, visual
                                                                               media (e.g., posters
                                                                               with simplified, intuitive
                                                                               graphics, video clips,
                                                                               etc.).

Persons with disabilities   Physically    challenged   Consultations    with   Physical accessibility
                            people.                    these groups should     of interview locations
                                                       be held in local        should be considered
                                                       language such as,       prior    to   arranging
                                                       Pashto,       Brahvi,   engagement.
                                                       Balochi, Sindhi and     Participants should not
                                                       Urdu depending on the   be required to travel
                                                       area)                   long distances, and
                                                                               should be given the
                                                                               option       to      be
                                                                               interviewed at home or
                                                                               via     phone     when
                                                                               possible.



                                                  22
 Stakeholder Type           Characteristics          Language needs          Specific needs


                                                                             Awareness     raising
                                                                             through   appropriate
                                                                             signage,     leaflets,
                                                                             mobile phone, and
                                                                             mass media.

 Sharecroppers              Individuals engaged in   Consultations    with   Interview     locations
                            farming who do not own   these groups should     should be flexible to
                            the land they farm       be held in local        ensure representation.
                                                     language such as,       Participants should not
                                                     Pashto,       Brahvi,   be obliged to travel
                                                     Balochi, Sindhi and     long distances.
                                                     Urdu depending on the
                                                                             Face-to-face
                                                     area)
                                                                             interviews should be
                                                                             preferred        when
                                                                             possible,           as
                                                                             telecommunication
                                                                             access       can  vary
                                                                             significantly between
                                                                             stakeholders.


                                                                             Awareness     raising
                                                                             through   appropriate
                                                                             signage,     leaflets,
                                                                             mobile phone, and
                                                                             mass media.


Purpose and Timing of Stakeholder Engagement Program

The approach for the stakeholder engagement analysis shall be underscored by three elements:
(i) belief in the primacy of qualitative data; (ii) commitment to participatory methods; and (iii)
flexible responsive methods. An inclusive and participatory approach shall be followed taking the
main characteristics and interests of the stakeholders into account, as well as the different levels
of engagements and consultations that will be appropriate for different stakeholders.
In general, engagements will be directly proportional to the impact and influence of a
stakeholders. As a project's impact on a stakeholder group or a stakeholder's influence on a
project increases, the engagement with that group will become more frequent and intense.
The stakeholder engagement program shall aim to: establish a systematic and inclusive approach
to stakeholder engagement; build and maintain a constructive relationship with stakeholders;
incorporate stakeholders’ views and concerns into project design/implementation; mitigate
negative social and environmental impacts of the project; and enhance project acceptance and
socio-environmental sustainability. Stakeholder engagement has been divided into two phases:
   •   Phase I (Project Preparation): The purpose of stakeholder engagement during this phase
       has been to: ascertain institutional needs; apprise all stakeholders about planned
       activities; improve project design; create synergies; and enhance the socio-environmental
       sustainability of the project activities envisaged under the different project components.



                                                23
   •   Phase II (Project Implementation): Extensive stakeholder engagement will be carried out
       during this phase with affected communities, disadvantaged/vulnerable groups and other
       interested parties.

Proposed Strategy for Information Disclosure and consultation process

The strategy for information disclosure and consultation may vary depending on the regional and
local context however, it is important that the different activities are inclusive and culturally
sensitive, to ensure that vulnerable groups outlined above will have the chance to participate in
and benefit from the Project while contained from potential pesticide risks. This can include,
among others, household-outreach activities, group discussions, use of local tv/radio channels,
use of local mosques (Masjid) and the use of verbal communication or pictures, etc. While district
wise awareness campaigns will be established, area specific communication and awareness
raising consultation in local area wise languages will also be conducted.
The Project will strategize and implement communications, engagement and social accountability
to conduct effective consultations with the local community members and other concerned
stakeholders using communication channels outlined above as deemed appropriate. The SEP
will serve as a precursor and a guiding document for this project and will be refined as the project
progresses.
During preparation and implementation of infrastructure schemes, at least 70% local communities
will be consulted, and their full participation will be sought to take financial benefits (as labor
wages for works) as skilled and unskilled labor. These, consultations will be conducted during the
preparation of ESMF/ESIAs/ESMPs or other E&S instruments if required in the future. The draft
and final ESMF/ESIAs/ESMPs and SEP will be disclosed prior to formal consultations.
The approaches taken will thereby ensure that information is meaningful, timely, and accessible
to all affected stakeholders, use of local language including addressing cultural sensitivities, as
well as challenges deriving from illiteracy or disabilities, tailored to the differences in geography,
livelihoods and way of life. Project will form citizen centric groups who will be regularly informed
of these, while disclosing the same information on relevant channels. The first such
communication will happen 60 days’ post project effectiveness. The project will also ensure the
establishment of a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) that is accessible to all project
stakeholders and beneficiaries.




                                                 24
     SEP Summary Table

     Table 10: SEP Summary table


                   Target         Information to be
Project Stage                                                 Methods Proposed         Responsible      Frequency
                Stakeholders          disclosed

                Affected          Project Documents,         Project Orientations,     PIU ID for      Progress of
                parties, Public   Environmental and          One-on-one meetings,      Component A,    each month,
                at large,         Social Commitment          Focus         Groups      PIU QWASA       quarterly, bi-
                Vulnerable        Plan         (ESCP),       Discussions,              for Component   annual and
                groups,           Grievance                  Community                 B, Consulting   annual
                                  Mechanism (GRM)            Consultations     etc.    firms, IPs,
                                  procedures       and       Short        Message      Individual
                                  project information        Service        (SMS)      consultants
                                                             messages through cell     and WB
                                                             phones, Project and
                                                             World Bank, website ·
                                                             Print and electronic
                                                             media            like,
                                                             Newspapers,     Radio
                                                             and Social Media and
                                                             Quarterly     Printed
                                                             Newsletters.

                Interested        Project Documents,         Seminars, Workshops,      PIU ID for      Progress of
                groups,           Environmental and          FGDs,       Meetings,     Component A,    each month,
                                  Social Commitment          Progress        review    PIU QWASA       quarterly, bi-
                                  Plan (ESCP),               meetings, field visits,   for Component   annual and
Preparation                       Grievance                  capacity       building   B, Consulting   annual
                                  Mechanism (GRM)            programs,         Short   firms, IPs,
                                  procedures and             Message        Service    Individual
                                  project information        (SMS)       messages      consultants
                                                             through cell phones,      and WB
                                                             Project and World
                                                             Bank, website · Print
                                                             and electronic media
                                                             like,    Newspapers,
                                                             Radio    and     Social
                                                             Media and Quarterly
                                                             Printed Newsletters.

                Government        Project Documents,         Seminars,                 PIU ID for      Progress of
                entities          Environmental and          Workshops, FGDs,          Component A,    each month,
                                  Social Commitment          Meetings, Progress        PIU QWASA       quarterly, bi-
                                  Plan (ESCP), SEP,          review meetings, field    for Component   annual and
                                  Grievance                  visits, capacity          B, Consulting   annual
                                  Mechanism (GRM)            building programs,        firms, IPs,
                                  procedures and             Short Message             Individual
                                  project information        Service (SMS)             consultants
                                                             messages through cell     and WB
                                                             phones, Project and



                                                        25
                                                                 World Bank websites,
                                                                 Print and electronic
                                                                 media like,
                                                                 Newspapers, Radio
                                                                 and Social Media and
                                                                 Quarterly Printed
                                                                 Newsletters.



                 Consultants                                     Seminars, Workshops,      PIU ID for      Progress of
                                    E&S principles and
                                                                 FGDs,       Meetings,     Component A,    each month,
                                    obligations, ESCP,
                 Other relevant                                  Progress        review    PIU QWASA       quarterly, bi-
                                    Consultation
                 Government                                      meetings, field visits,   for Component   annual and
                                    process/SEP
                 departments                                     capacity       building   B, Consulting   annual
                                    including      GRM,
                                                                 programs etc. Short       Firms, NGOs
                                    Environmental and
                 Private                                         Message        Service    and WB
                                    Social Management
                 Institutions                                    (SMS)       messages
                                    Plans (ESMPs), and
                                                                 through cell phones,
                                    Resettlement Plans
                                                                 Project and World
                                    (RPs), Other E&S
                                                                 Bank, website · Print
                                    instruments,
                                                                 and electronic media
                 Civil  Society     Grievance
                                                                 like,    Newspapers,
                 Organizations      Mechanism (GRM)
                                                                 Radio    and     Social
                                    procedures       and
                                                                 Media and Quarterly
                                    project information
                                                                 Printed Newsletters.

                 Local              Regular updates on           Outreach through          PIU ID for      · Outreach
                 communities        project activities           local community           Component A,    through local
                 (Communities       and specific                 organizations, One-       PIU QWASA       community
                 around project     interventions for the        on-one meetings,          for Component   organizations
                 areas) and         targeted groups,             Focus Groups              B, Consulting
                 Vulnerable         SEP and GRM                  Discussions,              Firms and
Implementation
                 groups             procedures, other            Community                 NGOs
                 (including local   E&S instruments              Consultations, Short
                 labor, disabled                                 Message Service
                 people,                                         (SMS) messages
                 minorities, and                                 through cell phones,
                 women)                                          Project and World
                                                                 Bank websites. Print
                                                                 and electronic media
                                                                 like, Newspapers,
                                                                 Radio and Social
                                                                 Media, Public notices,
                                                                 Press releases in the
                                                                 local media and on
                                                                 the project website.

                 Other              Scope of Project,            Virtual meetings.         PIU ID for      Biannual
                 International      opportunities for            Short Message             Component A,    Consultative
                 Donors             collaboration,               Service (SMS)             PIU QWASA       sessions with
                                    regular updates on           messages through cell     for Component   agencies to
                                    project progress,            phones, Project and       B, Consulting   create
                                    ESMPs and Other              World Bank, website ·     Firms and       synergies in
                                    E&S instruments,             Print and electronic      NGOs            the work
                                    SEP and its                  media like,                               undertaken


                                                            26
                             implementation,           Newspapers, Radio                       and avoid
                             Scope of Project,         and Social Media.                       duplication of
                             opportunities for                                                 efforts
                             collaboration




           NGOs, Media       Scope of Project,         PIU websites, Short     PIU ID for      Biannual
           representatives   opportunities for         Message Service         Component A,    Consultative
                             collaboration,            (SMS) messages          PIU QWASA       sessions with
                                                       through cell phones,    for Component   agencies to
                                                       Project and World       B, Consulting   create
                                                       Bank, website · Print   Firms and       synergies in
                                                       and electronic media    NGOs            the work
                                                       like, Newspapers,                       undertaken
                                                       Radio and Social                        and avoid
                                                       Media.                                  duplication of
                                                                                               efforts

           Academia          Scope of Project,         Bi-Annual Project,      PIU ID for      Biannual
                             opportunities for         Dissemination           Component A,    Consultative
                             collaboration,            Workshops, Short        PIU QWASA       sessions to
                             regular updates on        Message Service         for Component   create
                             project progress,         (SMS) messages          B, Consulting   synergies in
                             ESMPs and Other           through cell phones,    Firms and       the work
                             E&S instruments,          Project and World       NGOs            undertaken
                             SEP and its               Bank, website · Print                   and avoid
                             implementation,           and electronic media                    duplication of
                             Scope of Project,         like, Newspapers,                       efforts
                             opportunities for         Radio and Social
                             collaboration             Media.

           General public    Frequently asked          PIU websites, Short     PIU ID for      PIUs websites
                             questions (FAQs),         Message Service         Component A,
                             SEP and GRM               (SMS) messages          PIU QWASA
                             procedures                through cell phones,    for Component
                                                       Project and World       B websites
                                                       Bank, website · Print
                                                       and electronic media
                                                       like, Newspapers,
                                                       Radio and Social
                                                       Media.



Proposed Strategy to Incorporate the View of Vulnerable Groups

Vulnerable stakeholders are not a homogenous group. Some may be receptive to immediate and
direct contact with a government agency, and may be vocal about their concerns. At the other
extreme, there may be some groups who are reluctant to be contacted at all, perhaps because of
their legal status or any other reason. Varying strategies will thus have to be adopted.
The project will conduct regular consultations with vulnerable groups through various partners
and focal persons. Following that, a strategy shall be formulated which will broadly follow the
steps below.


                                                  27
Identification of Potential Partners: As a first step, NGOs and community-based organizations
working with vulnerable groups, including women’s groups shall be identified. This identification
exercise will classify these partners by a) area/location of operations; b) nature of intervention or
type of activity; and c) sector(s) of interest. A total of five or six organizations will be shortlisted
for further engagement, and to develop potential partnerships through the life of the project.
Consultation with Partners: At the next stage, meetings will be organized with representatives of
the chosen partners, at first individually, and then in a group, to apprise them of the objectives of
the stakeholder engagement program. The requirements of the stakeholder engagement
program, with regard to consultations with different groups, and vulnerable groups in particular,
will be shared with them, and their inputs sought on how best to establish contact and create an
atmosphere of mutual trust. The shortlisted partners will then be asked to enter into formal
partnership agreements for the duration of the project.
A work plan and strategy shall be prepared giving the timelines for outreach with different groups
and linked to different phases of project implementation. At each stage of project implementation,
and for each type of outreach activity, consultations shall be chalked out (in person, through
community-based organizations in the field), and how records of consultation will be maintained,
and how concerns raised etc. will be responded to.

Reporting Back to Stakeholders

Stakeholders will be kept informed as the project develops and on all available reference
documents to share information about the project and its processes during implementation. This
will include reporting on project environmental and social performance and implementation of the
stakeholder engagement plan and grievance mechanism. This will be important for the wider
public, but specifically critical for the directly impacted community members.

5. Resources and Responsibilities for Managing SEP Activities

Project Implementation Arrangements

The Balochistan Irrigation Department (BID) will be Implementation Agency for Component A
while the QWASA will be the Implementation Agency for Component B. The Balochistan ID will
rely on the existing PMU of the BIWRMDP for project management, with enhancements in
capacities as required. For Component B, a new PIU will be created and staffed with QWASA
staff and relevant specialists.

For both PIUs, project management functions will include staffing, procurement, contract
management, monitoring and evaluation, environment, social safeguard, project supervision, and
financial management. While the PIUs will also be responsible for collaboration with the
communities, customers, community organizations and the farmers’ organizations, and for sub-
project implementation. The PIUs will benefit from capacity strengthening during project
preparation and implementation. The project design will include a robust Monitoring, Evaluation
and Learning system. The PIUs will have the overall responsibility for project monitoring and
evaluation in their respective domains and locations but will outsource an M&E consultant for
support. They will both benefit from a robust technical assistance through project design and
supervision consultants.




                                                  28
The PIUs will be responsible for collaboration with the communities, community organizations and
the farmers’ organizations, as well as for sub-project implementation. The PIUs shall be headed
by independent Project Directors.

The BID and QWASA PIUs will be responsible for the implementation of the SEP activities
independently.

Project Steering Committee (PSC)

A PSC will provide strategic guidance, approve adjustments to the BWSPIP, and facilitate inter-
agency coordination. It will be chaired by the Additional Chief Secretary of the Planning and
Development Department and include the Secretaries of Irrigation, Agriculture, Forestry, Public
Health Engineering, Livestock, Finance, and Local Government. It will meet quarterly or on a
need-basis to review physical and financial progress, resolve Project issues, and recommend
solutions for diligent implementation.

Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements

The project design will include a robust Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning system. The BID and
QWASA PIUs will have the overall responsibility for project monitoring and evaluation and regular
reporting to the Bank, but will outsource to M&E consultant for support. The Project will establish
a MIS system for both PIUs to facilitate project management and reporting. The Project will also
support the creation of a dedicated WMIS system adapted for QWASA operations.

During project implementation, the SEP will be periodically updated, as necessary, consistent
with the requirements of ESS10, in a manner acceptable to the Bank. Any major changes to the
project related activities and to its schedule will be duly reflected in the SEP. The PIUs will prepare
and submit to the Bank quarterly and annual SEP implementation reports, including the GRM.
The quarterly summaries will provide a mechanism for assessing both the number and the nature
of complaints and requests for information, along with the Project’s ability to address those in a
timely and effective manner.
Information on public engagement activities undertaken by the Project during the year will be
conveyed to the stakeholders in following the ways: (i) publication of a standalone annual report
on project’s stakeholder engagement; and (ii) Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) will also be
included and monitored by the project on a regular basis as part of the Community Communication
and Outreach Guideline.
Further details will be outlined in the updated SEP, to be prepared within 60 days of effectiveness,
including the establishment of detailed stakeholder’s communication guideline.

Resources for SEP Implementation

It is proposed at this stage that the implementation budget of the SEP in lump-sum will be Rs.
94.00 Million. However, that may further be assessed later on as this SEP will update within 60
days of project effectiveness with PIUs wise allocation. Therefore, this SEP will include all costs
related to ongoing engagement with stakeholders, information disclosure, grievance redress, and
other activities described in the SEP. The budgetary estimates will also be assessed for the
following items to be covered to effectively implement the SEP.

Table 11: Proposed items for the budget


                                                  29
                       Item                                        Comments

 Stakeholder engagement events (Seminars, Covers all organized events for mass
 dialogues, workshops, and meetings, etc.) stakeholder engagement, and includes
                                           location costs, technical services, catering,
                                           materials, etc.

 Community consultations                          All stakeholder engagement carried out with
                                                  communities in the field

 Mass communications campaigns                    For awareness raising campaigns. Includes
                                                  ad-space    costs,     printing, technical
                                                  development of materials, etc.

 SEP and other instruments training activities    Related to training provided to project teams
                                                  on SEP implementation, including GRM
                                                  training.

 Travel costs                                     For traveling of staff involved in implementing
                                                  the SEP

 Miscellaneous costs                              Other miscellaneous or unplanned costs

 Communications Strategy                          Strategy development and implementation

 GRM implementation

6.   Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM)
A Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) is a system which allows not only grievances, but also
queries, suggestions, positive feedback, and concerns of project-affected parties related to all
kinds of project related issues, including its environmental and social performance, to be
submitted and responded to in a timely manner. Therefore, the project will prepare a GRM through
which, the project staff, affected persons, workers, contractors, departmental staff as well as
interested persons, local communities and the general public will be able to raise issues on the
project. The GRM will guarantee privacy and confidentiality on the part of the aggrieved party.
Different type of expected grievances can be foreseen during the project period such as,
grievances about the designs of the schemes, acquisition of lands, acquisition of material from
the surroundings local land, labor issues, facilitation issues in the labor camps, GBV/SEAH
issues, security issues, harassments in any form etc. There may be more type of grievances that
can be assessed during actions.

Objectives of GRM:

The main objective of a GRM is to assist resolve complaints in a timely, effective and efficient
manner. Project-level GRM can provide the most effective way for people to raise issues and
concerns about project activities that affect them. The project will have two separate GRMs for
Component A and Component B, established in PIU BID and PIU QWASA, respectively and the
GRMs will be culturally appropriate, effective, accessible and should be known to the affected
population. The PIUs and its partners’ organizations will involve and conduct awareness raising


                                                 30
sessions for the affected persons and communities about the presence of the GRM and inform
their right to file any concerns, complaints and issues they have related to the project and its
interventions.
The GRM provides a transparent and credible process for fair, effective and long lasting outcome.
It also builds trust and cooperation as an integral component of broader consultation that
facilitates corrective actions. Specifically, the GRM:
   •   Provides affected people with avenues for making a complaint or resolving any dispute
       that may arise during the project implementation;
   •   Ensures that appropriate and mutually acceptable redress actions are identified and
       implemented to the satisfaction of complainants; and
   •   Avoids the need to resort to judicial proceedings
   •   ensure that the targeted and affected communities/individuals are treated fairly at all times
       and given importance especially whenever they submit the complaints against any works
       of the project which affect them and may not benefit properly.
   •   identify systemic flaws in the operational functions of the project and suggest corrective
       measures; and
   •   ensure that the operation of the project is in line with its conception and transparently to
       achieve the goals for sustainability of the project

Existing GRM System

The existing GRM of the Balochistan Integrated Water Resources Management and Development
Project (BIWRMDP) serves as the foundation upon which we are building and improving for the
BWSPIP. The BIWRMDP's GRM is comprehensive and functional, with a four-tiered structure
that facilitates grievance submission through various channels, including online forms, written
documents, SMS, WhatsApp, and postal services. Grievances are acknowledged and resolved
within a clear 20-day timeframe, managed by a Grievance Redress Committee (GRC) at the PMU
level, and escalated appeals are addressed by the Project Steering Committee. This well-
established system ensures all complaints are recorded promptly, assessed for relevance, and
resolved with due diligence, setting a robust precedent for the enhanced GRM system we aim to
implement for BWSPIP.
Building upon the well-established and functional GRM of the BIWRMDP, the BWSPIP will
enhance this existing system while introducing two separate GRMs for each PIU- one for the
Irrigation Department (BID) and another for QWASA. Each PIU will independently manage their
complaints, maintaining clear and effective channels for grievance submission, and reporting to
the World Bank.




                                                31
A. GRM for Component A- implemented by Balochistan ID

Step               Description of process              Timeframe   Responsibility
GM                 The structure will be integrated Continuous     PIU Balochistan ID
implementation     at provincial and local levels
structure          with clear reporting lines to the
                   PIU.

                   For Component A, the GRM will
                   be     implemented     by    the
                   Balochistan ID. A Grievance
                   Redress Committee will be
                   formed at the PIU level,
                   including the Project Director,
                   Environmental       Compliance
                   Expert,    Gender     Specialist,
                   Member from District PHE
                   Office, Member from District
                   Forest Office, Member from
                   District Office OFWM, Social
                   Safeguard Specialist, Member
                   Engineer from PISAC and co-
                   opted members from relevant
                   government departments as
                   required. The Social Safeguard
                   Specialist at the PIU will be
                   responsible for the overall
                   operation of the GRM and will be
                   the Grievance Redressal Officer
                   (GRO) of the project.

                   At the district level, Grievance
                   Focal Persons will be appointed
                   in each district.

                   Grievances may be recorded
                   through the available GRM
                   channels, the local level GFPs,
                   or directly with the Social
                   Specialist at the PIU.
Grievance uptake   Grievances can be submitted Upon                PIU GRC
                   via the following channels: submission          Grievance        Focal
                                                                   Persons
                   •   Toll-free telephone hotline:
                       [include number] operated
                       by [insert]
                   •   Short Message Service
                       (SMS) to [include number]



                                            32
Step         Description of process          Timeframe     Responsibility
             • E-mail to [insert]
             • In-person through the GFPs,
                or PIU-GRC.
             • Grievance or suggestion
                boxes located at all project
                locations
             • Online form on the BID
                and/or project website
             • Postal services
             • WhatsApp number:

             Complaints can be submitted in
             person to the Grievance Focal
             Persons or via dedicated phone
             lines, email addresses and
             suggestion boxes provided at
             local community centres.

Sorting,     The     PIU GRC          will   be Upon receipt PIU GRO
processing   responsible to receive, log and of complaint
             investigate           grievances.
             However, if the GRC is unable to
             resolve the grievances, the
             grievances will be referred to the
             Project Steering Committee
             (PSC).

             Any complaint received is
             logged in an online complaint
             registration system at the PIU
             level. The system will pick up
             relevant complaints from the
             website and social media, as
             well as complaints registered on
             it directly. Grievances are then
             categorized into the following
             complaint types: Low; Medium;
             and High priority.




                                      33
Step   Description of process           Timeframe   Responsibility
       Low priority: these typically
       involve minor issues that do not
       significantly impact the overall
       project or the complainants’
       well-being. Examples could
       include minor administrative
       errors, delays in non-critical
       services,       or   small-scale
       individual grievances that can
       be resolved locally, with the
       GFP,        without    extensive
       intervention.

       Medium priority: these are more
       serious than low priority
       complaints but do not pose
       immediate or significant risks to
       the    project’s    success    or
       stakeholders’      rights    and
       interests. These might include
       disputes    over     employment
       terms, moderate environmental
       impacts, or concerns about
       project implementation aspects
       that affect a limited number of
       stakeholders.

       High priority: these are critical
       issues that require urgent
       attention and could significantly
       impact the project’s success
       and      the     well-being      of
       stakeholders. Examples could
       include violation of the law of the
       land, corruption, GBV, SEAH
       (sexual exploitation, abuse and
       harassment), community rights,
       significant health and safety
       concerns, allegations of serious
       environmental harm; complaints
       regarding minorities, differently
       abled persons, transgender etc.




                                  34
Step             Description of process                Timeframe    Responsibility
Acknowledgement Receipt of the grievance is Within 5 days Social Specialist at
and follow-up   acknowledged         to        the of receipt PIU
                complainant by the Social
                Safeguard Specialist at the PIU
                via acknowledgement letter or
                email.       Depending          on
                accessibility, the Specialist may
                instruct the relevant GFP to
                convey acknowledgement
Verification,    Low priority grievances may be        Within     10 Grevance     Focal
investigation,   investigated      and      resolved   working days Parsons, PIU GRC
action           directly by the GFP, in               for low and
                 consultation with the PIU GRC.        medium; and
                 If the grievance is unable to be      15 working
                 resolved, its priority is upgraded    days for high
                 to medium priority.                   priority

                 Medium priority grievances are
                 investigated and resolved by the
                 PIU GRC. The GRC may enlist
                 the relevant GFP to assist in
                 verification and investigation. If
                 the       grievance      remains
                 unresolved, its priority is
                 upgraded to high priority.

                 High priority grievances are
                 investigated by a special
                 committee if required, with
                 resolutions proposed by the
                 PIU-level GRC. The GRC may
                 enlist GFPs to assist in
                 verification and identification.

                 For all levels of grievance, the
                 proposed        resolution     is
                 formulated by the overseeing
                 entity (varying depending on the
                 grievance priority), and the
                 resolution is communicated to
                 the     complainant     by   the
                 GRC/GFP where the complaint
                 was first received.




                                            35
Step              Description of process               Timeframe   Responsibility
Monitoring   and Data     on     complaints   are Quarterly        PIU GRO
evaluation       collected    in    a   dedicated reporting
                 grievance management system
                 at the PIU GRC. Grievance data
                 is reported to the World Bank on
                 a quarterly basis
Provision     of Feedback from complainants Post-                  Grievance        Focal
feedback         regarding their satisfaction with resolution      Persons
                 complaint resolution is collected
                 through follow-up surveys or
                 interviews after the resolution
                 process.
Training          Training        needs          for Annually or PIU
                  staff/consultants in the PIU, as needed
                  Contractors and Supervision
                  Consultants are identified and
                  addressed through regular
                  capacity-building    workshops
                  and      on-the-job      training
                  programs,       focusing       on
                  grievance redress mechanisms,
                  social     engagement        and
                  environmental compliance.

                  Ongoing training for all levels of
                  the GRM structure on handling
                  grievances    effectively     and
                  sensitively.
Appeals process   The GRM will also include a Within 5 days PSC
                  system for appeals. If a of appeal
                  complainant is unsatisfied with
                  the resolution of the grievance,
                  they will be able to lodge an
                  appeal with the Project Steering
                  Committee (PSC).
B. GRM for Component B- implemented by QWASA




                                            36
Step               Description of process              Timeframe   Responsibility
GM                 The structure will be integrated Continuous     PIU   Balochistan
implementation     at provincial and local levels                  QWASA
structure          with clear reporting lines to the
                   PIU.

                   For Component B, the GRM will
                   be     implemented     by    the
                   Balochistan      QWASA.        A
                   Grievance Redress Committee
                   will be formed at the PIU level,
                   including the Project Director,
                   Environmental       Compliance
                   Expert,    Gender     Specialist,
                   Member from PHE, Social
                   Safeguard Specialist, Member
                   from      QWASA,        Member
                   Engineer from PSDC and co-
                   opted members from relevant
                   government departments as
                   required. The Social Safeguard
                   Specialist at the PIU will be
                   responsible for the overall
                   operation of the GRM and will be
                   the Grievance Redressal Officer
                   (GRO) of the project.

                   Community Focal Points (CFPs)
                   will be appointed in sub-project
                   areas.

                   Grievances may be recorded
                   through the available GRM
                   channels, the CFPs, or directly
                   with the Social Specialist at the
                   PIU.
Grievance uptake   Grievances can be submitted Upon                PIU GRC
                   via the following channels: submission          CFPs

                   •   Toll-free telephone hotline:
                       [include number] operated
                       by [insert]
                   •   Short Message Service
                       (SMS) to [include number]
                   •   E-mail to [insert]
                   •   In-person through the CFPs,
                       or PIU-GRC.




                                            37
Step         Description of process          Timeframe     Responsibility
             • Grievance or suggestion
                boxes located at all project
                locations
             • Online form on the QWASA
                and/or project website
             • Postal services
             • WhatsApp number:



             Complaints can be submitted in
             person to the Community Focal
             Points or via dedicated phone
             lines, email addresses and
             suggestion boxes provided at
             sub-project sites.

Sorting,     The     PIU GRC          will   be Upon receipt PIU GRO
processing   responsible to receive, log and of complaint
             investigate           grievances.
             However, if the GRC is unable to
             resolve the grievances, the
             grievances will be referred to the
             Project Steering Committee
             (PSC).

             Any complaint received is
             logged in an online complaint
             registration system at the PIU
             level. The system will pick up
             relevant complaints from the
             website and social media, as
             well as complaints registered on
             it directly. Grievances are then
             categorized into the following
             complaint types: Low; Medium;
             and High priority.




                                      38
Step   Description of process           Timeframe   Responsibility
       Low priority: these typically
       involve minor issues that do not
       significantly impact the overall
       project or the complainants’
       well-being. Examples could
       include minor administrative
       errors, delays in non-critical
       services,      or    small-scale
       individual grievances that can
       be resolved locally, with the
       CFP,       without     extensive
       intervention.

       Medium priority: these are more
       serious than low priority
       complaints but do not pose
       immediate or significant risks to
       the    project’s   success     or
       stakeholders’      rights    and
       interests. These might include
       disputes    over     employment
       terms, moderate environmental
       impacts, or concerns about
       project implementation aspects
       that affect a limited number of
       stakeholders.

       High priority: these are critical
       issues that require urgent
       attention and could significantly
       impact the project’s success
       and      the     well-being      of
       stakeholders. Examples could
       include violation of the law of the
       land, corruption, GBV, SEAH
       (sexual exploitation, abuse and
       harassment), community rights,
       significant health and safety
       concerns, allegations of serious
       environmental harm; complaints
       regarding minorities, differently
       abled persons, transgender etc.




                                  39
Step             Description of process                Timeframe    Responsibility
Acknowledgement Receipt of the grievance is Within 5 days Social Specialist at
and follow-up   acknowledged         to        the of receipt PIU
                complainant by the Social
                Safeguard Specialist at the PIU
                via acknowledgement letter or
                email.       Depending          on
                accessibility, the Specialist may
                instruct the relevant CFP to
                convey acknowledgement
Verification,    Low priority grievances may be        Within     10 Community    Focal
investigation,   investigated      and      resolved   working days Points, PIU GRC
action           directly by the CFP, in               for low and
                 consultation with the PIU GRC.        medium; and
                 If the grievance is unable to be      15 working
                 resolved, its priority is upgraded    days for high
                 to medium priority.                   priority

                 Medium priority grievances are
                 investigated and resolved by the
                 PIU GRC. The GRC may enlist
                 the relevant CFP to assist in
                 verification and investigation. If
                 the       grievance      remains
                 unresolved, its priority is
                 upgraded to high priority.

                 High priority grievances are
                 investigated by a special
                 committee if required, with
                 resolutions proposed by the
                 PIU-level GRC. The GRC may
                 enlist CFPs to assist in
                 verification and identification.

                 For all levels of grievance, the
                 proposed        resolution     is
                 formulated by the overseeing
                 entity (varying depending on the
                 grievance priority), and the
                 resolution is communicated to
                 the     complainant     by   the
                 GRC/CFP where the complaint
                 was first received.




                                            40
 Step                Description of process               Timeframe    Responsibility
 Monitoring    and Data     on     complaints   are Quarterly          PIU GRO
 evaluation        collected    in    a   dedicated reporting
                   grievance management system
                   at the PIU GRC. Grievance data
                   is reported to the World Bank on
                   a quarterly basis
 Provision       of Feedback from complainants Post-                   CFPs
 feedback           regarding their satisfaction with resolution
                    complaint resolution is collected
                    through follow-up surveys or
                    interviews after the resolution
                    process.
 Training            Training        needs          for Annually or PIU
                     staff/consultants in the PIU, as needed
                     Contractors and Supervision
                     Consultants are identified and
                     addressed through regular
                     capacity-building    workshops
                     and      on-the-job      training
                     programs,       focusing       on
                     grievance redress mechanisms,
                     social     engagement        and
                     environmental compliance.

                     Ongoing training for all levels of
                     the GRM structure on handling
                     grievances    effectively     and
                     sensitively.
 Appeals process     The GRM will also include a Within 5 days PSC
                     system for appeals. If a of appeal
                     complainant is unsatisfied with
                     the resolution of the grievance,
                     they will be able to lodge an
                     appeal with the Project Steering
                     Committee (PSC).
Responding to GBV/SEA/SH Complaints:

The GRM will also be responsive to GBV/SEA/SH complaints and will follow necessary protocols
to ensure that complaints are made anonymously with a high degree of discretion. Grievances
specifically concerning GBV/SEA/SH will be triaged and referred to GBV/SEA/SH specialists for
adequate support and redress. To cater to all the above-mentioned policy statements and its
proposed Code of Conduct primitively, separate GBV committees will be formed in each
administrative set up i.e. in the BID and the QWASA PIUs for GBV/SEA/SH specific complaints.
Similarly, a detailed procedure for GBV/SEAH complaints will also be prepared as part of the GBV
Action Plan and this SEP and GRM will be updated accordingly.




                                               41
Workers GRM:

ESS2 mandates that borrowers (organizations or entities involved in the project) must establish
a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) for workers. This mechanism is designed to address
and resolve the grievances of both direct and contracted workers. Workers need to be informed
about the existence of this Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) at the time of their employment
entry and also throughout the duration of their employment. This ensures that workers have a
proper channel to voice their concerns and seek resolution for any issues they may encounter
during their work. Each PIU will have a separate GRM for workers. Contractors and consultant
firms will also be required to establish workers GRMs as per the requirements of the project. The
workers GRM, roles and responsibilities have been detailed in the project Labor Management
Procedures (LMP). The workers GRM will include procedures for receiving and managing
GBV/SEAH complaints as per the requirements of the GBV Action Plan.

Monitoring and Reporting
The project will provide quarterly summaries of the GRM to the World Bank. This will provide a
mechanism for assessing both the number and the nature of complaints and requests for
information, along with the Project’s ability to address those in a timely and effective manner.




                                               42
Annex 1: Consultations and Prescription Guide/Questionnaire

Consultations of Component A

         Feedback and Concerns                 Proposed Measures to address the Stakeholders’
                                                                Concerns
• Almost the stakeholder of all settlements • The proposed project has been initiated by Irrigation
  of the project area requested that they     Department to give the water for settlements through
  want water for their life and their         effective flood management and to build the ponds
  livelihood.                                 for water storage.

 • Concerned authorities who will be familiar • Definitely, all project stakeholders will ensure the
   the outcomes of the project and they will    community respect and safety and will incorporate
   ensure to give respect with community’s      community's views in the project documents.
   views and concerns.
• Employment opportunities should be • The contractor will be contractually bound to disclose
   provided to local skilled and unskilled      the “Recruitment Policy” that specifically includes a
   labour in the project, as to improve the     requirement to prioritize local employment for
   livelihood of the locals.                    unskilled and semi-skilled positions that become
                                                available.
• What is meant by Affected Persons? • Any person or household adversely affected by any
                                               project related change in terms of use of land, water
                                               or other natural resources, or who loses any asset or
                                               property movable or fixed, in full or in part including
                                               land, with or without displacement or anyone who
                                               losses his source of livelihoods or means of
                                               livelihoods or if he/she may face any dimmest in
                                               his/her livelihoods or any other person who
                                               establishes his/her right as an affected person.
 • What are the objective of this • This consultation process was held with the
   consultation?                               objectives of sharing information with stakeholders
                                               on proposed improvement works and expected
                                               impacts on the physical, biological and socio-
                                               economic environment; understanding stakeholder
                                               concerns regarding various aspects of the project;
                                               providing an opportunity to the public to influence
                                               project design in a positive manner; and creating a
                                               sense of ownership of the proposal in the mind of the
                                               stakeholders.
• Compensation for the houses and other
                                             • The valuation of built-up structures is based on
   private/ community assets should be fixed
                                               current market value but with consideration of the
   in accordance with current market
                                               cost of new construction of the structure, with no
   rates/replacement cost.
                                               deduction for depreciation.
• People were also concerned that the • The contractor will be contractually bound to disclose
  workers and laborers will be brought by the “Recruitment Policy” that specifically includes a
  the Contractor from outside the project requirement to prioritize local employment for
  area and an opportunity of employment   unskilled and semi-skilled positions that become
                                          available.
  generated locally shall be availed by the
  people from other areas.


• Access road in the area which is badly • Contractor will take care during construction not to
  affected due to flood should be                 damage any roads. If roads will be damaged,
  rehabilitated.                                  Contractor will repair the roads.
• Existing roads should not be damaged
  and new access road should be provided.
• Is there a grievance redress mechanism • There is a grievance redress mechanism in place
  system in place and will it be effective?       which with cooperation from the client is expected to
                                                  handle any issues fairly.
• One of the participant told that before start • Prior to starting of work, the contractor shall prepare
  of construction activities of the project,      a method statement for major construction activities
  The Contractor will inform residents of the     and share with all stakeholders. This shall be simple
  area about detail of work, likely               and explain the contractor’s work process that is
  disturbances and their duration and as to       actually conducted on site, with safety and safeguard
  whom they should address their                  concerns.
  complaints.
• One of the participant said that the safety • During the project implementation stage, measures
  of the public at all stages of the              will be prepared that will include GRM and
  construction will be ensured.                   institutional arrangements.

• Why is compensation given to the Aps • This project is financed by World Bank and
  encroach the Government owned RoW            according to the policies of WB, compensation cost
  and Govt has right to restore their land     for loss of structure will be paid to the Affected
  back by removing the encroachments and       Persons who have no entitlement of land but their
  it is not objectionable for us?              structures will lose due to site clearance.
• Religious and educational structures like • Generally, relocation of Mosques, graves, residential
  mosques, madrassas and graveyards            structures has been avoided except those ones
  should be saved from demolishing as          which are unavoidable to relocate. However, re-
  such as possible.                            building/ re-settlement of such social, religious
                                               structures will be ensured.
• The rehabilitation of these water • This project team committed to providing local
  resources will be beneficial for the entire  residents for effective, comfortable and healthy
  area and also beneficial for social and a    environment.
  significant environmental enhancement is
  also expected.
• It was also mentioned that the relevant • During the project implementation stage, measures
  Government personnel must ensure the         will be prepared that will include GRM and
  Contractor staff is cooperative with the     institutional arrangements.
  general public and maintain the right
  attitude and try to facilitate them instead
  of being confrontational.
• The landlords of the area suggested that • World Bank safeguard policies are very clear about
  they are not ready to get compensation       the compensation.
  for the land which will be used for drinking
  water and they want to give land for
  drinking water voluntarily.



                                                 44
• Adequate compensation for the loss of          • The principles and procedures for the valuation of
  land. Payments to be made only to the            assets at market rate will be laid down in the report
  legitimate owners at the prevailing market       in detail if needed.
  rates.
• In case of a complaint what a common           • Resettlement expert explained the GRM in detail to
  people can do?                                   the local and affected people.
• Employment opportunities should be             • Contractors will give preference to the local skilled
  provided to local skilled and unskilled          and unskilled labour, preference will also be given to
  labour in the project, as to improve the         the PAPs.
  livelihood of the locals. At least one third   • Irrigation department will also support the local
  of the local community, especially PAPs,         communities to improve their skills in construction
  should be engaged in the project related         activities.
  jobs.
• Whether local labour resources will be   • Defiantly, the contractor will be contractually bound
  used during construction and operation     to disclose the “Recruitment Policy” that specifically
  phases of the Project                      includes a requirement to prioritize local employment
                                             for unskilled and semi-skilled positions that become
                                             available.
• The stakeholders also expressed the • Comment has been incorporated in the ESMP report
  desire to receive regular updates on the
  project development from the relevant
  Government departments.
• The community perception of the project • The proposed project will be start soon.
  is good and most of the people wish to
  see immediate implementation of the
  project.
• The local representatives of the • Comment has been incorporated in the ESIA report
  community requested to raise awareness
  about tree plantation.

• The local representatives of the • The contractor will be developed and enforced a
  community requested that the staff of     strict code of conduct for workers to regulate
  contractor should be cooperate with local behavior in the local communities.
  communities on their cultural norms and • To avoid conflicts among local people on
  values.                                   employment matter, it is proposed that the
                                            Contractor employs the locals in cooperation with
                                            local administration in unskilled and semi-skilled
                                            duties. This will reduce pressure on existing
                                            resources such as housing, schools and health
                                            facilities.
• Privacy and security of local people • Privacy and security of the local residents is the
  should not be disturbed due to            prime responsibility of all concerned departments,
  construction work.                        contractors and the consultants.

• The     stakeholders  requested     the • A fully capable Project Team of PMU Irrigation
  concerned authorities to ensure the       Department has been setup to mitigate weaknesses
  project was completed on a fast track     in certain specialized areas, as well as consultants
  basis and hoped it would not suffer any   to further strengthen the team in project preparation
  delays.                                   and implementation.



                                                  45
Consultations of Component B

Consultation with Communities of Quetta:

Findings and recommended actions of consultation with the communities along the proposed
surface water sources are presented as follows;

Overall Findings of the consultations:

The overall region of Quetta Division is water stressed zone. Proper water resources
management plays a crucial role in Quetta’s development and survival as a capital city. Large
influx of migrants and refugees explosively increased population and water demand in the last 30
- 40 years. Coupled with rapidly dropping groundwater levels, the city and surrounding villages
need massive and rapid intervention to rectify and improve its water supply situation.

Community acceptance and cooperation are most important factors for the feasibility of the
selected short-term sub-projects. Therefore, in this report, great emphasis was put on the social
dimensions associated with the planning, implementation and sustainable operation of the
envisioned ensuing sub-projects.

In general, the social aspects of the reported sub-projects are (i) the beneficiaries of the project
are the citizens of Quetta city; and (ii) the communities settled in the vicinity of the sub-projects
are the owners of the land or perceived as actual beneficiaries (in term of incremental recharge
of groundwater or direct use for irrigation and domestic use) of the commissioned and under
construction dam sub-project are non-beneficiaries or disadvantaged communities under the
proposed withdrawal of raw water for Quetta city. Therefore, to avoid social conflicts on the sub -
projects at the construction stage, the following action are imperative for the feasibility of the sub-
projects;

This is an initial consultation (covered in this report) and in future meaningful consultation with the
legally entitled land-owning community’s participation;

Signing of formal agreements between B-WASA/PHE or Balochistan Irrigation department and
involvement are important factors towards the feasibility and success of the project; and;

Participatory development processes need to be mainstreamed during the project preparation,
construction and O&M process or its activities.

Overall; the communities’ perceptions the land-owning communities in term of Dam construction
and installation of transmission pipelines for water withdrawal was conditionally appreciative and
expressed their concurrence. They have one concern that in future when the population growth
increases and the demand water would be high, if the complete right of water use is given to
BWASA/PHE, they (communities) will be deprived from the right of water use for drinking and
irrigation. The sub-project wise consultation findings are discussed as follows;

Sra Ghurgai Dam Village

During consultation with the tribal elder Malik Mohammad Khan, it was ascertained that they are
willing to provide Sra Ghurgai Dam reservoir water for Quetta city but have requested for some
time to discuss the matter with the existing village committee (a community-based organization).


                                                  46
It was informed by the tribal elder that in the past B-WASA developed eleven tube wells in their
communal hill terrains situated in north of the village. Consequently, the Thalari Kareze
which was major source of water for drinking and irrigation purposes of the village was dried up.
At that time, the villagers were well aware of the reported negative consequences of the tube
wells development at the source of Thalari Kareze and have signed an agreement with B-WASA
to provide drinking water to Sra Ghurgai on first priority. However, the following actions are
proposed for the Sra Ghurgai Dam sub-project;

Meaningful consultation with the respective communities is required and their request for
allocation of proportionate water share for irrigation and drinking needs to be considered.

It was reported that the dam reservoir is silted up due to high sediment load in the river and last
year, the communities pumped water for irrigation and the reservoir was emptied within three
days’ time period.

Sra Khula Dam village:

Overall the communities were willing to allow construction of the Dam and withdrawal of water for
Quetta city with some conditions. During consultation, it was informed that there is another
existing Dam in the name Bhaggi Dam commissioned in 1960s and completely silted up. B-
WASA installed a tube well in the reservoir of the Bhaggi Dam in 2007 and a commitment was
agreed with the villagers to they will provide appropriate share of water to the community for
irrigation and drinking purposes. But unfortunately, this agreement was not respected by one of
the party, therefore, this tube well is still non- functional.

Based on the past practices which persist in the area, the B-WASA/PHE or Balochistan Irrigation
Department needs to sign a formal agreement with the legally entitled land-owning communities
in term of allocation of proper share of water for drinking and irrigation, provision of regular
employment opportunities (if required for OandM of Dam and transmission pipeline) to the local
people.

Kach Dam Village:

During consultation in Malik Shabo village and Sra Ghurgai village, the water rights of the Kach
Dam are claimed by two villages i.e. Malik Payand Killi (also known as Killi Shabak) and residents
of the Sra Ghurgai village. Therefore, it was ascertained that dispute may be raised over the
employment and community water share deM&Ed for drinking and irrigation purposes during
construction or after construction of the project.

During detailed studies, review of the cadastral record it will be required to confirm the legal
ownership of the land. Accordingly, further meaningful consultation needs to be carried out with
the legal owners of the land. An agreement between B-WASA/PHE or Baluchistan Irrigation
Department and legally entitled land-owning communities on the same course of action proposed
for Sra Khula is required. The villagers of the Shabak Killi reported that the land of the under
construction Kach Dam is communal property of the village and the following principal
shareholders have land rights.




                                                47
Annexure 2: Pictures of the consultations meetings




                                              48
49
