Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Southern Niger Connectivity And Integration Project (P179770)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                             Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                       (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                         Date Prepared/Updated: 03/31/2025 | Report No: ESRSA04151




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Apr 03, 2025                                                                          Page 1 of 12
                               The World Bank
                               Southern Niger Connectivity And Integration Project (P179770)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                  Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P179770                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)       PICSN                       2025

                     Operation Name            Southern Niger Connectivity and Integration Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries           Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Niger                     Niger                                    WESTERN AND CENTRAL         Transport
                                                                                        AFRICA

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                 Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Board Date

                     Republic of Niger         Ministère des Transports et de           03-Apr-2025                 15-May-2025
                                               l'Equipement

                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost
                     Review Date



Public Disclosure
                     18-Mar-2025               370,600,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve climate-resilient road connectivity and to enable value chain
                     logistics development in southern Niger.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The Proposed Operation will provide financing to rehabilitate the Maradi-Zinder section along the National Road 1
                     (RN1) in Niger, as well as associated secondary and rural roads and transport and logistics services. These interventions
                     are part of a comprehensive national program to improve connectivity and to unlock the development potential of
                     areas around southern Niger's RN1 basin while improving climate resilience and maximizing benefits for local and rural
                     communities, especially youth, women, refugees and host communities. The project intends to support the stabilization
                     of the region by fostering economic opportunities through support to value chains with growth potential and sub-
                     regional trade. As such, the project will support the design of a value chains support program through rural logistics

                    Apr 03, 2025                                                                                                    Page 2 of 12
                               The World Bank
                               Southern Niger Connectivity And Integration Project (P179770)



                     while promoting multimodality and regional trade facilitation through the development of technical studies and
                     environmental and social instruments. The project is expected to improve food security, climate resilience, and access
                     to basic services around the RN1 basin, thereby enhancing living conditions for host and refugee communities in the
                     Maradi-Zinder region and building in flexibility to finance urgent and critical needs as they arise during implementation.
                     The project will be structured around three components: (i) Component 1: Climate-resilient improvement of Niger’s
                     transport backbone; (ii) Component 2: Enabling environment for southern Niger basin logistics; and (iii) Component 3:
                     institutional strengthening and project management. The Proposed Operation will also include a Contingent emergency
                     response component (CERC).


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The National Road 1 (RN1) which is currently quite difficult to use for all users including population, motorcyclists, cars
                     and trucks for long-haul transportation of goods, connects Niamey to the most important secondary cities in the
                     country serves as the backbone of the country by serving about 70 percent of the population in this region (18.5 million
                     in 2020). The population living along the road is made up mainly of farmers and smallholders affected by the road.
                     Among the population there are also IDPs and refugees. The RN1 enables mobility and agropastoral produce flow sector
                     to drive socioeconomic development, fight food insecurity, prevent conflict and mitigate forced displacement. Ensuring
                     all-year connectivity between the RN1 provide access to other major regional corridors, ultimately improving trade
                     potential of selected value chains at the sub-regional level. The RN1 is composed by the: (i) Niamey – Maradi section,
                     which is part of the TSH; (ii) Malian border – Niamey and Zinder – Chadian Border sections, which are part of the Trans-
                     Saharan Road (TSR) corridor; and (iii) Maradi – Zinder section, which connects the TSH and TSR within the RN1. The



Public Disclosure
                     vulnerability and the degradation of the road infrastructure are obstacles to agropastoral logistics as well as access to
                     markets, primarily located in Nigerien secondary cities.
                     The project will provide financing to improve connectivity of the Maradi-Zinder section along the National Road 1 (RN1)
                     in Niger (230 km), rehabilitate associated secondary (25 km) and rural roads (165 km), construct drainage (50 km) and
                     support logistics services. These interventions are part of a comprehensive strategy to improve regional integration. The
                     strategy aims to unlock the development potential of areas around Southern Niger's RN1 basin while improving climate
                     resilience and maximizing benefits for local and rural communities. In addition to physical infrastructure, the project will
                     implement soft measures to strengthen transport services, facilitate local and regional trade, and improve resilient
                     access to basic services.
                     The RN1 basin, including the proposed locations that this project would target, is characterized by persistent and
                     widespread fragility. The RN1 basin cuts across areas with high security threats in Niger which have led to humanitarian
                     crisis, and hosting, as of January 2025, 929,191 forcibly displaced, including 421,753 refugees and asylum seekers
                     highlighting the continued cross-border spillover conflict dynamics. Lack of decent community infrastructure is part of
                     the root causes of conflict in these regions and the influx of IDPs and refugees has put additional pressure on the host
                     communities. The RN1 basin also faces a climate crisis.


                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Project will be implemented by the Ministry of Transport and Equipment (MTE) with the involvement of other
                     ministries , including the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF), the Ministry of Interior, Public Security, and Territorial
                     Administration (MIPSTA), the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (MAL), the Ministry of Commerce and Industry (MC)
                     and the Ministry of Environment (ME). The MTE has some experience in the implementation of regional and national

                    Apr 03, 2025                                                                                                       Page 3 of 12
                               The World Bank
                               Southern Niger Connectivity And Integration Project (P179770)



                     projects financed by the World Bank including the Enhancing Niger Northeastern Connectivity (P171793), Rural Mobility
                     and Connectivity Project (P164498) and Lome-Ouagadougou-Niamey Economic Corridor (P168386). The overall
                     environmental and social risk management performance of these projects has been satisfactory, although some
                     weaknesses have been noted, particularly with regard to local monitoring and supervision in remote areas.

                     Based on overall prior experience with transport projects in the country, national capacity to properly implement and
                     monitor compliance with E&S measures has been challenging, with particular capacity constraints regarding community
                     health and safety aspects (i.e. including labor management procedures, insecurity, SEA/SH risks and incidence
                     monitoring, reporting and follow-ups) and operationalizing the Grievance Mechanism (GM). Niger's legislative
                     framework includes an environmental code and a law on environmental assessments that guarantees the integration of
                     environmental and social considerations at the level of projects and programs. At the institutional level, the National
                     Environmental Assessment Office (BNEE) in the Ministry of the Environment and Fisheries, ensures that the
                     environmental and social dimensions are taken into account at all stages, from preparation to implementation. At the
                     sectoral level, the Ministry of Transport and Equipment, which is expected to co-supervise the project, has an
                     environmental unit for the monitoring and supervision of projects in the sector. However, the country's legislative
                     framework and the capacity of these structures remain limited and strengthening them is necessary for greater
                     effectiveness. Financing for activities intended to address some of these gaps and to be implemented both by the PCE-
                     LON PIU and ministries’ existing staff will be provided under Component 3 - Project Management and Monitoring.
                     Further E&S capacity assessments have been conducted during preparation, and corrective measures, including a
                     timeline, have been proposed and implemented in terms of personnel reinforcement and training. These trainings
                     which have also been reflected in the ESCP will include among others environmental and social assessment, the GRM,




Public Disclosure
                     SEA/SH prevention and public health and safety. The environmental specialist, a social specialist and a security
                     specialist are already in place. A gender-based violence / sexual exploitation and abuse / sexual harassment
                     (GBV/SEA/SH) specialist will be hired as per the ESCP.


                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                                High


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                  Substantial
                     Environmental risk is Substantial. This is due to multiple risks associated with the planned activities under Component
                     1 – Improvement of Infrastructure along the RN1 and its feeder roads where the project will improve climate
                     resilience and connectivity of priority road sections on the RN1, secondary roads and rural roads that connect the
                     adjacent rural areas to the RN1, as well as construct concrete gutters using HIMO. Most of these roads are currently
                     in very poor conditions and are inaccessible during the rainy season. The road improvement will enhance access to
                     areas with high agricultural and commercial potential and connect Niger and Nigeria and make these roads sections
                     more climate resilient. However, the planned civil works are also likely to generate some adverse environmental risks
                     and impacts. Potential risks and adverse impacts that have been identified so far relate to: (i) Resource efficiency and
                     pollution prevention and management (sourcing of raw materials for civil works, water and energy use, GHG
                     emissions, dust, noise, potential contamination of water sources due to spills and run-off of petroleum products,
                     infiltration into storage areas and improper disposal of fuels); (ii) occupational and community health and safety; (iii)


                    Apr 03, 2025                                                                                                      Page 4 of 12
                               The World Bank
                               Southern Niger Connectivity And Integration Project (P179770)



                     potential loss of vegetation and biodiversity during civil works and preparation of sites, quarries areas for materials
                     and higher demand of fuelwood by workers; and (iv) potential impact of civil works and excavations on cultural
                     heritage. The ESIA of the Maradi – Zinder section has been prepared. The assessment of the likely changes related to
                     the implementation of the project highlighted the positive and negative environmental and social impacts on the
                     biophysical and human environments in the project insertion area. Thus, in terms of positive impacts, in the short
                     term, this project will contribute to job creation, reduce unemployment, improve income, etc. In the long term, it will
                     enable the opening up of the areas crossed, improve trade within and outside the country, enhance road safety and
                     transport conditions efficiency, etc. The potential negative impacts of the project include land and production losses,
                     infrastructure losses, relocation of concessionaire networks (Niger electricity company/NIGELEC -Niger water
                     company/NDE- Telecommunications and other assets located in the work area), risk of accidents and injuries, air
                     quality modification, destruction of flora, disruption of soil structure, soil and water pollution by solid and liquid
                     waste, noise disturbance, etc. In addition to these impacts, the following risks are present: fire, explosion, and
                     electrocution risks, risks related to the use of heavy vehicles, equipment, machinery, and tools, noise and vibration
                     risks, fall risks, collapse and falling object risks, risks related to traffic and road safety.
                                                                                                                                                 High
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risk rating is High. While the overall social benefits are expected to be positive, the anticipated social risks
                     and impacts include: (i) A range of significant social challenges: This includes access to land for women, high
                     population mobility (refugees and internally displaced people), high levels of poverty and illiteracy, especially in rural
                     areas, and high risks for child labor. (ii) The challenging security situation: This situation has been adversely affected
                     by the activities of violent extremist groups, criminality, and illicit trafficking, making it difficult to access certain road




Public Disclosure
                     sections and also an issue to secure implementation of activities and payments of PAPs especially. A robust SRA/SMP
                     has been developed to mitigate this substantial risk especially in the Maradi – Zinder road section where while
                     insecurity is currently manageable , it can change rapidly . (iii) The significant social risks related to the inadequate
                     management of the involuntary resettlement process : This project is to be implemented in remote areas with high
                     numbers of forcibly displaced where it is difficult to monitor implementation. In addition, there will be limited land
                     acquisition due to already existing roads platform, and to some negative impacts on private property, including crops
                     and small businesses;. However, alternatives that minimized involuntary resettlement were explored and this is
                     considered as the best technical option. (iv) Risk of discrimination during the recruitment of local workers among
                     (hosted community, IDPs, refugees, migrants and people coming from other regions/cities and countries as Nigeria)
                     This may result in social tension amplified by the presence of of IDPs and refugees in the communities. (v) In addition,
                     borrower’s low capacity to manage project-related ES risks and impacts in a manner consistent with the ESSs; and the
                     limited familiarity with the overall ESF by contractor and subcontractors pose risks to project implementation. Other
                     social risks associated with the improvement of the roads: The RN1 corridor is also a major transportation road for
                     long-haul trucking that connects the border of Mali with the border of Chad and provides important goods and access
                     to markets for the population along the road. Improving these roads may increase the risks of road-related accidents,
                     SEA/SH risks, and threats to the local communities and access to rural areas in general. . Effective monitoring of these
                     risks will be ensured by the following means, among others: local community-based monitoring, satellite imagery,
                     GEMs/Kobotoolbox technology, and an active GRM implemented by a local NGO. These have been explored during
                     preparation and integrated into the final project design and implementation plan.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered


                    Apr 03, 2025                                                                                                            Page 5 of 12
                               The World Bank
                               Southern Niger Connectivity And Integration Project (P179770)



                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                  Relevant

                      The proposed project is expected to generate positive environmental and social impacts by improving transport
                      connectivity and logistics services along the RN1 in Niger to support transport services for selected agropastoral value
                      chains and intra-regional trade (including a focus on vulnerable populations, refugees and IDPs). For the road section
                      identified under Component 1 (Maradi-Zinder), an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and a
                      Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) were prepared and disclosed on December 30, 2024. For the sections that have not
                      yet been identified under Component 1 and for the activities under Component 2, an Environmental and Social
                      Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have also been prepared, adopted and
                      disclosed on 30 december 2024 during project preparation. Relevant “chance find” procedures has been included in
                      the ESMF. As part of the environmental and social assessment, a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) has also been
                      prepared, consulted upon and disclosed prior to Appraisal on 30 December, 2024. The project will apply the relevant
                      requirements of the Environmental Health and Safety Guidelines (EHSGs) for civil works and rehabilitation of
                      infrastructure. The Borrower will monitor the environmental and social performances in accordance with the legal
                      agreement. The project will also have a Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC). The Project’s ESMF
                      contains in an annex a CERC section, that includes the CERC triggers and a positive list of activities that are eligible.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                       Relevant

                      A Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) has been prepared, validated and disclosed on 30 december 2024. The
                      consultations held between July and October 2024 and from January to February 2025 in towns in the regions of



Public Disclosure
                      Dosso, Zinder, Maradi and Niamey provided an opportunity to exchange views with the project's stakeholders : (i) the
                      parties affected, in particular physically displaced persons, economically displaced persons, migrants attracted by the
                      project, and users of transport and road services; (ii) the other parties concerned (technical ministries, administrative
                      authorities, associations), including vulnerable groups for whom special attention was paid to ensure their inclusion
                      in the project and the communication process. During the consultations, the following concerns were expressed by
                      stakeholders: loss of land and property, loss of livelihood, imbalance of power, risk of accidents. The main
                      expectations gathered are summarized in the points below: • Consider floods in the design of structures crossing
                      towns and villages and construct rainwater drainage channels; • Build drinking water points and electrify crossed
                      localities; • Carry out the works within a reasonable and contractual timeframe; • Provide job to youth, and recruit
                      local labor and allow women who wish to work on the construction sites; • Compensate for land and property and
                      PAPs as soon as possible in accordance with national texts in force; • Involve municipalities in activities; • Fence in
                      the schools and health establishments of the crossed localities; • Create secondary laterite roads to open up
                      neighboring localities and facilitate access to health centers; • Develop alternative income-generating activities, and
                      especially support women's groups through income-generating activities with material and financial means; • Do the
                      construction and electrification of community infrastructure, • Resurfacing of roads, and making the corridor safe. In
                      addition, all the stakeholders wanted direct communication throughout the project (meetings, radio, consultations,
                      etc.). As for the local people, they asked for PAPs to be directly involved in compensation, and for the project owner
                      to communicate regularly with the local people through local authority administrators and elected representatives.
                      the SEP establishes an accessible and transparent strategy for ongoing information sharing and communication
                      especially in the challenging FCV context. The SEP also includes the principles for the establishment of an accessible,
                      transparent and confidential Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) for the project. Conflict sensitive approaches such


                    Apr 03, 2025                                                                                                      Page 6 of 12
                               The World Bank
                               Southern Niger Connectivity And Integration Project (P179770)



                      as hiring a local NGO to undertake the communication campaign, alternatives to community consultation that will
                      protect local communities such as phone surveys etc. and strong collaboration with local authorities have been
                      incorporated into the project design and implementation plan. Further, the SEP includes the design and
                      operationalization of a GRM, sensitive to SEA/SH issues, and the ethical treatment and resolution of such complaints
                      that is proportionate of the potential risks and impacts of the project. Due to the considerable workforce involved in
                      the project, and the potential for SEA/SH, the GM reflects the guidance from the Bank’s good practice note
                      “Addressing Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) in Investment Project Financing involving
                      Major Civil Works”. In regard with the risks of the discrimination during the recruitment of workers which may result
                      in social tension amplified by the presence of IDPs and refugees in the communities, SEP has planned awareness-
                      raising information campaigns, for the enrolment of the workforce including host communities and vulnerable groups
                      in measures to reduce various forms of social tension/violence, including exclusion and discrimination against
                      migrants, IDPs and refugees. In relation to awareness campaign, to enrolment of workforce and other vulnerable
                      groups with respect to measures to reduce various violence and social tension including exclusion and discrimination
                      against IDPs/Refugees and especially migrants, the establishment of a GBV sensitive GM will also consider inclusion of
                      IDPs/Refugees counselor systems within the community workers committee and other community platforms. The
                      GRM will also serve as a platform for continuous feedback from project-affected communities, other interested
                      stakeholders and implementing partners.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                           Relevant

                      The project will include direct workers, contract workers and primary supply workers. A Labor Management
                      Procedure (LMP) that specifies the terms and conditions of employment, non-discrimination and equal opportunities,



Public Disclosure
                      workers' organizations, measures against child and forced labor, grievance redress mechanism for labor disputes,
                      occupational safety and health measures for the workers (direct and contracted) and provisions to prevent and
                      manage SEA/SH has been prepared, adopted and disclosed on December 30, 2024. To ensure the health and safety of
                      workers during the construction and operational phases of the project, the Borrower will develop and implement a
                      Health, Safety and Environmental (HSE) plan consistent with World Bank Group's Environment, Health and Safety
                      Guidelines (EHSG) for construction activities. As part of the Operational Health and Safety plan, a road safety
                      management plan must be included and extreme weather conditions (heat waves) in which workers may be required
                      to work be taken into account, particularly in the work scheduling. The plan will include procedures for incident
                      investigation and reporting, recording and reporting of any non-compliance, emergency preparedness and response
                      procedures and continuous training and awareness to workers that will be proportionate with the project scope. The
                      Borrower will ensure that the ESS2 requirements are incorporated into: (a) the contracts between the Borrower and
                      the Contractor and any entity supervising the Project’s civil works; and (b) the contracts between the Contractor and
                      any Contractors’ subcontractors. All workers will be required to sign a Code of Conduct that will be enforced by the
                      supervising entities.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                            Relevant

                      The project activities, including the improvement to climate resilient standards of the RN1 Maradi-Zinder (230 km)
                      road section; (i) the rehabilitation of approximately 25 km of feeder roads connecting to the RN1 and 165 km of rural
                      roads connecting to the rural hinterland in this region; and (ii) the construction of 50 km concrete gutters using HIMO
                      in the Maradi region will likely impact Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management due to the
                      consumption of energy, water and raw material. As part of the ESIA for Maradi-Zinder, the Borrower has identified


                    Apr 03, 2025                                                                                                    Page 7 of 12
                               The World Bank
                               Southern Niger Connectivity And Integration Project (P179770)



                      relevant measures for improving the efficient consumption of energy, water and raw materials, as well as other
                      resources, these measures include among others, Water-saving measures at remote bases through regular plumbing
                      maintenance; Identifying and repairing leaks, Shutting off water in unused areas, Installing auto shut-off
                      valves/valves, nozzles, vacuum regulators, and water conservation devices (e.g., installing water economizers in water
                      closets such as showerheads, faucets, water closets, low-flow urinals, etc.). However, the Maradi-Zinder road ESIA
                      prohibits the use of surface water resources in the area and recommends that contractors create their own water
                      points to avoid any conflicts with local populations and their livestock. In addition, contractors must submit their C-
                      ESMP, describing, the work and its potential environmental impacts, as well as the concrete measures they plan to
                      implement to avoid or mitigate risks and impacts, including the use of groundwater and/or surface water. At the
                      quarry level, reduce water requirements by establishing closed circuits between sedimentation ponds and extraction
                      operations that allow the recirculation and reuse of water resources. To minimize the impact of the opening of
                      quarries and borrowing areas on the biophysical and human environment, the following measures are recommanded
                      : using existing sites and open new sites only when necessary after environmental and social assessment, using
                      appropriate extraction methods (excavation, quarrying, etc.) that have a limited impact on biophysical and human
                      environments, conserve and protect ecological niches as much as possible during the extraction phase; rehabilitation
                      and restoration of sites according to local or regional plans to promote habitat regeneration, Seeding and
                      revegetation with local species of unrestored land for community purposes, etc. It is anticipated that emissions will
                      be generated by construction vehicles and dust will be generated by digging activities during project
                      implementation/construction. Those most likely to be affected are workers and people living within the proximity of
                      construction/rehabilitation sites. The implementation of mitigation measures such as dust suppression and vehicle
                      maintenance will be incorporated into the contractor's ESMP. Noise may be generated from the use of construction




Public Disclosure
                      machinery and vehicle movements. The relatively short-term and nature of the works suggest that noise levels will
                      not be excessive or cause long-term nuisances. The construction works will however, present short-term nuisance to
                      the neighbors to some of the project sites. The Environmental and Social Management instruments(ESMPs) that have
                      been prepared have included mitigation measures to minimize and manage the noise levels such by applying
                      standard restrictions to hours of site work where appropriate. Construction/ rehabilitation activities will generate
                      solid waste which will primarily include excavated soil and solid wastes. The waste generated by the
                      construction/rehabilitation works will largely be disposed of at approved sites according with national laws and
                      regulations. For energy-saving measures, it is recommended, among other things, to turn off the engines of parked
                      vehicles and other machinery. In addition to applying the resource efficiency requirements of this ESS, the Borrower
                      will adopt measures specified in the EHSGs and other GIIP to support efficient use of raw materials, to the extent
                      technically and financially feasible.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                             Relevant

                      The influx of workers into a project area can lead to adverse social impacts, such as SEA/SH, sexually transmitted and
                      communicable diseases, especially in rural areas and in a region with complex compounded challenges. The ESMPs
                      will also include labor related clauses and ensuring compliance will be the responsibility of the contractors. As SEA/SH
                      risks are rated as High for the project , an SEA/SH risk assessment has been conducted during the project preparation
                      as part of the ESMF. An SEA/SH Prevention and Response Action Plan with mitigation measures has been prepared,
                      adopted and disclosed on 30 december 2024. These measures include ): i) a code of conduct (CoC) outlining
                      prohibited SEA/SH behaviors and applicable sanctions; ii) accountability and response framework within the project's
                      GRM with specific procedures to manage SEA/SH complaints safely and confidentially, including a referral protocol to


                    Apr 03, 2025                                                                                                     Page 8 of 12
                               The World Bank
                               Southern Niger Connectivity And Integration Project (P179770)



                      ensure the timely referral of survivors to a holistic package of GBV support services; iii) regular trainings for workers;
                      iv) regular consultations with women and girls conducted in safe places in small, separate groups led by a woman
                      animator; and v) awareness raising activities to inform communities about GBV risks, prohibited behaviors within CoC
                      and reporting procedures for SEA/SH incidents. However, the project also presents an opportunity to address SEA/SH
                      at a systemic level by incorporating gender aspects (e.g., employing more female workers in key positions) and
                      designing female friendly facilities within markets or construction sites. The project could also strengthen sectoral
                      accountability frameworks to prevent SEA/SH in the workplace and public spaces through above measures. Regarding
                      security risks, a detailed Security Risk Assessment (SRA) has been undertaken during preparation to provide more
                      information regarding the security context and corresponding mitigation measures have been incorporated into the
                      project design and/or alternatives to direct supervision during implementation could be adopted. A Security Risk
                      Management Plan (SRM) has been prepared, reviewed by the Bank and adopted by the Borrower. The contractor’s
                      ESMP will also include the security plan for the project sites. Other community safety risks associated with the
                      improvement of the roads relate to high-security threats that have led to humanitarian crises. Improving these roads
                      may increase the risks of road-related accidents, and threats to the local communities and access to rural areas in
                      general. Risk mitigation measures will be developed respectively through a road safety management plan. The traffic
                      and road safety plan, which will be part of the EIES/ESMP, road safety measures that are technically and financially
                      feasible, such as placing road signage, public lighting, and road safety equipment, including pedestrian crossings,
                      pathways, and sidewalks with solar-powered street lighting at urban crossings following violence prevention
                      environmental design criteria, have already been integrated into the project design to prevent and mitigate potential
                      road safety risks for road users and affected communities, particularly for the RN1.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                    Relevant



Public Disclosure
                      Land acquisition is expected to be limited given that there is an existing road platform but it is likely that there will be
                      some negative impacts on private property including crops and small businesses. While all efforts will be made to
                      avoid and minimize the adverse impacts, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for the road section (Maradi –Zinder)
                      under Component 1 has been prepared and disclosed on December 30, 2024. The RAP identified permanent and
                      temporary impacts as well as any negative impacts on livelihoods. There are following categories of losses: PAP-only
                      economically displaced persons (1072) - PAP-only persons affected by minor losses of land and/or other assets (21) -
                      i.e. a total of 1093 PAPs. There were (21) buildings and assets affected by minor losses - and (55) vulnerable PAPs. The
                      total budget for implementing the RAP has been estimated at CFAF 702 764 480 to be financed by project funds. For
                      impacts relating to the activities to be financed under Component 2, Resettlement Plans (RP) will be prepared as
                      needed to address impacts related to of secondary and rural roads and the small economic support infrastructure
                      that will be financed (e.g., markets, storage and distribution centers). Given the substantial level of insecurity that
                      could occur in the project area when works will start, theRight-of-Way was reduced ito minimize impacts. . In
                      addition, during preparation, the Bank team has also explored alternative ways to supervise the implementation of
                      the RAP process with the Client given that travel to the project sites might be restricted. Alternatives include local
                      community-based monitoring, satellite imagery, GEMs/Kobotoolbox technology, and an active GRM implemented by
                      a local NGO.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                     Relevant
                      Resources




                    Apr 03, 2025                                                                                                        Page 9 of 12
                               The World Bank
                               Southern Niger Connectivity And Integration Project (P179770)



                      The proposed work consists to the rehabilitation of National Road No. 1 between Maradi and Zinder on
                      approximately 235 km. However, the project also includes the construction of new rural roads as secondary access
                      routes to connect certain localities to the RN1 and increase mobility in the area. The project area in the Maradi region
                      is relatively wooded. Sites preparation and construction work on new rural roads, quarrying areas for materials and
                      increased demand for firewood by workers will involve potential loss of vegetation including protected or even
                      endangered species, and consequently disrupt the habitats of terrestrial microfauna relics . Detailed ESIA of the new
                      works, can use IBAT (Integrated Biodiversity Assessment Tools), to provide additional details on the impacts and
                      effects levels of the works on biodiversity. Also, other Impacts or damage on the resources will be assessed before
                      the start of the works and relevant and appropriate mitigation measures will be proposed as needed.. This
                      assessment should consider real threats to biodiversity, for example, habitat loss, degradation and fragmentation,
                      overexploitation, uprooting of trees and cutting of shrubs, hydrological changes, pollution and incidental take, as well
                      as projected climate change impacts. It will determine the significance of biodiversity or habitats based on their
                      vulnerability and/ or sensibility at local or national levels and will also take into account the differing values attached
                      to biodiversity and habitats by project-affected parties and other interested parties.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                 Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      This standard is not considered relevant as there are no Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically
                      Underserved Traditional Local Communities currently identified in the project area. Should the presence of
                      indigenous communities be confirmed through further screening during implementation, the necessary assessments,
                      consultations and instruments will be undertaken per the requirements of this standard.



Public Disclosure
                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                          Relevant

                      While the project will mostly finance the rehabilitation of existing road platforms, and therefore the need for new
                      construction will be minimal, the ESIA for Maradi – Zinder road section confirmed, through consultation with the
                      communities and national heritage institution, whether there is any tangible or intangible cultural heritage in project
                      areas. The ESMF includes a chance find procedure and it will guide the preparation of the site-specific ESIAs for the
                      road sections that have not yet been identified, including an assessment of the potential existence of cultural
                      heritage. These mitigation measures will also be reflected in the contractors' contracts. If needed, training will be also
                      be provided to them.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                    Not Currently Relevant

                      This standard is not considered relevant. The project will not use a financial intermediary.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                            No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                     No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features


                    Apr 03, 2025                                                                                                       Page 10 of 12
                               The World Bank
                               Southern Niger Connectivity And Integration Project (P179770)



                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                              No
                       The project will not use the Borrower’s E&S Framework but will be consistent with relevant national legal
                       requirements.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                 No
                       Not applicable.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     1.        Documents developed are:

                     •       The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) which includes a chance find procedure
                     •       The Labor Management Procedures (LMP)
                     •       The Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)
                     •       The Resettlement Framework (RF)
                     •       The Security Management Plan (SMP)
                     •       The Sexual Exploitation and Abuse /Sexual Harassment Action Plan (SEA/SH)
                     •       The Maradi - Zinder Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and corresponding Environmental and




Public Disclosure
                     Social Management Plan (ESMP) including appropriate waste and Biodiversity management measures as needed
                     •       The Resettlement Action Plan (RAP)for Maradi - Zinder

                     2.        Other actions to be taken before starting activities or sub-projects are:

                     •        Establish a grievance mechanism prior to engaging Project workers.
                     •        Establish the grievance mechanism prior to the start of the project activities
                     •        Prepare and Incorporate the ESMP including appropriate waste and biodiversity management measures as
                     needed as part of the respective bidding documents for the respective [subproject] that requires the preparation of
                     such ESMP
                     •        Implement the Resettlement Plan (RP) of secondary and rural roads and small economic support infrastructure
                     that will be financed (e.g., markets, storage and distribution centers) prior to carrying out the relevant works, including
                     ensuring that before taking possession of the land and related assets, full compensation has been provided and as
                     applicable displaced people have been resettled and moving allowances have been provided.




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Guillermo Diaz Fanas                       Title:            Transport Specialist



                    Apr 03, 2025                                                                                                     Page 11 of 12
                               The World Bank
                               Southern Niger Connectivity And Integration Project (P179770)



                      Email:                  gdiazfanas@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Aguiratou Savadogo-Tinto                 Job Title:    Senior Transport Specialist

                      Email:                  asavadogotinto@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                             Guillermo Diaz Fanas, Aguiratou Savadogo-Tinto

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                    Ibrah Hachimou

                     ADM Social Specialist:                           Yves Bertrand Koudjou Tatang




Public Disclosure




                    Apr 03, 2025                                                                                                   Page 12 of 12
