Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Southern Niger Connectivity and Integration Project (P179770)




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                         Project Information Document (PID)



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                         Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 26-Jun-2023 | Report No: PIDC35973




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Jun 04, 2023                                                                                          Page 1 of 11
         The World Bank
         Southern Niger Connectivity and Integration Project (P179770)


  BASIC INFORMATION


  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE

  Country                                        Project ID                 Parent Project ID (if any)   Project Name
  Western and Central Africa                     P179770                                                 Southern Niger
                                                                                                         Connectivity and
                                                                                                         Integration Project
                                                                                                         (P179770)
  Region                                         Estimated Appraisal Date   Estimated Board Date         Practice Area (Lead)
  WESTERN AND CENTRAL                            Oct 09, 2024               Dec 02, 2024                 Transport
  AFRICA
  Financing Instrument                           Borrower(s)                Implementing Agency
  Investment Project Financing                   Ministere du Plan          Ministere de l'equipement



   Proposed Development Objective(s)

    The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve transport connectivity and logistics services along the NNC in
    Niger to support agricultural value chains and trade within the NNC basin.

    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

   SUMMARY-NewFin1

    Total Project Cost                                                                                                   600.00
    Total Financing                                                                                                      600.00

                             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                           600.00

    Financing Gap                                                                                                           0.00

   DETAILS     -NewFinEnh1




    World Bank Group Financing

       International Development Association (IDA)                                                                       600.00

          IDA Credit                                                                                                     600.00




  Environmental and Social Risk Classification                              Concept Review Decision



Jun 04, 2023                                                                                                           Page 2 of 11
          The World Bank
          Southern Niger Connectivity and Integration Project (P179770)


   High                                                                                    Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to
                                                                                           continue


  Other Decision (as needed)

  B. Introduction and Context

  Regional Context
    The Sahel region, spanning over 3 million square kilometers and home to 91 million inhabitants (as of 2021)1
    grapples with significant economic, social, political, and security challenges that hinder its overall economic
    development. Niger and Chad, members of the Sahel Group of Five (G5),2 are two of the least developed countries in
    the world, ranking 189th and 190th out of 191 countries based on their 2021/2022 Human Development Index (HDI) of
    0.400 and 0.394, respectively.3 Niger’s population is estimated at over 25 million and is growing rapidly at about 3.7
    percent per year and almost half of the population is less than 15 years old.4 With an estimated population of 16.9
    million inhabitants in 2021, Chad has a low average population density, estimated at 8.5 inhabitants per km². The
    national gross domestic product (GDP) for Niger is US$14.9 billion and a per capita GDP of US$590.6 in 2021;5 while
    Chad has a $11.7 billion national GDP and a per capita GDP of $685.7.6
      The uncompleted Niamey-Ndjamena Corridor (NNC), a strategic backbone for both countries, connects the capitals
      of Niger and Chad through the main cities of southern Niger and the northern area of Lake Chad and serves a basin
      where an estimated population of more than 22 million inhabitants7 is primarily engaged in agriculture and fisheries
      activities. Given the important role of this backbone for agriculture, trade, and stability, the proposed overarching
      program aims to foster regional integration and resilience of communities across the NNC Basin.
      The NNC Basin faces persistent fragility and insecurity, with poverty affecting over 50 percent of the population.8
      Conflicts generated by armed groups continue to plague the region and have resulted in over 2.9 million refugees and
      internally displaced people (IDP) across Burkina Faso, Mali, and Niger.9 Climate change also poses a threat to
      livelihoods, food security, and fragility, with Niger and Chad being among the top 7 most vulnerable countries
      worldwide. The shrinking Lake Chad water area, coupled with the impact of climate change, has made resources
      increasingly scarce, leading to increased migration and tensions. The Country Climate and Development Report
      (CCDR)10 for the G5 Sahel region estimates that up to 13.5 million people across the region could fall into poverty due
      to climate change-related shocks by 2050 if urgent climate adaptation measures are not taken.




 1 World Bank, Open Data
 2 G5 Sahel (https://www.g5sahel.org/) identifies 5 countries as part of the G5 Sahel countries: Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania and Niger
 3 Human Development Report 2021/2022. United Nations Development Program 2022. Available at: https://hdr.undp.org/system/files/documents/global-report-

 document/hdr2021-22pdf_1.pdf
 4 Social Data, World Bank 2021. Available at: https://data.worldbank.org/country/niger
 5 Economic Data, World Bank 2021. Available at: https://data.worldbank.org/country/niger
 6 Economic Data, World Bank 2021. Available at: https://data.worldbank.org/country/chad
 7
   WorldPop’s Africa population count data: Linard, C., Gilbert, M., Snow, R.W., Noor, A.M. and Tatem, A.J., 2012, Population distribution, settlement patterns and
 accessibility across Africa in 2010, PLoS ONE, 7(2): e31743. Available at: www.worldpop.org.
 8 Down to Earth, Climate shocks to drive 13.5 million people in Africa’s Sahel into poverty by 2050, Madhumita Paul (2022)
 9 UNHCR, Sahel Situation, Available at: https://reporting.unhcr.org/sahel-situation
 10
    Sahel Country Climate Development Report (In English). September 2022. Available at: https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/37620


Jun 04, 2023                                                                                                                                               Page 3 of 11
          The World Bank
          Southern Niger Connectivity and Integration Project (P179770)


 Country context
    Niger is a large Sahelian landlocked country covering an area of 1,267,000 km2, with a rural and informal economy.
    About 83 percent of its population lives in rural areas,1 and 80 percent of the jobs are in the informal sector. Most of
    the poor (2019 estimate) live in rural areas where food insecurity is high11 despite serving as the agriculture production
    centers throughout the country. Costs of transport services in Niger is high due to poor accessibility and informality
    of the logistics sector, especially in rural areas.
      The country’s economy is based on the production of agriculture and raw materials (uranium, rice, palm oil). As a
      result, logistics and connectivity are key for Niger’s economic and social development as export plays an important
      role in the economy. Export performance is largely dependent on the efficiency of transport systems of Niger and
      neighboring countries with access to the sea.
      Gender disparities remain in Niger, particularly in human capital, and access to the labor market. With a gender
      inequality index of 0.611, the country ranked 153rd out of 170 countries in 2021,12 due to gender gaps in access to
      healthcare, education, and economic opportunities. Vulnerable employment is higher among females with a rate of
      98 percent compared to 91.6 percent among males, a rate higher than the regional average of 79.8 percent of females
      against 67.4 percent of males, as of 2019 data.13
 Regional Sectoral and Institutional Context
     The NNC is composed of key sections of the Trans-Saharan Road (TSR) corridor and a key section of the Trans-
     Sahelian Highway (TSH). The TSR corridor is one of the oldest transnational road corridors in Africa linking Algeria,
     Chad, Mali, Niger, Nigeria, and Tunisia. The 4,500 km long North-South backbone of the corridor connects the ports
     of Algiers and Lagos . The sections of the NNC that compose the TSR corridor are the Niamey – Malian border sections
     as well as the Zinder – Ndjamena sections. The TSH is a transnational highway aiming to improve and lighten border
     formalities on a highway crossing the southern fringe of the Sahel between Dakar and Ndjamena. The sections of the
     NNC that compose the TSH corridor are the Niamey – Maradi sections.
                                                   Figure 1: NNC, TSR and TSH corridors




 11
   Niger – Economic and Poverty situation Note in the time of COVID-19, World Bank Spring 2020
 12UNDP    Human Development Reports. “Gender Inequality Index (GII).” https://hdr.undp.org/data-center/thematic-composite-indices/gender-inequality-
 index#/indicies/GII
 13
    World Bank Gender Data portal. https://genderdata.worldbank.org/countries/niger


Jun 04, 2023                                                                                                                             Page 4 of 11
          The World Bank
          Southern Niger Connectivity and Integration Project (P179770)




      Both landlocked, Niger and Chad depend on access to few seaports for their international trade and are hence
      seeking to diversify their strategic corridors. Trade within the NNC basin is constrained by inadequate infrastructure,
      particularly in Niger and Chad. The incomplete and poorly maintained NNC corridor impedes connectivity between
      the two countries and their neighbors. The NNC could be a crucial strategic trade corridor if developed properly, but
      the current situation around Lake Chad makes trade between Chad and Niger minimal. In 2021, Niger officially
      exported $8.23M to Chad, while Chad exported $14.6k to Niger, although much of the trade is likely unreported and
      related to agriculture and livestock.
      The physical condition of NNC throughout its length varies. In Niger, population growth, economic activities, and
      climate change have stressed the RN1, particularly its critical points. Some sections are being rehabilitated, while
      others require financing. The Chadian section, about 580 km long, consisting of the Ndjamena-Massaguet-Massakory-
      Ngouri-Bol-Liwa-Rigrig-Daboua-Niger border sections is mostly paved or under construction except for the Liwa-Rig
      Rig section (55km). The lack of periodic maintenance and truck overloading further impacts the road network in both
      countries. With an average overload rate of more than 70 percent for trucks, the average life of roads is reduced from
      15 to 20 years to 5 to 7 years, which represents an estimated annual additional investment cost of between USD 50.3
      and 75.5 million14 while the countries struggle to properly maintain their road network. Extreme weather events also
      contribute to structural failures of aging infrastructure.
      The services and “soft” facilitation agenda remain critical in Niger and Chad, where the informality of the transport
      sector impact trade and agriculture productivity negatively. The informal sector currently negatively impacts these
      sectors due to weak regulation and fragmented procedures. Despite some reforms supported by previous Bank-
      financed projects in Chad and Niger15, further improvements are necessary. Facilitating trade with Nigeria is also
      crucial for both countries. At the regional level, several strategies and policies aim to improve transport infrastructure,
      reduce transit times, and facilitate trade. CEMAC's "Transport and Transit Facilitation Program," the AU's
      harmonization of transport regulations, AfCFTA's "African Transport Policy Program," and ECOWAS' initiatives such as
      the Trade Liberalization Scheme aim to improve transport infrastructure and reduce trade barriers. Due to belonging

 14 FCFA 30 billion equal USD 50,306,030.38 and FCFA 45 billion equal USD 75,461,520.55 with a conversation rate of USD 1 = FCFA 596.364 XOF as of May 2, 2023,

 Available at https://www.xe.com/currencyconverter/convert/?Amount=45000000000&From=XOF&To=USD
 15
    Lomé-Ouagadougou-Niamey Economic Corridor Project (P168386) and Cameroon-Chad Transport Corridor Project (P167798)


Jun 04, 2023                                                                                                                                           Page 5 of 11
          The World Bank
          Southern Niger Connectivity and Integration Project (P179770)


      to different regional economic communities (RECs, except for AfCFTA), Chad and Niger resort to bilateral handling of
      trade issues.
      Poor rural accessibility is attributed to the region’s limited and degraded rural road network and the absence of
      organized transport and logistic services in the rural areas. The limited and degraded rural road network and absence
      of transportation services in rural areas hinder agricultural production zones in Chad and Niger. Women mainly
      transport commercial goods using carts, animals, or by walking due to a lack of affordable two- and three-wheelers.
      Obstacles to the development of intermediate means of transport (IMT)16 in Niger, include: (i) a weak institutional and
      regulatory framework; (ii) the poor state of the road network; (iii) the poverty of the rural population, especially for
      women and socio-cultural constraints; (iv) inadequate enforcement of road safety regulations; (v) poor access to
      supply of carts (typically manufactured in Niamey); (vi) lack of access to micro-finance; and (vii) poor security17. The
      proposed project will increase rural accessibility and support the transport of goods from the rural areas to the local
      markets by connecting rural roads to the NNC and providing a more direct route of transport between Niger and Chad,
      and the countries of the Lake Chad region, thus fostering short and medium distance trade within and between both
      countries.
  Country Sectoral and Institutional Context

      Road transport dominates Niger's transportation system, with the port of Cotonou in Benin being the closest access
      to the sea from Niamey. The Benin-Niger Regional Transport Compact, developed by the Millennium Challenge
      Corporation and costing $202 million in Benin and $302 million in Niger, aims to reduce transportation costs along the
      corridor between the Port of Cotonou and Niamey, benefiting 1.2 million people. The RN1 connects the west and east
      of Niger over 1800 km and is crucial for providing basic services and economic opportunities to three-fourths of the
      population, facilitating the transport of agricultural products to urban centers, and connecting secondary cities
      (Maradi, Zinder, and Diffa) to Nigeria's commercial hubs (Sokoto, Katsina, Kano, and Maiduguri) through feeder roads.
      These feeder roads serve as a gateway for trade between Niger and Nigeria, playing a vital role in the social and
      economic development of the NNC Basin and sub-regional trade.
  Relationship to CPF

      The proposed project is aligned with the World Bank Group (WBG)’s strategy for Western and Central Africa, and
      with the Country Partnership Frameworks (CPF) of the two countries captured under this regional engagement:
         •     Niger’s CPF for FY2018-202218 which was extended through FY23 through the Performance and Learning
               Review (PLR) to further consolidate and deliver results, overarching goal is “to help safeguard and accelerate
               Niger’s economic and social development by tackling growth constraints, unsustainable population growth and
               other fundamental (and emerging) drivers of fragility.”
         •     Chad’s FY23-24 Country Engagement Note (CEN)19 serves as the country’s current CPF and it is focused on


 16
    In rural areas people use a variety of means of transport to access essential economic and social services and transport goods. These range from the most basic -
 walking and carrying goods on one’s person back or head- to relatively large-scale motorized transport. Between these two extremes, there is a wide variety of
 Intermediate Means of Transport that can increase transport capacity and reduce human drudgery without the high costs associated with large motor vehicles.
 Options include single- and two-wheel technologies, tricycles, waterway technologies (low-cost boats), etc. powered by an engine or animal-powered (pack animals
 and animal-drawn sledges pulled by for example camels, donkeys, mules, oxen and/or horses). IMTs play an important role in rural transport services, for land and
 water transport.
 17
    Development Plan for Intermediate Means of Transport (IMT) of Transport and transport services in Rural Areas 2016-2025 (French). Ministry of Transport of
 Niger, 2015.
 18Niger - CPF for the period of FY18-FY22 (English). Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/466811523970978067/Niger-

 Country-partnership-framework-for-the-period-of-FY18-FY22
 19 Chad - CEN for the period of FY23-FY24 (English). Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group.

 https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/099045011032228370/pdf/BOSIB0e049600f0990811102aaa8c12a776.pdf


Jun 04, 2023                                                                                                                                             Page 6 of 11
           The World Bank
           Southern Niger Connectivity and Integration Project (P179770)


                “reducing the drivers of fragility,” and forms a good basis for addressing longer-term objectives within a future
                CPF. The proposed project supports CEN’s objective to “increase inclusive access to basic services and
                infrastructure, with effective inclusion of border, peripheral and conflict-affected areas.”
      This project is also in line with Niger’s Economic and Social Development Plan (PDES) 2022-202620 and Niger 2035:
      Strategy for Sustainable Development and Inclusive Growth,21 respectively, through its contributions to
      strengthening the quality and reliability of key transport infrastructure and improving transport services for agriculture
      and trade with logistics infrastructure (e.g., storage facilities).
      The project also fully supports the first priority of the World Bank’s Regional Integration and Cooperation Assistance
      (RICA) Strategy Update 2021-2023 for Africa:22 “Connectivity – improve functioning of regional corridors and
      enhance regional transport service markets;” and the AFW strategy (2021-2025). RICA’s first priority focuses on
      selected transnational economic corridors where integration could be realized, and where financing for regional
      physical infrastructure connectivity would be complemented by policy reforms to address barriers to value addition
      and facilitate greater trade.
      The proposed project is aligned with the International Development Association (IDA) 20 core priorities and the
      WBG FCV strategy and action plan prepared by Niger’s Prevention and Risk Allocation (PRA) Eligibility.23 The
      eligibility of Niger was confirmed on March 2, 2021 and the PRA provides up to US$700 million in addition to the
      country’s performance-based allocation.
      Climate Strategies
      The project is aligned with regional and national climate strategies, namely:
            •     World Bank’s Next Generation Africa Climate Business Plan, 2020-2026,24 which highlights the importance
                  and urgency of countries to pursue development that addresses climate impacts and manages climate risks.
            •     Sahel’s CCDR, which acknowledges that it is critical to invest in road improvements, road maintenance, and
                  emergency works, as well as in policy reforms in areas such as customs, axle load control, truck registration,
                  mandatory technical standards and inspections, driver training, insurance requirements, and access to the
                  profession and to markets. The regional CCDR also flags the urgent need to develop use of electric vehicles in
                  a gradual manner, such as battery-powered 2- and 3-wheelers.
            •     Niger’s Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs)25 and National Adaptation Plan (NAPs)26: The country’s
                  NDCs and NAPs highlight the importance of enhancing the resilience of infrastructure, including roads, bridges
                  and features to access water resources. Accordingly, the project aims to enhance the climate resilience of the
                  transport sector by rehabilitating a strategic corridor and feeder road systems to meet climate resilience
                  standards.


 20 Niger’s Economic and Social Development Plan (PDES) 2022-2026 (French); July 2022. Available at: http://www.finances.gouv.ne/index.php/une/879-adoption-du-

 plan-de-developpement-economique-et-social-pdes-2022-2026
 21
    Niger 2035: Strategy for Sustainable Development and Inclusive Growth (French). February 2017. Available at: http://www.plan.gouv.ne/sddci-2035/
 22 World Bank Group (2020). Report No 154458. Available at: https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/249911623450779120/pdf/Supporting-Africa-s-

 Recovery-and-Transformation-Regional-Integration-and-Cooperation-Assistance-Strategy-Update-for-the-Period-FY21-FY23.pdf
 23 To confirm eligibility, an eligibility note is submitted to the Board with a government strategy that describes the concrete steps that the country will take to reduce

 the risks of conflict or violence. Countries that are eligible for the PRA recalibrate their full IDA country program to focus on de-escalating conflict and violence through
 development interventions aiming at addressing conflict and violence risks and the underlying drivers of conflict.
 24
    Next Generation Africa Climate Business Plan. World Bank 2020. Available at: https://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/africa-climate-business-
 plan/reports
 25
    Niger’s Nationally Determined Contributions; October 2021 (French). Available at: https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/NDC/2022-
 06/CDN_Niger_R%C3%A9vis%C3%A9e_2021.pdf
 26 Niger’s National Climate Change Adaptation Plan; October 2022 (French). Available at: https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/Plan-National-

 d%27Adaptation_Niger_Version-Finale.pdf


Jun 04, 2023                                                                                                                                                    Page 7 of 11
         The World Bank
         Southern Niger Connectivity and Integration Project (P179770)


  C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

     The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve transport connectivity and logistics services along the NNC in
     Niger to support agricultural value chains and trade within the NNC basin.
     The proposed project is being processed as a Series of Projects (SOP). This approach will allow for a programmatic-
     phased engagement according to the country’s needs, program readiness and availability of resources. The first phase
     comprises two SOPs that we will be prepared and delivered in parallel, in Chad and Niger. The proposed overarching
     development objective for the NNC Basin of Integration Program is the following: to improve regional integration and
     socioeconomic and climate resilience of communities in the NNC Basin.

  Key Results (From PCN)
    The following PDO indicators will be considered and refined during project preparation:
               •   Number of direct and indirect beneficiaries with enhanced access to transport infrastructure and
                   services in the NNC Basin
               •   Access to all-weather and climate-resilient roads (km)
               •   Total traffic between Chad and Niger (veh/day)
               •   Number of people (including IDPs) with access to basic services (health, education and sanitation
                   facilities) and economic opportunities (small border trade and businesses created along the NNC)

  D. Concept Description

     The proposed SOP’s overall objective is to improve connectivity and transport and logistics services to support the
     development of the communities along the NNC by supporting agricultural value chains and sub-regional trade. The
     SOP will support regional integration by unlocking agricultural areas and developing trade between Niger, Chad and
     Nigeria. As such, the project will promote the concept of Basin of Integration and Stability to finance the rehabilitation
     of the most degraded road sections of Niger’s RN1, and the feeder roads connecting to it, and on the introduction of
     intermediate transport services necessary for the development of rural agricultural areas and secondary cities along
     the route to support value chains and sub-regional trade. Prioritization will be undertaken based on activities
     readiness and IDA availability
     Component 1 – Improvement of Infrastructure along the NNC and its feeder roads:
     The component will rehabilitate priority road sections on the RN1, secondary roads and rural roads that connect the
     adjacent rural areas to the RN1, which are inaccessible during the rainy season and are highly vulnerable to climate
     change, as reflected in Table 1. These works will enhance access to areas with high agricultural and commercial
     potential and connect Niger to Chad and Nigeria. It will also finance complementary social infrastructure along the
     NNC and its feeders. This component will have a modular and programmatic approach, prioritizing the sections most
     vulnerable to climate change. Depending on available resources, the RN6 (between Niamey and the Burkina Faso
     border) could be integrated into the project in a later phase.
     Component 2 – Improvement of Transport and Logistics Services:
     This component will finance the development of transport and logistics services to support priority agricultural value
     chains and to increase sub-regional trade, particularly with Chad and Nigeria. This component will include investments
     in rural transport and logistics services and strengthening institutional capacity to:
          •    Improve transport and rural logistics services, notably through the development of decarbonized intermodal
               transport modes in the framework of pilot projects for electric two- and three-wheelers in secondary cities

Jun 04, 2023                                                                                                         Page 8 of 11
         The World Bank
         Southern Niger Connectivity and Integration Project (P179770)


               along the corridor and in rural areas, and commercial and agricultural logistics facilities such as markets,
               storage, and distribution centers. Activities to be funded will be informed by the ongoing study on
               decarbonization and climate resilience for logistics and rural connectivity in the Sahel region, funded by the
               WB's Global Facility for Decarbonization of Transport (GFDT).
          •    Address the constraints affecting the fluidity of transport between Niger and Chad and sub-regional trade by
               strengthening and implementing the agreements and dialogue framework between the two countries.
          •    Harmonize the road transport strategy of the two countries and scaling up efforts for the professionalization
               of the sector.
          •    Assess and monitor the impacts of the activities of this component on the development of trade within the
               NNC basin (Niger, Chad and Nigeria) and on the mobility of people, the consultation framework to be set up
               between the countries could include a sub-regional observatory on mobility and trade. This observatory could
               also host regional solutions for early warning systems for hazards related to climate change and proactive and
               concerted management of the regional corridor's infrastructure.
      Component 3 – Project Management and Monitoring support:
      This component will finance the project operational costs and monitoring and evaluation activities. It will also finance
      gender and GBV activities derived from the gender assessment financed under the project and the GBV action plan to
      be finalized during preparation.
      Component 4 – Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC):
      In the event of an eligible crisis or emergency, to provide immediate and effective response to it, the Government
      may request the Bank to re-allocate project funds to support emergency response and reconstruction of
      infrastructures. This component would draw from the uncommitted credits resources under the project from other
      project components to cover emergency response. This component has, by its nature, a zero funds allocation.


  Legal Operational Policies                                                              Triggered?
  Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                            No
  Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60                                                     No

  Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
  .

  The environmental and social risks and impacts of project activities are related to the rehabilitation of the road sections
 and the proposed economic activities. The full extent of these risks and impacts are not known at this stage but a
 comprehensive ESIA to assess the potential risks and impacts and identify mitigation measures and assess the acceptability
 of any potential residual impacts will be carried out. On the environmental side, the potential risks and negative impacts
 are related to: (i) Resource efficiency and pollution prevention and management (sourcing of raw materials for civil works,
 water and energy use, GHG emissions, dust, noise, potential contamination of water sources due to spills and run-off of
 petroleum products, infiltration into storage areas and improper disposal of fuels, (ii) Occupational and Community health
 and safety (potential injuries to workers, spread of diseases from labor camps, GBV); (iii) potential loss of vegetation and
 biodiversity during civil works and preparation of sites, quarries areas for materials, and higher demand of fuelwood by
 workers; and (iv) potential impact of civil works and excavations on cultural heritage.

 The full extent of the social risks is not yet known. An ESIA will be undertaken during preparation to gather important
 information regarding demographics, economic activities, GBV/SEA risks and security concerns. The results will be used to

Jun 04, 2023                                                                                                        Page 9 of 11
          The World Bank
          Southern Niger Connectivity and Integration Project (P179770)


 inform project design and the preparation of safeguard instruments. However, it should be noted that the contextual risks
 in certain of the project area are quite high. This will impact both the ability of the Bank to visit the project area and our
 capacity to provide implementation support and safeguard compliance verification. Alternative ways to ensure that these
 risks are adequately mitigated and can be monitored are being explored. For example, the feasibility of a TPM or hiring a
 local NGO to assist with community engagement are under consideration.


 .
     CONTACT POINT


     World Bank
     Anne Cecile Sophie Souhaid, Guillermo Diaz Fanas
     Lead Transport Specialist


     Borrower/Client/Recipient
     Ministere du Plan
     Abdou Rabiou
     Ministre du Plan
     contact@plan.ne

     Implementing Agencies

     Ministere de l'equipement
     Gado Sabo Moctar
     Ministre de l'Equipement|
     moctarsabo961@msn.com


     FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
     The World Bank
     1818 H Street, NW
     Washington, D.C. 20433
     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects



     APPROVAL

     Task Team Leader(s):                     Anne Cecile Sophie Souhaid, Guillermo Diaz Fanas




Jun 04, 2023                                                                                                      Page 10 of 11
         The World Bank
         Southern Niger Connectivity and Integration Project (P179770)



  Approved By
  APPROVALTBL
  Country Director:                         Boutheina Guermazi           30-Sep-2023




Jun 04, 2023                                                                           Page 11 of 11
