Public Disclosure Authorized                                         FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

                                                                                                                Report No: PAD5226


                                                 INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                 PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

                                                                                ON A

                                                                          PROPOSED LOAN

                                                                IN THE AMOUNT OF US$363 MILLION

                                                                              TO INDIA

                                                                               FOR A




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                               KARNATAKA SUSTAINABLE RURAL WATER SUPPLY PROGRAM (P179039)



                                                                           March 3, 2023




                               Water Global Practice




Public Disclosure Authorized
                               South Asia Region




                               This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of
                               their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.
                  CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

          (Exchange Rate Effective January 18, 2023)


               Currency Unit = Indian Rupee (INR)
                      INR 80 = US$1

                       FISCAL YEAR
                     April 1 – March 31




Regional Vice President: Martin Raiser
      Country Director: Auguste Tano Kouame
     Regional Director: John A. Roome
     Practice Manager: Sumila Gulyani
   Task Team Leader(s): Kristoffer Welsien, Mariappa Kullappa
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

ACG        Anti-Corruption Guidelines
ACIWRM     Advanced Centre for Integrated Water Resources Management
ACS        Additional Chief Secretary
AG         Auditor General
AM         Accountability Mechanism
BCC        Behavior Change Communication
CAPEX      Capital Expenditure
CEO        Chief Executive Officer
CPF        Country Partnership Framework
CSS        Centrally Sponsored Scheme
CVC        Central Vigilance Commission
DBO        Design-Build-Operate
DBOT       Design-Build-Operate-Transfer
DLI        Disbursement-Linked Indicator
DLR        Disbursement-Linked Result
DTSS       District Technical Support Staff
DWSM       District Water Sanitation Mission
E&S        Environmental and Social
EA         Economic Analysis
ESMP       Environmental and Social. Management Plan
ESSA       Environmental and Social Systems Assessment
FD         Finance Department
FHTC       Functional Household Tap Connection
FLL        Field-Level Leadership
FM         Financial Management
FTK        Field Test Kit
GCRF       Global Crisis Response Framework
GDP        Gross Domestic Product
GeM        Government e-Marketplace
GO         Government Order
GoI        Government of India
GoK        Government of Karnataka
GP         Gram Panchayat
GRM        Grievance Redress Mechanism
GRS        Grievance Redress Service
GSDP       Gross State Domestic Product
GST        Goods and Services Tax
IA         Implementing Agency
IEC        Information, Education, and Communication
IFSA       Integrated Fiduciary Systems Assessment
IRR        Internal Rate of Return
ISA        Implementation Support Agency
ISM        Implementation Support Mission
IVA        Independent Verification Agent
IVDN     In-Village Distribution Network
JJM      Jal Jeevan Mission
JMP      Joint Monitoring Program
KFRA     Karnataka Fiscal Responsibility Act
KSRWSP   Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program
KTPP     Karnataka Transparency in Public Procurements
lpcd     Liters Per Capita per Day
M&E      Monitoring and Evaluation
MTFP     Medium-Term Fiscal Plan
MTR      Midterm Review
MVS      Multi-Village Scheme
NABL     National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories
NPV      Net Present Value
O&M      Operation and Maintenance
OHT      Overhead Tank
PAD      Program Appraisal Document
PAP      Program Action Plan
PDO      Program Development Objective
PFM      Public Financial Management
PFMS     Public Financial Management System
PforR    Program-for-Results
PIC      Program Implementation Committee
PLFS     Periodic Labor Force Survey
PMU      Program Management Unit
POM      Program Operational Manual
PPP      Public-Private Partnership
PV       Photovoltaic
RA       Results Area
RDPR     Rural Development and Panchayati Raj Department
RDWSD    Rural Drinking Water and Sanitation Department
RO       Reverse Osmosis
RTI      Right to Information
RWS      Rural Water Supply
SBD      Standard Bidding Document
SBM      Swachh Bharat Mission
SCADA    Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
SCD      Systematic Country Diagnostic
SDG      Sustainable Development Goal
SNA      Single Nodal Agency
SVS      Single-Village Scheme
TP       Taluk Panchayat
VWSC     Village Water and Sanitation Committee
WSS      Water Supply and Sanitation
The World Bank
Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



                                                           TABLE OF CONTENTS

 I.    STRATEGIC CONTEXT ..................................................................................................................1
        A. Country Context .....................................................................................................................1
        B. Sectoral and Institutional Context ...........................................................................................2
        C. Relationship to the CPS/CPF and Rationale for Use of Instrument ............................................5
 II.   PROGRAM DESCRIPTION.............................................................................................................6
        A.    Government Program ..........................................................................................................6
        B.    Theory of Change ................................................................................................................8
        C.    PforR Program Scope...........................................................................................................9
        D.    Program Development Objective (PDO) and PDO Level Results Indicators .......................... 14
        E.    Disbursement-Linked Indicators and Verification Protocols ................................................ 14
 III. PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION .................................................................................................. 17
        A.    Institutional and Implementation Arrangements................................................................ 17
        B.    Results Monitoring and Evaluation .................................................................................... 18
        C.    Disbursement Arrangements ............................................................................................. 18
        D.    Capacity Building ............................................................................................................... 19
 IV. ASSESSMENT SUMMARY .......................................................................................................... 19
        Technical .................................................................................................................................. 19
        Fiduciary .................................................................................................................................. 22
        Environmental and Social ......................................................................................................... 23
 V.    RISK ......................................................................................................................................... 25
 ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK MATRIX ........................................................................................ 26
 ANNEX 2. DISBURSEMENT LINKED INDICATORS, DISBURSEMENT ARRANGEMENTS AND VERIFICATION
 PROTOCOLS ..................................................................................................................................... 34
 ANNEX 3. SUMMARY TECHNICAL ASSESSMENT ................................................................................. 47
 ANNEX 4. SUMMARY FIDUCIARY SYSTEMS ASSESSMENT .................................................................. 54
 ANNEX 5. SUMMARY ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SYSTEMS ASSESSMENT .................................... 60
 ANNEX 6. PROGRAM ACTION PLAN .................................................................................................. 62
 ANNEX 7. IMPLEMENTATION SUPPORT PLAN ................................................................................... 65
     The World Bank
     Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)




DATASHEET


BASIC INFORMATION
BASIC_INFO_TABLE
Country(ies)              Project Name

India                     Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program

Project ID                Financing Instrument          Does this operation have an IPF component?

                          Program-for-Results
P179039                                                 No
                          Financing


Financing & Implementation Modalities

[ ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA)                        [ ] Fragile State(s)

[ ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)                [ ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country

[ ] Small State(s)                                                [ ] Conflict
[ ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA)                      [ ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster

[ ] Hands-on Enhanced Implementation Support (HEIS)

Expected Project Approval Date        Expected Closing Date

28-Mar-2023                           01-Jun-2028

Bank/IFC Collaboration

No

Proposed Program Development Objective(s)

To increase access to safely managed drinking water and strengthen institutions for sustainable rural water service
delivery in Karnataka.

Organizations

Borrower :                    India

Implementing Agency :         Rural Development and Panchayat Department, Government of Karnataka
Contact:                      Mr. L.K Atheeq




                                                              i
     The World Bank
     Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



Title:                         Additional Chief Secretary
Telephone No:                  08022353929
Email:                         lk.atheeq@gov.in

Implementing Agency :          Rural Drinking Water and Sanitation Department, Government of Karnataka
Contact:                       Mr. Gangadhra Swamy G M
Title:                         Director
Telephone No:                  080-22240508
Email:                         krwssd@gmail.com


COST & FINANCING
FIN_SUMM_WITH_IPF
SUMMARY

Government program Cost                                                                                  2,926.16
Total Operation Cost                                                                                     1,144.91
     Total Program Cost                                                                                  1,144.00
     Other Costs                                                                                             0.91
Total Financing                                                                                          1,144.91
Financing Gap                                                                                               0.00



Financing (USD Millions)
     Counterpart Funding                                                                                  781.91

         Borrower/Recipient                                                                               781.91

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                         363.00


Expected Disbursements (USD Millions)


Fiscal
                        2024                  2025                2026                2027                  2028
Year
Absol
                       60.00                 80.00               120.00              60.00                 43.00
ute
Cumul                  60.00               140.00                260.00             320.00                363.00



                                                            ii
      The World Bank
      Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



 ative



 INSTITUTIONAL DATA
 INSTITUTIONAL DATA TBL
 Practice Area (Lead)                                        Contributing Practice Areas
 Water

 Climate Change and Disaster Screening
 This operation has been screened for short and long-term climate change and disaster risks


 SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK-RATING TOOL (SORT)

Risk Category                                                                         Rating
1. Political and Governance                                                          ⚫ Moderate
2. Macroeconomic                                                                     ⚫ Moderate
3. Sector Strategies and Policies                                                    ⚫ Moderate
4. Technical Design of Project or Program                                            ⚫ Moderate
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability                      ⚫ Moderate
6. Fiduciary                                                                         ⚫ Moderate
7. Environment and Social                                                            ⚫ Moderate
8. Stakeholders                                                                      ⚫ Moderate
9. Other
10. Overall                                                                          ⚫ Moderate


 COMPLIANCE

 Policy
 Does the program depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects?
 [ ] Yes      [✔] No

 Does the program require any waivers of Bank policies?
 [ ] Yes      [✔] No




                                                            iii
     The World Bank
     Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



Legal Operational Policies

                                                                                                            Triggered
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                     No

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                                                                              No



Legal Covenants

Sections and Description
[Section I.B.3 of the Schedule to the Program Agreement] The Program Implementing Entity shall cause
Government of Karnataka to maintain, throughout the period of implementation of the Program, a Program
Management Unit (“PMU”), headed by the Program Director which unit shall be provided with staff, in adequate
number, each with qualifications and experience satisfactory to the Bank. The PMU shall remain vested with
powers, financial resources, functions, and competencies, acceptable to the Bank, to, among other things,
coordinate the implementation of the Program activities, as further detailed in the Program Operational Manual
(POM).

Sections and Description
[Section I.D.1a of the Schedule to the Program Agreement] The Program Implementing Entity shall before Program
signing prepare and adopt the POM in form and substance satisfactory to the Bank. The POM, which shall include,
inter alia: (a) the functions, responsibilities and composition of the PMUs, including its obligation to comply with
the Anti-Corruption Guidelines; (b) a detailed description of the activities and institutional arrangements for the
Project, including the technical, administrative and fiduciary functions of the Implementing Agencies (IAs); (c) the
Project administrative, accounting, auditing, reporting, financial, procurement and disbursement procedures; (d)
the monitoring indicators for the Project; (d) the grievance mechanism; (e) the composition and functions of the
Program Steering Committee; (f) the Anti-Corruption Guidelines, among others.

Sections and Description
[Schedule 2, Section I.B.2 of the Loan Agreement] The Borrower shall establish, and thereafter, operate and
maintain throughout Project implementation, a Program Steering Committee (the “Program Steering
Committee”), responsible for Program oversight, providing strategic direction, ensuring inter-agency
collaboration; monitoring progress; with composition, functions and resources acceptable to the Bank and set
forth in the POM.



Conditions




                                                           iv
The World Bank
Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



  I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT

  A. Country Context

 1.       India’s economy may slow down, coming off a strong recovery in FY21/22 (April 2021–March
 2022). The spillovers from global geopolitical tensions and the global monetary policy tightening cycle are
 expected to weigh on India’s economic outlook: elevated inflation on the back of higher prices of key
 commodities, heightened global uncertainty, and rising borrowing costs could affect domestic demand,
 while slowing global growth may dampen India’s export growth. Despite these challenges, India is
 expected to remain one of the fasted growing major economies in the world, due to robust domestic
 demand. The growth in FY22/23 is likely to moderate to 6.9 percent from 8.7 percent in FY21/22.1
 Domestic demand is expected to remain on a recovery path, despite external headwinds. The
 Government’s strong capital expenditure (CAPEX) program will support investment, while private
 consumption will benefit from consumer spending in high- and middle-income groups. Net exports may
 continue to drag on growth due to slowing global growth and high commodity prices. The rising
 merchandise trade deficit is likely to push the current account deficit to 3.2 percent of Gross Domestic
 Product (GDP) in FY22/23. Due to recovering demand, elevated global commodity prices and adverse
 weather conditions, headline inflation crept above the Reserve Bank of India’s tolerance range in January
 2022. It remained above the target range for ten months before returning to below the upper end of the
 target range of 6 per cent in November 2022 and is expected to gradually ease further next year.2 The
 Government’s gradual fiscal consolidation efforts will be bolstered by strong revenue performance. Goods
 and Services Tax (GST) collections continue to be strong, having crossed the INR 1 trillion mark every
 month since July 2021, reaching as high as INR 1.67 trillion in April 2022.

 2.       Although India has made remarkable progress in reducing extreme poverty over the past two
 decades, the COVID-19 pandemic has slowed progress and poses risks to welfare. Before the pandemic,
 the share of the population living below US$2.15 per person per day (2017 purchasing power parity) is
 estimated to have fallen from 22.5 in 2011 to 10 percent 2019.3 This was accompanied by a sharp decline
 in the incidence of multidimensional poverty, from 27.7 percent in 2005/06 to 16.4 percent in 2019/21. 4
 However, the pace of poverty reduction has slowed in recent years, with key welfare indicators being slow
 to improve.5 More than 40 percent of India’s population lived below the lower-middle-income poverty
 line even before the pandemic.6 Inequality in consumption has remained stable, with a Gini index of
 around 35 over the past two decades. Child malnutrition has remained high, with 35.5 percent of children
 under the age of 5 years being stunted and 67 percent of children aged 6–59 months being anemic in
 2019–21.7 Despite a substantial social protection response from the Government of India (GoI), the
 COVID-19 pandemic has likely reversed recent welfare gains, exposed vulnerabilities in the labor market,


 1 World Bank real GDP forecasts for FY22/23 published in India Development Update, December 2022.
 2 IMF, World Economic Outlook.
 3 World Bank Poverty and Inequality Platform. https://pip.worldbank.org/country-profiles/IND. In 2004, India’s extreme poverty

 rate was 39.9 percent using the same international poverty line.
 4 United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and OPHI (Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative (OPHI). 2022.

 2022 Global Multidimensional Poverty Index: Unpacking Deprivation Bundles to Reduce Multidimensional Poverty. New York.
 5 World Bank Poverty and Inequality Platform. https://pip.worldbank.org/country-profiles/IND.
 6 US$3.65 per capita per day (2017 purchasing power parity). World Bank Poverty and Inequality Platform.

 https://pip.worldbank.org/country-profiles/IND.
 7 Government of India, Ministry of Health, and Family Welfare. 2022. National Family Health Survey (NFHS - 5) 2019–21 Report.




                                                               1
The World Bank
Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



 and posed new risks to welfare. Headline labor market indicators have improved since the pandemic and
 unemployment has reduced and been stabilized at 7.5 percent in 2020-21.8

 3.       Karnataka is an economic powerhouse that is facing serious water challenges. According to the
 2011 census, Karnataka’s population is 61 million, of which around 60 percent live in rural areas. The
 state’s GDP per capita is approximately US$3,000, compared to US$1,900 for India. Karnataka is India’s
 sixth largest state by area, of which 77 percent is arid or semi-arid, making it the second most drought-
 prone state in India.9 The state contains seven river basins and has high rainfall diversity with the western
 ghats receiving nearly 4,000 mm rain annually compared to less than 500 mm in the eastern districts, and
 an overall decline in annual rainfall is predicted for the south-western and north-eastern regions of the
 state between now and 2050. Karnataka is expected to face increased water challenges due to climate
 change. The state is vulnerable to climate-change-related rainfall variability, leading to droughts and
 floods, which contribute to groundwater depletion and deteriorating water quality. Almost 60 percent of
 the state experienced drought conditions of varying severity between 2001 and 2020, and 23 of the 31
 districts face acute water scarcity. These water challenges need to be tackled if Karnataka is to deliver
 safe and reliable water supply to all citizens and make its economy less vulnerable to water stress.
  B. Sectoral and Institutional Context

 4.       The Government of Karnataka (GoK) intends to provide every household with a functional
 household tap connection (FHTC) by 2024 as part of the Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM), launched by the GoI
 in 2019. The JJM objective is to supply drinking water in adequate quantity, of prescribed quality, and on
 a sustainable basis to every rural household in India. The JJM investment is by any measure the largest
 and most ambitious investment in rural water supply (RWS) in India to date, and the central and state
 governments have jointly pledged to allocate more than US$44 billion to the JJM program. In 2018, the
 GoK launched its own program, Jaladhare, to provide all rural households of Karnataka with FHTCs at the
 earliest to achieve Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 6.110 on safe drinking water. In Karnataka, the
 Jaladhare11 infrastructure is being constructed at a record pace, and the Rural Drinking Water and
 Sanitation Department (RDWSD), the implementing agency (IA) for Jaladhare, is stretching its
 implementation capacity to achieve the ambitious infrastructure targets. As a result of these efforts, rural
 access to the FHTC in Karnataka rose from 24 percent in 2019 to 55.19 percent in 2022,12 benefiting almost
 3 million households since the launch of the program. Nonetheless, 44.81 percent of Karnataka’s rural
 population is still to be served by FHTCs.

 5.      Karnataka’s experience, over the last three decades, in rural water provision reveals challenges
 associated with weak ownership of systems and inadequate operation and maintenance (O&M).
 Although Karnataka has made progress in rural water provision over the past few decades, evidence from
 earlier World Bank projects13 suggests that O&M and sustainability issues have plagued most rural water

 8 World Bank Macro Poverty Outlook. October 2022. Estimates from PLFS data (2020-21).
 9 Environmental Management and Policy Research Institute and Energy and Resources Institute. 2012. Karnataka State Action

 Plan on Climate Change, 1st Assessment.
 10 SDG 6.1 is defined as follows: By 2030, to achieve universal and equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water for all.

 The corresponding indicator is “Proportion of the population using safely managed drinking water services.” To meet this
 criterion, households must use an improved source that is accessible on premises, available when needed, and free from
 contamination.
 11 This document refers to the Jaladhare program, meaning Karnataka’s JJM program which goes beyond 2024.
 12 As of September 9, 2022.
 13 Implementation Completion and Results Report, Second Karnataka RWS and Sanitation Project (2014). Report No: ICR3124.




                                                                  2
The World Bank
Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



 projects in Karnataka and, more broadly, in India. As per the 73rd Amendment to the Constitution of India,
 Gram Panchayats (GPs, rural local governments) and their Village Water and Sanitation Committees
 (VWSCs) are responsible for post-construction operation, maintenance, and service delivery of drinking
 water. Historically, lack of ownership and inadequate capacity at the GP level have led to poor operational
 performance. Most GPs have been unable to establish cost recovery mechanisms. Tariff collection targets
 are not met, leaving critical O&M activities unfunded and undone, resulting in many defunct or partially
 defunct water schemes. Thus far, the ultimate goal of providing safe water 24/7 to all rural households
 remains aspirational.

 6.       Groundwater depletion and water quality challenges. Groundwater levels have been declining
 at an alarming rate for several decades in many parts of the state. This is attributed to overreliance on
 groundwater, especially by the irrigation sector coupled with insufficient groundwater recharge,14 which
 has directly affected the rural water sector as sources dry up. Groundwater also suffers from
 contamination due to fluoride and nitrate, which compounds the problem further. Ensuring reliable rural
 drinking water in Karnataka is complex as it involves solving a multitude of challenges at a time when the
 rural population is increasingly demanding a higher level of service.15 Single-village schemes (SVSs) are the
 traditional and prevalent service delivery model for RWS in Karnataka where water is largely sourced from
 groundwater. Efforts to recharge the dwindling groundwater are being made, including through small
 tanks (ponds or reservoirs) that are recognized for serving a range of socio-ecological purposes such as
 soil and water conservation, groundwater recharge, and enhanced resilience in the context of floods and
 droughts.16

 7.       Karnataka is making a transition from groundwater to bulk surface water through multi-village
 schemes (MVSs). GoK has made a long-term strategic decision to use surface water for most of its rural
 villages through MVSs, where water is sourced from large lakes or rivers and then treated and piped as
 bulk water to rural villages. While the shift to bulk surface water supply will ensure more reliable drinking
 water, mitigate water quality concerns, and enhance climate change resilience, it inevitably brings about
 significantly higher O&M costs and necessitates more support and supervision from district- and state-
 level governments.

 8.       Electricity costs and arrears are two challenges that are hurting financial sustainability. The JJM
 supports the move toward a cost-reflective tariff, but very few states have managed to advance this
 agenda. In Karnataka, the sector has over the last decades moved from handpumps with low O&M
 requirements to electric deep-well pumping systems for SVSs and lately for the emerging energy-intensive
 multi-village bulk water systems with household piped-water provision. Presently there are 548 MVSs
 covering a population of 20 million in Karnataka. Approximately 450 of the MVSs are operational, while
 the remaining MVSs are under construction. This climate-resilient service-level improvement with
 household connections with 55 liters per capita per day (lpcd) is associated with significantly higher O&M
 costs. The first challenge is that the estimated electricity costs from MVSs amount to US$100 million per
 year—which is currently borne by the state. The second challenge relates to the fact that GPs have

 14 http://cwp-india.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/Report-on-Karnataka-SWP-with-regard-to-National-Water-Policy-

 2012.pdf.
 15 India - https://climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org/sites/default/files/country-profiles/15503-

 WB_India%20Country%20Profile-WEB.pdf.
 16 Ratna Reddy, V. 2018. “Tank Rehabilitation in India: Review of Experiences and Strategies.” Agricultural Water Management

 209: 32–43; Tank is an ancient approach of harvesting and preserving the local rainfall. It is a water reservoir of any size found
 throughout India. Tank use is critical in storing water after the monsoon season and can play in important role in recharging
 groundwater.


                                                                  3
The World Bank
Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



 accumulated insurmountable electricity arrears (unpaid electricity bills). The GoK’s budget data show that
 approximately 98 percent of the GPs are largely able to cover their O&M costs from their collection rates,
 when excluding electricity costs. When electricity costs are included, only around 40 percent of the GPs
 can achieve cost recovery from their current tariff collection. This is only seven years after the state in
 2015 cleared the principal amount on electricity arrears of the GPs. This makes Karnataka’s rural water
 sector reliant on substantial and arguably unsustainable state subsidies. Going forward, the GoK will have
 to decide if GPs should cover a larger portion of electricity and bulk water supply costs and how the GPs
 can reduce their energy consumption.

 9.       The investment of the century brings the challenge of the century. Institutions governing rural
 water infrastructure have an unfortunate record of deferring maintenance, causing the infamous cycle of
 ‘build, neglect, and rebuild.’ Should this cycle repeat, there is a real risk that the Jaladhare infrastructure
 will deteriorate long before its design life, leaving the rural population far short of Jaladhare’s drinking
 water service levels. Resolving this challenge goes beyond RDWSD’s civil engineering capacity as it
 necessitates financial and social engineering, capacity strengthening, and reorientation of institutions
 toward improved operational performance. Realizing the current shortcomings, the GoK has drafted a
 comprehensive O&M Policy with the objective of institutionalizing capacity and arrangements that will
 move the sector toward delivering and maintaining service levels and source sustainability. Among other
 things, the O&M Policy sets specific targets on water tariffs and bulk water charges between the MVS and
 the benefitting GPs. While the pending notification of the policy is a critical milestone for the sector, its
 operationalization is arguably the greatest sector-specific challenge for the GoK.

 10.     Introduction of household meters. Under the Jaladhare program, and in a move beyond the
 national JJM scope, Karnataka decided in 2019 to include a household volumetric water meter with every
 FHTC. A few GPs have successfully introduced a volumetric tariff, but most GPs have not. Achieving
 financial sustainability is important for the sector and efforts are being made to raise community
 awareness of GP-incurred O&M costs to start a community-led transition to cost recovery, with the
 metered household connections playing a critical role in reaching this goal in the future. Equally
 important, the meters provide direct evidence of equity in the delivery of rural water services, as the
 meter readings serve as a proof as to whether water was delivered, and in what quantity, to remote or
 marginalized households.

 11.      Aspirational upgrading to 24/7 continuous water supply service. Rural water supply is typically
 available to water users between 4 and 12 hours per day, sometimes less. Providing 24/7 continuous
 water supply through piped networks has several advantages over intermittent water supply for the
 benefiting households as they can transition away from the traditional reliance on in-house water storage,
 which can lead to microbiological contamination at the point of use if the storage containers are not
 periodically cleaned. Second, continuous water supply can reduce pumping by 16 percent because of
 reduced water consumption and hence save energy. Providing 24/7 water service is beyond the scope of
 both the JJM and Jaladhare but would lead to significant service improvement for rural populations. If
 done correctly, continuous water supply would bring about significant water and energy savings from
 avoiding water storage and wastage. Building the capacity to roll out 24/7 service could also allow the
 GoK to move the sector toward cost recovery by providing a much higher level of service which customers
 will value. The Program will help demonstrate how 24/7 service can be achieved at scale, and if successful
 this could also serve as a model for other states to replicate.




                                                       4
The World Bank
Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



 12.     Women’s employment in technical job roles is critical to Karnataka’s growth. As the state’s
 economy transitions away from agriculture, women’s access to non-farm jobs is a critical factor affecting
 the state’s growth trajectory. Women’s workforce participation rate in Karnataka is 31 percent, slightly
 above the national average of 28.7 percent.17 In rural Karnataka, women experience multiple barriers in
 finding paid work opportunities outside of agriculture. Among women who do work, domestic cleaning
 work is the second most common profession after textile-related odd-jobs, classified as informal work.18
 Currently, over 40 percent of women workers in rural Karnataka find work as informal workers in low-
 paying jobs with inconsistent wages.19 In this scenario, RWS activities have untapped potential to offer
 women’s entry and retention in technical job roles such as plumbers. At the same time, the 2022 National
 Family Health Survey (NFHS-5, 2019-21) shows that the time taken for obtaining drinking water has been
 reducing for a large share of rural households in Karnataka, as compared with NFHS- 4 data (2015-16),
 thus reducing the gap in access for women and children who bear the burden of water collection over
 long distances. The Program will, thus, prioritize women’s access to technical job roles in non-traditional
 sectors as the priority gender gap.

 13.      Building on the long-term engagement between the GoK and the World Bank, the Government
 has requested the World Bank’s assistance to address the above challenges and aspirations. By engaging
 with a more advanced state such as Karnataka, there is potential for setting a new benchmark for the
 Indian rural water sector. The World Bank is well placed to support the state to operationalize its O&M
 Policy through core technical, social, institutional, and financial performance criteria at the GP level. These
 criteria will include targeted incentives to promote and strengthen institutional capacity that foster a
 culture of water scheme maintenance and sustained functionality. The Program will support the GoK in
 institutionalizing a three-pronged approach that will (a) develop a system of incentives for improvements
 in source, financial, and technical sustainability across all levels of government for improved service
 delivery; (b) establish a last-mile monitoring system to track performance at the GP level across technical,
 social, institutional, and financial parameters; and (c) establish a system of ‘rewards in installments’ to
 ensure that GPs are incentivized to perform not just at the beginning of the Program but also until the
 end and beyond. The World Bank has a unique opportunity to support the state to systematically
 institutionalize, operationalize, and monitor new rural water services performance criteria, which would
 otherwise have proven problematic for the state to achieve at scale.

  C. Relationship to the CPS/CPF and Rationale for Use of Instrument

 14.      The Program is consistent with the World Bank Group Country Partnership Framework (CPF)
 FY18–22 approved by the Board in 2018 (Report 126667-IN). The Program aligns with the World Bank’s
 twin goals of ending extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity and, more specifically, with the
 World Bank’s India Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD).20 It highlights protection of water resources to
 combat water scarcity which is made more urgent by deteriorating water quality. The SCD emphasizes
 water use efficiency which the proposed Program seeks to address through the introduction of volumetric
 metering and source diversification. The Program also aligns with Focus Area 1 of the CPF on Resource
 Efficient Growth by improving resilience to climate change and Focus Area 3 on investing in human capital
 through improvement in access to rural water supply. Relatedly, India’s Nationally Intended Determined

 17 PLFS, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, 2021.
 18 NSSO definition.
 19 PLFS 2019-2020; World Bank analysis.
 20 World Bank Group. 2018. India Systematic Country Diagnostic: Realizing the Promise of Prosperity. Washington, DC: World

 Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/29879.


                                                               5
The World Bank
Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



 Contributions - Towards Climate Change21 identifies the water sector as vulnerable to climate change, and
 its adaptation strategy focuses on the efficient use of water. This aligns the Government’s investments in
 water supply with its wider national goals on climate change.

 15.      The Program is aligned with Global Crisis Response Framework (GCRF) Pillar 2: “Protecting
 People and Preserving Jobs”, specifically on gender equality and preserving jobs, and Pillar 3:
 “Strengthening Resilience” through water storage and tank rejuvenation activities. It also closely aligns
 with Pillar 4: “Strengthening Policies, Institutions and Investments for Rebuilding Better” on a wide range
 of thematic areas, including (a) climate-smart policies and incentives; (b) resilient reconstruction; (c)
 institutional strengthening and capacity building; and (d) digital development.

 16.      With this Program, the World Bank can leverage international and national lessons on RWS and
 facilitate convergence between its five active water-related operations in the state of Karnataka. The
 current operations include the Second Dam Rehabilitation and Improvement Project (P170873), National
 Groundwater Management Improvement (P158119), Rejuvenating Watershed for Agriculture Resilience
 through Innovative Development (P172187), Karnataka Urban Water Supply Modernization Project
 Additional Financing (P176107), and National Hydrology Project (P152698), coupled with analytical work
 such as the India Water Analytical Program (P176229). This Program will facilitate convergence across the
 ongoing projects, focusing on enhancing climate resilience through a comprehensive approach to water
 storage, use, and recharge, integrating GP-led water sector activities, and recharging groundwater.

 17.     The rationale for using the Program-for-Results (PforR) instrument is clear. The Jaladhare
 program provides a unique opportunity for the World Bank to support the ongoing state program and
 help build more robust and impactful institutional and service delivery actions that go beyond the state’s
 current program. The results can be structured to incentivize institutional and policy reforms at all levels
 of government including progressive performance metrics to help the Government evolve the sector. The
 PforR instrument has proven effective in government programs where the results are clear, in this case
 delivery of functional household taps. The state’s existing implementing capacity for procurement and
 financial management (FM) is strong and it is familiar with social and environmental risk management.

  II. PROGRAM DESCRIPTION

  A. Government Program

 18.      Karnataka’s Jaladhare program (the program) was announced in 2018 to provide 55 lpcd of safe
 and sustainable pure drinking water to all rural households. Through this and other past efforts,
 Karnataka has provided state funding and occasionally used counterpart funding for centrally sponsored
 schemes (CSSs) such as JJM. These combined efforts have helped the GoK to improve the provision of
 services to rural households. The Jaladhare program was aligned to the JJM, when the latter was launched
 by the GoI in 2019, but the Jaladhare has a more comprehensive scope, especially on sustainability, and
 its mandate goes beyond the JJM’s 2024 closing date. Like the JJM, Jaladhare aims to facilitate speed,
 scale, and a dedicated focus on achieving universal access to the FHTC. The approach is similar to that of
 other successful national programs on electricity to every household, toilet to every family, and cooking
 gas cylinders to poor households to make kitchens smoke free.


 21 https://moef.gov.in/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/revised-PPT-Press-Conference-INDC-v5.pdf.




                                                            6
The World Bank
Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



 19.     GoK has approved an overall funding of US$2,725 million22 for in-village works to provide 100
 percent FHTC coverage23 in rural Karnataka. Up to 2024, the GoK will receive 50 percent co-financing
 from the JJM (CSS) and after 2024 state funding will address any gaps. The proposed World Bank-funded
 Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (KSRWSP, ‘the Program’) seeks to improve coverage
 and sustain O&M of the drinking water infrastructure created under Jaladhare through a combination of
 community ownership, O&M performance criteria, handholding and capacity building, and an advanced
 monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system focused on O&M and financial sustainability. This will be
 financed by (a) the state government’s budget through Jaladhare; (b) GPs’ own sources; and (c) collection
 of water charges from users.

 20.      To a large extent, the Jaladhare program incorporates many of the past lessons from RWS
 initiatives in India. The key activities of the Jaladhare program are as follows:

   (a)     O&M Policy. With the transition to bulk surface water, larger water schemes, and household
           connections, reforming the institutional and policy architecture is essential for the achievement
           of sustainable service delivery. Conscious of the need for reform, the GoK has prepared a
           comprehensive O&M Policy with the clear objective of improving institutional capacity and
           human resources of RDWSD, GPs, and VWSCs to provide sustainable water supply services. The
           O&M Policy clarifies institutional roles and responsibilities of sector stakeholders and provides
           guidance on technical, institutional, and financial sustainability of water schemes in the state. The
           policy sets specific targets on water tariffs and bulk water charges. However, there is insufficient
           capacity to systematically institutionalize the O&M Policy across the 5,963 GPs.

   (b)     Jaladhare engages implementation support agencies (ISAs) which are local organizations
           contracted by the districts to mobilize and train the GPs to plan, design, manage, operate, and
           maintain in-village water supply infrastructure. The ISAs play a crucial role in the last-mile delivery
           of Jaladhare and eventually the Karnataka O&M Policy vision.

   (c)     Community contribution. The Jaladhare program includes a one-time community contribution of
           10 percent (US$25-30 per household) of the total capital investment for the in-village distribution
           network, which is typically around US$250–300 per household, but this does not include the
           capital cost of the bulk water infrastructure of MVSs. In terms of O&M costs, most villages in
           Karnataka still pay a flat rate for water ranging from US$0.3 to US$1.2 per household per month.
           This is generally insufficient to cover the full O&M costs, which include electricity and bulk water
           charges envisaged under the O&M Policy. The state has, through the introduction of FHTCs under
           Jaladhare, included volumetric meters at every household without introducing a volumetric tariff.
           Thus, operationalization of the O&M budget exercise and cost recovery remains unresolved.

   (d)     Water quality. To ensure clean drinking water, the GoK installed 18,000 reverse osmosis (RO)
           water treatment plants, one for every village with water quality problems, under a five-year build
           and operate contract with private contractors. The GoK has shown interest in approaches to
           sustainably dispose of reject water from these RO plants. The operators typically charge INR 2–5
           for 20 liters of water. In addition, the state provides water quality field test kits (FTKs) to GPs and
           is building laboratories to National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories


 22 A similar amount is being provided by the state for MVS schemes which is being funded separately by the state and center.
 23 A total of 6 million connections are envisaged to be provided.




                                                                 7
The World Bank
Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



          (NABL) standards in each district for routine testing. Laboratories for testing microbiological
          parameters are not yet built, and public dissemination of water quality results from labs is not
          practiced.

   (e)    Greywater management. The Jaladhare program moves water access points from the traditional
          community standposts to household taps typically placed outside the house and facing the road.
          The program provides 55 liters per capita per day which equates to 275 liters for the average
          household for drinking, bathing, washing, and so on. This does create post-use challenges for
          villages as about 65 percent of the total water supplied reemerges as greywater. Greywater from
          households discharged into the surroundings poses environmental and public health risks. Village-
          level greywater management plans and implementation through soak pits and waste stabilization
          ponds are a peripheral yet critical part of the Jaladhare program. Greywater management is a
          small component under Jaladhare, and the collection, treatment, and reuse are included in the
          villages action plan. Jaladhare does not formally fund but, rather, facilitates convergence with
          other programs such as the Swachh Bharat Mission (SBM), by sourcing funding from them. A
          statewide system for planning and implementation of greywater management is pending.

 21.      RDWSD has embraced the private sector in its implementation and operation of the Jaladhare
 program. For the SVS, the private sector is tasked with construction of the distribution system along with
 a one-year maintenance contract. By contrast, the MVSs are built through design-build-operate-transfer
 (DBOT) contracts with private contractors, which include five-year O&M post-construction contracts
 meant to be re-tendered every five years. To date, Karnataka has invested approximately US$1.6 billion
 in 548 MVSs.24 The MVS contractors are tasked with sourcing, treating, and distributing bulk surface water
 to village overhead tanks (OHTs). The MVS can range from small schemes comprising three to five villages
 to large bulk water supply where one MVS covers more than 500,000 people. From the OHTs, the GPs and
 their VWSCs are responsible for the distribution and in-village O&M equivalent to SVSs. Household
 connections are used for both SVSs and MVSs. The 548 MVSs in Karnataka are believed to consume energy
 to the tune of US$100 million per year. For MVSs, there are considerations to extend the operation period
 from the current 5 years to 10–15 years, and the proposed Program will seek to include energy efficiency
 performance criteria for re-tendering the operations contracts for the existing MVSs and carry out energy
 audits to save energy.

 22.      Source sustainability and tank rejuvenation. GoK is currently providing funds for tanks
 rejuvenation every year through various schemes. Rejuvenation of minor irrigation tanks with a command
 area of less than 40 ha is an important part of the program to ensure source sustainability.

  B. Theory of Change

 23.     The KSRWSP seeks to strengthen institutional capacity and enhance resilience to climate change
 by solving a multitude of technical, financial, institutional, source, and social sustainability issues in RWS.




 24 https://english.swachhamevajayate.org/water-2/.




                                                       8
The World Bank
Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



                                            Figure 1: Program’s Theory of Change




   Note: PDO = Program Development Objective; PPP = Public-private partnership.
  C. PforR Program Scope
 24.    The proposed Program will support and strengthen the implementation of the GoK’s Jaladhare
 program by focusing on a core set of service delivery improvements. As a subset of the Government
 program, the PforR’s boundaries are defined as follows:
 25.     Duration and Geographical scope. The Program will be implemented over five years (2023–28).
 The Program will cover all 31 districts of Karnataka. With regard to tank rejuvenation for groundwater
 sustainability, the scope is limited to seven water-stressed districts.25
 26.      Service delivery. The Program will cover (a) construction/rehabilitation of in-village distribution
 infrastructure26 (such as piped network and storage reservoirs) and metered FHTCs as well as quality
 assurance of the infrastructure and provision of 2 million FHTC; (b) strengthening of operational and
 energy efficiency in MVSs;27 (c) institutional performance enhancement; (d) increase in implementation
 capacity on greywater management, water quality, and M&E system; and (e) tank rejuvenation and
 sustainability.
 27.     Implementation and readiness. The KSRWSP will be implemented by RDWSD, the nodal agency,
 which is the custodian of the Jaladhare program. The district and block units of RDWSD are mandated to
 implement the Program with post-construction handover of the water assets to the GPs. RDWSD will
 coordinate Program activities, including M&E, and provide necessary technical and financial support to


 25 The proposed districts are Bengaluru Rural, Bengaluru Urban, Bidar, Chikkaballapura, Kalaburgi, Kolara, and Tumakuru.
 26 Includes entire cost of SVS and cost of in-village schemes which can be segregated from an overall MVS contract.
 27 The GoK has sufficient resources to finance MVSs. The Program will focus on sustainability and efficiency of existing MVSs.




                                                                 9
The World Bank
Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



 the relevant service delivery agencies.28 The fiduciary responsibilities will fall under one department,
 RDWSD. The Program will be implemented following the Government’s fiduciary and social and
 environmental safeguards systems. More than 40 percent of the KSRWSP contracts for civil works have
 been awarded.
 28.    The ambition of the World Bank KSRWSP goes beyond the scope of both the JJM and Jaladhare
 program, as shown in table 1. The KSRWSP will help raise the ambition of the Jaladhare program.
                                   Table 1. Program Boundaries and Value Addition
                                         Program Boundaries                   JJM      Jaladhare         KSRWSP
                                                                             India      Program
                            Program closing date                             2024        Open             2028
                            Geographical scope - districts                                 31              31
                            Multi-village schemes                            DBO          DBO        Operation (only)
                            In-village water infrastructure                   🗸            🗸               🗸
  Value addition
  Technical                 FHTC                                               🗸           🗸       🗸
  sustainability            24/7 water service demonstration                                       🗸
  Financial                 Volumetric household meter                              🗸              🗸
  sustainability            Cost recovery, O&M                                     (🗸)             🗸
                            System for cost recovery                                               🗸
                            Energy efficiency interventions                                        🗸
                            Preparation of GP O&M budget                (🗸)        (🗸)             🗸
  Source sustainability     Groundwater recharge investments             🗸          🗸              🗸
                            O&M on tank rejuvenation                                               🗸
                            Greywater management implementation                    (🗸)             🗸
  Social sustainability     Customer-facing water quality app                                      🗸
                            Behavior change communication (BCC)                                    🗸
  Institutional             Operationalization of the M&E system                                   🗸
  sustainability            Field-level leadership (FLL)                                           🗸
                            Performance ranking and reward scheme                                  🗸
 Note: (🗸) Proposed as part of program but not yet implemented by the government. DBO = Design-build-operate.

 29.    Financing support. The overall government program (“p”) is US$2,926.16 million to be
 implemented over five years (FY23-24 to FY28-29). The World Bank PforR Program (“P”) is proposed as
 US$1,144.91 million. The PforR Program (“P”) covers 39 percent of the overall government program (“p”).
 The World Bank (IBRD) will finance US$363 million (or 32 percent) of the PforR program (“P”) as per table
 2 below. Detailed breakdown of cost is provided in table 4.1 in annex 4.
                                              Table 2. Program Financing
                                Source                                  Amount (US$, millions)       Percent of Total
   Counterpart Funding                                                           781.91                    68
   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                  363.00                    32
   Total PforR Program financing (“P”)                                         1,144.91



 28 The Program will be coordinated with the Minor Irrigation and Groundwater Development Department and the Water

 Resources Department including the Advanced Centre for Integrated Water Resources Management (ACIWRM).


                                                           10
The World Bank
Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



 Results Area 1: Increase access to safely managed rural water supply
 30.     Providing access to metered household water connections. Result Area (RA) 1 will support
 metered household connections through new and rehabilitated in-village water infrastructure. The
 KSRWSP seeks to support delivery of two million FHTCs. Quality assurance of infrastructure construction
 will be ensured through private sector third-party quality assurance inspections, as required under
 Jaladhare, which will then be verified by the Program’s independent verification agent (IVA).

 31.      Citizen engagement. In line with the JJM requirements, participatory planning and appraisal
 through social audits will be carried out to strengthen beneficiary engagement and track overall
 performance of JJM, focusing on capacity enhancement of VWSCs and GPs, who are responsible for
 undertaking the audits. RDWSD, in collaboration with the Directorate for Social Audit under Rural
 Development and Panchayati Raj Department (RDPR), will prepare a social audit manual and provide
 training on the social audit proceedings. The KSRWSP will implement information, education, and
 communication (IEC) activities such as interpersonal communication and BCC, among others. RDWSD has
 developed Parihara, a grievance redress mechanism (GRM) software, to redress water-related complaints.
 Parihara features include multiple options to file complaints (internet, phone, or social media), user
 categorization, alert generation, response, real-time monitoring, customer feedback, and escalation flow.
 The KSRWSP will strengthen Parihara by enhancing staff capacity to manage the call center, increase
 public outreach and awareness, strengthen links with field staff and other relevant agencies for improved
 efficiency, and extend Parihara to tank rejuvenation works.

 32.     Greenhouse gas emissions. A greenhouse gas emissions accounting analysis was carried out for
 the Program’s water supply activity. Because of the energy usage by water pumps in the water schemes
 of the Program compared to the baseline scenario, the net emissions for the provision of FHTCs is
 estimated to be an average of 35,531 tCO2e annually and total of 710,621 tCO2e over 20 years.

 Results Area 2: Strengthen institutions, policies, and finance to improved sustainability of water
 services

 33.      The policy and institutional framework for Jaladhare is still to be adopted and operationalized.
 The O&M Policy to sustain service delivery has been prepared but not yet notified. Among others, the key
 objectives of the O&M Policy are to provide guidance on technical, institutional, and financial
 sustainability of RWS schemes and systematically introduce cost recovery at the GP and community levels
 from operations of MVSs and SVSs in the state. Specifically, the policy includes detailed tariff setting
 calculations and progressive rollout of guidelines along with budgeting and reporting guidelines.
 Supporting the institutionalization of the policy will be transformational in managing RWS in the state and
 informing policy reform at the national level by operationalizing steps toward cost recovery in the sector.
 Achievements toward the notification and implementation of sector policies are supported by
 disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs) under RA 2.

 34.      Institutional performance metrics and enhanced monitoring functionalities. The goal for the
 sector is to ensure that the 20-year design life of the investments of Jaladhare investments is realized and,
 ideally, surpassed. Currently, RDWSD’s attention and expertise are focused on construction of
 infrastructure, but it recognizes the need for improving service delivery and sustainability of these assets.
 The Program will help RDWSD develop and institutionalize a set of performance criteria at the GP level to
 this effect—an approach which has been proven effective in similar World Bank PforR operations



                                                      11
The World Bank
Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



 elsewhere.29 The performance criteria will encapsulate core elements from the O&M Policy and move the
 focus to planning, gradual cost recovery, accounting, reporting, and system maintenance, among others,
 which are core elements for ensuring sustainability. These ambitious efforts will apply to all GPs in the
 state. To measure the performance, the Program will significantly expand the functionalities of the sector
 monitoring system to enable RDWSD to remotely monitor GP-specific revenue generation, O&M budgets,
 VWSC activities, and so on. This improved monitoring system will be a pivotal part of the KSRWSP and
 seek to harness Bengaluru’s leading IT expertise and digitally capture undisputed GP data sources such as
 energy bills and bank account information.

 35.      Water quality. RA 2 supports the state in modernizing its Water Quality Monitoring Information
 System and data governance architecture to make reliable water quality data easily accessible to policy
 makers and citizens. To enhance water quality testing capacity in the state, RA 2 supports construction of
 laboratories by RDWSD and their accreditation through NABL to ensure that testing conforms to the
 national standards along with a pilot on mobile laboratories to enable testing in remote areas. The
 KSRWSP will help the Jaladhare program prioritize microbiological testing capacity which will inform the
 rollout of chlorination to treat water in SVSs to address the risk of coliform bacteria.

 36.     Shifting the RWS focus from engineering of water infrastructure to social, institutional, and
 financial engineering of the sector. The proposed reforms and service improvements require behavior
 change especially at the GP and community levels. Each GP will need to carry out an annual O&M budget
 exercise which should be uploaded into the advanced M&E system which is under development. The O&M
 budget will include electricity charges which many GPs are currently not paying in full and a new bulk
 water charge which will be introduced in line with the O&M Policy. Through this exercise, each GP will
 determine the need to adjust the water tariff accordingly. The new monitoring system will remotely track
 the GP’s performance against the O&M budget, its revenue, and costs along with electricity and bulk
 water charges. A sector benchmarking performance scheme will be developed to reward and recognize
 GPs that meet these targets.30

 37.       The Field-Level Leadership (FLL) approach is a multi-agent model of leadership development
 that aims at creating a broad cadre of change champions at all levels of government. The KSRWSP
 supports an innovative approach for effecting positive changes in staff behavior and organizational culture
 of RDWSD. Under RA 2, FLL will be progressively rolled out and cover approximately 1,145 staff of RDWSD.
 Initial implementation, to be completed in the first two years of the KSRWSP, will include (a) training of
 FLL master trainers and (b) rollout of FLL workshops led by the master trainers. The momentum of the
 initial phase will be sustained by conducting impact evaluations, documenting success, recognizing change
 leaders, and supporting their informal support groups. As these peer-to-peer networks expand, and as
 more staff join this dynamic, they explore process improvements, enhance community outreach, and
 strive to deliver better results.

 38.    Roll out of 24/7 service delivery.31 The 24/7 service delivery would entail a continuous supply of
 household piped water of a quality adhering to nationally prescribed standards and available when
 needed. This involves technical assessment at the water scheme level and GP-level social behavior change

 29 Vietnam: Results-Based Rural Water Supply and Sanitation under the National Target Program (P127435) and Results-Based

 Scaling Up Rural Sanitation and Water Supply Program (P152693); Tanzania: Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation
 Program (P163732); and Bangladesh: Local Governance Support Project - 3 (P159683).
 30 For further information, see section III.D: Capacity Building.
 31 24 hours per day, seven days a week is also referred to as continuous water supply.




                                                             12
The World Bank
Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



 activities to sensitize rural communities on changing household water storage habits helping water users
 trust continuous service and conserving water for enhanced climate resilience against drought and water
 scarcity through ISAs’ existing in-village activities. This will also involve capacity building of RDWSD at the
 district and block levels to demonstrate the technical and social transition to 24/7 service.

 39.     Enhancing sustainability. RA 2 will incentivize sustainability by establishing technical, social, and
 financial sustainability criteria which apply to all GPs and measured in Year 3, 4, and 5 of the Program.

 40.       Link informal women workers to technical job roles such as plumbers. The rural water and
 sanitation sector currently lacks certified plumbers, which is an important sustainability parameter. The
 Program will support localized needs assessments and deliver on-the-job skills training for technical jobs
 (i.e. plumbers) to 3,000 women. The technical training on skills will be complemented by delivery of life
 skills training for female workers which includes digital, financial, reproductive, and legal literacy. To
 measure women’s sustained participation in technical and life skills training, completion of the training
 modules will be tied to interactive digital assessments. Finally, the Program will support design and rollout
 of digital learning tools and performance assessments to help track female workers’ uptake of technical
 skills and improvements in productivity and performance.

 Results Area 3: Improve water source sustainability and energy efficiency to enhance climate resilience

 41.      The GoK is yet to develop a comprehensive assessment and strategy that cuts across
 departments and enables the state to carry out statewide long-term planning and decision-making for
 water security. The Program will support the development of a Water Policy Implementation Roadmap
 that will support the state in navigating increasing water demand from irrigation, rural, and urban sectors
 and the growing uncertainties attributable to water shortages and droughts that are exacerbated by
 climate change. This includes modernization of sector monitoring and reporting systems for the RWS
 subsector specifically as well as systems for the entire water sector.

 42.     Energy and operations expenditures. Lifting water from deep wells or distant surface reservoirs
 is energy intensive. Some of RDWSD’s MVSs use more than 5 MW to power pumping operations. The
 energy cost related to water pumping will in many areas be a key determinant of the long-term price of
 water or the required subsidy to the sector. RA 3 will provide increased focus on energy expenditure to
 reduce overall energy intensity and carbon footprint through energy audits and development of energy
 performance criteria for DBOT and build-operate-transfer contracts and explore energy service company
 financing models for investments in energy efficiency. Under the energy audits, data-driven technologies,
 including supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) in MVSs, would be integrated for monitoring
 energy use and performance, thereby optimizing operations. As part of these efforts, a scoping study on
 PPP models for photovoltaic (PV) solar energy (potentially for 5–10 MW) for MVSs will be carried out along
 with training of engineers in PV-powered water pumps.

 43.     Climate resilience to droughts through water storage. RA 3 will invest in tank rejuvenation to
 increase water storage in seven water-stressed districts, which will accelerate groundwater recharge. The
 focus will be on small tanks with an irrigation command area less than 40 ha. This activity brings in two
 new elements: (a) the site selection will be informed by analysis of satellite imagery; and (b) the Program
 will seek to institutionalize O&M for tanks ensuring that the tank desilting infrastructure is maintained
 along with other preventive maintenance activities. This activity is linked directly with the overarching
 goal of promoting source sustainability of the borewells for RWS schemes by contributing to the natural



                                                       13
The World Bank
Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



 recharge of aquifers, making rural area residents more resilient to water shortages and droughts. In
 addition, there are clear synergies between tank rejuvenation and RA 1 and RA 2, especially because the
 responsibility of small tanks falls to GPs and can hence be incorporated into the performance scheme and
 O&M budgeting. Tank rejuvenation will also be linked with the GP’s Water Policy Plans which are
 supported under the World Bank’s National Groundwater Management Improvement Program. The
 World Bank has five lending operations in Karnataka that focus on the water sector. With this operation,
 there is an opportunity to strengthen the convergence across these projects. Further details on adaptation
 and mitigation actions can be found in the Climate Change Technical Note.

 D.        Program Development Objective (PDO) and PDO Level Results Indicators

 44.     The PDO is to increase access to safely managed drinking water and strengthen institutions for
 sustainable rural water service delivery in Karnataka.

 45.       The proposed key result indicators for the Program are as follows:

           •      Functional household tap connections installed (Number)
           •      Gram Panchayats with sustainably functioning water service (Number)32
           •      Sector M&E system enhanced (Yes/No)
           •      Gram Panchayats with water tariff collection rate above 90 percent (Number)
           •      Tanks rejuvenated in water scarce select districts (Number)

 46.     The complete tables of the Results Framework and intermediary results indicators are provided
 in annex 1. It is estimated that 2 million FHTCs will be installed, equivalent to 10 million people who will
 benefit from access to safely managed rural drinking water under the Program. Safely managed rural
 drinking water is an SDG indicator and constitutes the highest level on the Joint Monitoring Program (JMP)
 drinking water service ladder and is defined as “drinking water from an improved source that is accessible
 on premises (at the household), available when needed, and free from fecal and priority chemical
 contamination.” The JMP definition is in line with the Jaladhare program where the aim is to provide every
 rural household with an adequate quantity of water of prescribed quality through an individual household
 tap connection. ‘Sustainable rural water service’ refers not only to financial sustainability but also to water
 source sustainability and hence climate resilience and institutional sustainability.

  E. Disbursement-Linked Indicators and Verification Protocols

 47.      Program resources will be disbursed based on the achievement of eight DLIs. These DLIs have
 been selected to incentivize the achievement of improvements in access, service, quality, and
 performance. The DLIs are not time bound,33 and weighing of resources across different DLIs reflects their
 importance toward achieving the Program results. Resources allocated to the DLIs do not represent the
 total financial outlay required. Table 3 details the DLIs and their allocated funding from IBRD. The detailed
 DLI matrix is provided in annex 2.




 32 As per the definition of ‘basic-level’ under DLI 3.
 33 With the exception of DLI 6.




                                                          14
The World Bank
Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



                                     Table 3. Disbursement-Linked Indicators
                                        DLI                                         GCRF Pillar    DLI value (US$)
  Results Area 1: Increase access to safely managed rural water supply
  DLI 1: Functional Household Tap Connections Installed                             Pillar 3          160,000,000
  Provide access to 2 million FHTCs equipped with volumetric water meters. The
  DLI will finance approximately 25 percent of the actual cost of FHTCs.
  Results Area 2: Strengthen institutions, policies, and finance to improved sustainability of water services
  DLI 2: Strengthening Institutions to Ensure Safe and Reliable Water Services      Pillar 4           40,000,000
  DLI 2.1. Sector M&E system enhanced (US$10 million)
  DLI 2.2. O&M Policy Notified in official gazette (US$10 million)
  DLI 2.3. Water Quality System Modernization (US$10 million)
  DLI 2.4. Centre of Excellence for Water and Sanitation established &
  operational (US$10 million)
  DLI 3: Gram Panchayats with Basic O&M Capacity                                   Pillar 4          40,000,000
  The DLI will systematically increase GP-level O&M capacity and performance.
  Target: 5,000 GPs to achieve basic-level O&M criteria
  DLI 4: Gram Panchayats with Improved Financial Sustainability of Water           Pillar 4          50,000,000
  Services
  Target: 3,500 GPs to increase GP-level financial capacity and performance
  DLI 5: Gram Panchayats with 24/7 Water Service                                   Pillar 4          18,000,000
  Target: 500 GPs to achieve 24/7 service level
  DLI 6: Gram Panchayats with Sustained Water Service                              Pillar 4          21,000,000
  The DLI will incentivize RDWSD to prioritize sustained functionality and O&M.
  Starting from Year 3, 3,500 GPs will meet core functionality and O&M criteria.
  Results Area 3: Improve water source sustainability and energy efficiency to enhance climate resilience
  DLI 7: Operationalize Energy Efficiency and Explore Solar Energy                Pillar 4          18,092,500
  Operationalize energy efficiency and explore solar energy
  DLI 8: Tanks Rejuvenated in Water Scarce Select Districts                       Pillar 3          15,000,000
  Rationale: The GoK requires support to increase water storage capacity.
  Target: Rejuvenate 500 small tanks.
  Sub-total                                                                                        362,092,500
  Front end fee                                                                                       907,500
  Total                                                                                            363,000,000

 48.       DLI 1 incentivizes the construction or rehabilitation of in-village water infrastructure including
 metered household connections (FHTCs) regardless of the source (SVS - groundwater and MVS - surface
 water). Only infrastructure that adheres to technical standards and minimum service-level criteria will be
 eligible for disbursement, as detailed in the Program Operational Manual (POM). These hardwired
 conditions include, among others: (a) adherence to quality assurance inspection procedures for
 construction, water quality, and resilient design standards; (b) presence of an environmental and social
 (E&S) screening and assessment mechanism; and (c) FHTCs designed for 55 lpcd and the inclusion of a
 volumetric water meter at every household. The design process will ensure that supported infrastructure
 is resilient to the risks posed by climate-induced drought.




                                                         15
The World Bank
Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



 49.      DLI 2 incentivizes RDWSD to take critical institutional steps through four strategic sub-DLIs. They
 are DLI 2.1. Advanced monitoring system, which includes enhancement of the sector’s M&E system, by
 adding critical functionalities to capture financial and technical sector data and launch of the sector
 benchmarking performance and reward scheme; DLI 2.2. O&M Policy notified in official gazette; DLI 2.3.
 Water quality system modernization to ensure water quality by securing NABL accreditation for all 31
 districts and NABL recognition for 48 block water quality laboratories, a mobile laboratory for remote
 areas, and a phone application for citizens to view their water quality; and DLI 2.4. Operationalization of
 a Center of Excellence for rural drinking water and sanitation within RDWSD to pave the way for
 professional sector assistance with specialized operational staffing in all districts to support the human
 resource capacity to implement infrastructure, strengthen safeguards and fiduciary execution, and
 implement BCC activities. The Center of Excellence would provide dedicated and comprehensive support
 on contract management of MVS private contractors, lead the digitalization of assets, and arrange
 international exposure visits for innovation through assimilation.

 50.      DLI 3 applies to all GPs in the state and rewards the progressive move of water service delivery
 institutions to fulfill basic O&M. This scalable DLI pays GPs that meet the following basic criteria: (a) the
 VWSC is active and meets regularly, (b) GRM is active, (c) the water scheme is functional, (d) the water
 quality is tested twice per year and the results are publicly disseminated, and (f) the greywater
 management plan is in place. Greywater management includes soak pits and waste stabilization ponds
 under the Program.

 51.     DLI 4 applies to all GPs in the state and rewards the strengthening of the GPs’ financial capacity
 and performance. This scalable DLI pays GPs that meet the following criteria: (a) a designated water bank
 account in place; (b) O&M budget exercise completed (budget includes electricity and bulk water costs),
 (c) the water tariff collection rate above 90 percent, and (d) electricity and bulk water bills paid for the
 current year (excluding arrears and interest on arrears).

 52.     DLI 5 incentivizes the achievement of 24/7 service in 500 GPs that have either an MVS or SVS
 regardless of the technology used. A GP can achieve this DLI if a minimum of one village in the GP has
 access to 24/7 service and further meets the criteria of both DLI 3 and DLI 4.

 53.      DLI 6 incentivizes strengthening of GP-level capacity and improved performance under the
 Program that are sustained over the entire Program period. The DLI applies to Year 3–5 and pays GPs that
 meet the following criteria: (a) water scheme is functional; (b) the GRM is active; (c) the fixed tariff
 collection rate is 90 percent, and (d) the GP has paid electricity and bulk water bills for the current year
 (excluding arrears and interest on arrears).

 54.     DLI 7 incentivizes an energy package to reduce energy intensity and carbon footprint, including
 (a) energy audits in 50 MVSs with the highest energy cost and implementation of core recommendations
 commenced in 10 MVSs (investments in solar energy is also an eligible activity) and (b) a scoping study on
 PPP financing models for solar energy plants (potential scope: 5–10 MW).

 55.      DLI 8 rewards the state for the rejuvenation of 500 small tanks in water scarce districts to foster
 resilience to climate change-exacerbated droughts and floods. The GoK requires support to modernize its
 tank rejuvenation efforts with satellite imagery and quality assurance to recharge the groundwater and
 increase water storage capacity.



                                                      16
The World Bank
Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



 Verification Protocol and Independent Verification Agent

 56.      The verification of the DLIs will include desk-based review of reports, records, and technical
 designs, phone interviews, and site visits with interviews with beneficiaries and on-site checks (on a
 sampling basis) of physical interventions. The more complex DLI 3 is specifically designed to be verified
 using the Program’s M&E system that will produce a dashboard of each GP and automatically pull data
 from the GP’s bank account, electricity expenses, and revenue generation and feature an online O&M
 budget for each GP. An IVA will be procured by RDWSD to carry out the verification exercise, which will
 include physical site verification using statistical sampling methods to reduce the cost associated with the
 verification of the Program. For DLI 1, RDWSD has an existing third-party quality assurance inspection as
 required under JJM; in this case, the IVA will also be used to examine the quality of the GoK’s third-party
 quality assurance system, which is in place to inspect the quality of all new infrastructure under Jaladhare.
 Through the Program, the GPs and districts will be encouraged to strengthen internal data verification
 mechanisms and the use of routine monitoring data to improve data reliability, strengthen process
 tracking, and develop feedback loops that enable districts and GPs to take appropriate action.

  III. PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION

  A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
 57.       The Program will be implemented by RDPR which is headed by the Additional Chief Secretary
 (ACS) and has three commissionerates: Commissioner Panchayati Raj, Commissioner Rural
 Development, and Commissioner RWS who heads RDWSD. The Commissionerate of RDWSD is
 headquartered in the state capital Bengaluru and is supported by its district staff and offices in each
 district. The district-level staff report to both the commissioner, RDWSD and the district Chief Executive
 Officer (CEO) Zilla Parishad.

                                  Figure 2. Implementation Arrangements




                                                      17
The World Bank
Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



 58.     A PMU will be established in RDWSD, the Program’s nodal agency. As illustrated in figure 2,
 RDWSD will use its district staff for implementation along with the government officers at the block and
 GP levels. The PMU will have overall responsibility for compliance, monitoring, and implementation of the
 Program. The PMU will include specialized technical personnel as well as environment, social, FM, and
 procurement experts. The World Bank’s technical, fiduciary, and safeguards assessments have identified
 shortcomings in district-level capacities, and thus the Program will support RDWSD with a District
 Technical Support Staff (DTSS) to be deployed to the 31 districts as part of DLI 2.4. The district-level DTSS
 efforts will support the executive engineers and CEOs of Zilla Panchayats. DTSS include five district staff—
 a technical specialist, a finance and contract management specialist, an M&E specialist, and an
 environment and a social specialist—for supporting activities, oversight, coordination, and staff to lead
 the ISAs and the social change campaigns in each district. The staff may either be brought in on deputation
 or hired from the private market. The staffing requirement will be aligned as per the implementation
 schedule of the FHTC infrastructure under Jaladhare.

 59.     A Program Steering Committee will be established and chaired by the Development
 Commissioner of the GoK. Members of the committee will include the ACS (RDPR), representatives from
 Finance Department (FD), and representatives from the IAs. The committee will be responsible for
 providing oversight, strategic guidance, and policy direction for the Program. The committee will meet
 annually or as required. In addition, a Program Implementation Committee (PIC) which will conduct
 regular review of the Program will be constituted and headed by the ACS (RDPR). The members of this
 committee will be commissioners of RDWSD, chief engineers, nodal officers of the Program, and finance
 controllers of the departments, among others. This PIC will meet quarterly or as required.

  B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation

 60.       Achievements against the PDO will be measured through the Results Framework developed for
 the KSRWSP. The existing rural water sector M&E system will undergo a comprehensive upgrading where
 critical last-mile activities and performance at the GP level will be captured through an enhanced M&E
 system which will generate the data and reports for the DLIs. The enhanced M&E system will pull revenue
 data from GP water bank accounts and billing systems, which will be interlinked with the MVSs’ SCADA
 systems and will capture GP-level O&M budgets, revenue generation, and mandatory VWSC activities.

 61.     Midterm review. The midterm review (MTR) will be an opportunity to assess the status of the
 Program implementation. The MTR will be in addition to the annual verification exercise and is expected
 to be held in 2025.

  C. Disbursement Arrangements

 62.      The GoK will prefund the Program and receive reimbursements from the World Bank on
 completion of DLIs. The state will provide the initial budget to RDWSD. Disbursements will depend on the
 borrower providing evidence, satisfactory to the World Bank, that DLI targets have been achieved as per
 the agreed verification protocol detailed in the POM. Disbursements will be made against DLIs,
 irrespective of the Program expenditure incurred at the time of releasing the DLIs. In the last year of the
 Program, RDWSD, in coordination with the World Bank, will reconcile the audited Program expenditure
 with the DLI amounts disbursed by the World Bank. Any shortfall in the Program expenditure in relation
 to DLI disbursement will be adjusted from the final DLI claim or refunded.




                                                      18
The World Bank
Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



 63.     After Program effectiveness, the GoK can submit claims for prior results, which will be results
 achieved between September 9, 2022, and Program effectiveness. The prior results cannot exceed 25
 percent of the total loan amount. RDWSD will prepare technical reports to document the status of
 achievement of DLIs. The technical reports will be verified by an IVA, appointed as per terms of reference
 agreed with the World Bank. Upon validation of DLIs by the IVA, the PMU will communicate the
 achievement of DLIs to the World Bank along with supporting documents. If RDWSD is unable to achieve
 the DLI target set out in any year, it will be rolled over for future years till the DLI target is achieved.

  D. Capacity Building

 64.      RDWSD has strong engineering capacity and is continuously making efforts to adopt new
 technologies and approaches mostly linked to construction of infrastructure. Thus, the capacity-building
 efforts brought by the Program will focus on areas linked to sustainability of service delivery, social
 change, solar water pumping, energy efficiency, 24/7 service delivery, and systems to improve
 institutional effectiveness. The social and technical requirements to reach 24/7 service delivery will be
 main areas of the Program’s capacity focus along with the social behavior change, including the FLL
 approach, to operationalize the change management at scale.

 65.      The Program will design and implement a benchmarking performance scheme for RWS.
 Benchmarking is a powerful tool for decision-makers at all institutional levels to monitor performance,
 celebrate areas of strength, and flag areas for improvement. The PforR and Jaladhare offer a unique
 opportunity to leverage incentive and the improved M&E system to ensure that indicators are specific,
 measurable, achievable, relevant, and time bound, as per the SMART34 principle. The benchmarking
 criteria and league table will give emphasis to the PforR DLIs. Frequency: In addition to esteemed annual
 awards, the initiative will create frequent feedback loops with monthly or biweekly announcements and
 sub-awards to drive sector performance. Progressive indicators: The initiative will be adaptive and grow
 with the progress of the Program, starting with basic sector requirements, and keep raising the bar. Key
 performance areas will be linked to DLIs and broadly focus on FHTC coverage, preventive maintenance,
 water quality, and geo-tagging of assets. Over time, it will focus on greywater management, water source
 sustainability, water conservation, 24/7 service, and steps toward full cost recovery. Along with the Field
 Level Leadership initiative, high performers will be distinguished by their ability to serve as champions and
 influence other GPs. The initiative will be centered around a sector dashboard to benchmark sector
 performance at district, block, and GP levels and may include separate rewards for ISAs, young engineers,
 watermen, and so on, honoring both individuals and sector organizations.

  IV. ASSESSMENT SUMMARY

  Technical
 66.      Two decades of World Bank investments in RWS in retrospect. The World Bank has provided
 approximately US$2 billion of support to RWS in India since 1991. In Karnataka, two World Bank water
 supply and sanitation (WSS) projects were implemented from 1993 to 2014. The first Karnataka Rural
 Water and Sanitation Project (KRWSSP I, 1993–2000, US$92 million) covered 1,200 villages in 12 selected
 districts across the state. The second project from 2001 to 2014 invested US$301.6 million in 11 drought-
 prone districts in Karnataka. KRWSSP I was one of the first projects in India to implement a community


 34 Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, and Timely.




                                                               19
The World Bank
Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



 demand driven and decentralized approach with cost sharing by the community toward both capital and
 O&M costs. The Second Karnataka Rural Water Supply and Sanitation (Jal Nirmal Project) also sought to
 assist the GoK in increasing rural communities’ access to improved and sustainable drinking water and
 sanitation services. Both projects aimed to institutionalize the decentralization of RWS service delivery.
 GPs and VWSCs were placed in the ‘driver’s seat’ and capacitated to make decisions, procure materials,
 carry out construction, manage funds, and contribute toward capital cost. Several organizations
 supported the GP-level planning, implementation, and operations of the projects.

 67.     Lessons learned. While the two prior World Bank projects were able to establish a culture of
 paying for water, GPs were generally unable to achieve financial sustainability. Other notable lessons
 include the need for strong political and institutional determination to improve the capacity of the
 decentralized rural water service delivery and the need for legislative support to ensure consistent and
 uniform implementation of rural WSS projects across the state. This Program will build on the momentum
 generated by Jaladhare, by operationalizing its O&M Policy to core technical, social, institutional, and
 financial performance criteria at the state, district, and GP levels.

 68.      Strategic relevance. Increasing access to piped water supply at the household level and improving
 water security is a development priority for India. The proposed Program is strategically relevant to the
 GoI and GoK, which are increasingly shifting their focus from infrastructure to service delivery and
 sustainability. Historically, the GoK’s efforts in the sector have focused on financing investments for asset
 creation. While nearly all rural habitations in the state have been provided with water supply
 infrastructure, service levels in these habitations are not uniform, and water quality remains a problem
 for many. The underlying reasons for the sustainability issues in the sector are the low capacity and lack
 of ownership among local institutions for service delivery. The Program is designed to improve the
 performance of the GoK’s sector institutions in these areas.

 69.       Technical soundness. The Program is technically sound, relying on strong government ownership
 and building on experiences in the rural water sector in the state and in India. The Program will support a
 system of incentives and monitoring to improve last mile delivery, focusing on five sustainability
 parameters: source, financial, technical, institutional, and social sustainability. Program activities will help
 fill gaps in planning, implementation, service delivery, and monitoring through institutional strengthening.

 70.       Institutional arrangements and governance structures for the Program are assessed as
 adequate. The sector has decentralized institutional arrangement and stakeholders at the different levels
 have clearly defined roles and responsibilities. However, the local institutions may not have the necessary
 skills, capacities, and proper systems to ensure the sustainability of service delivery. Building the capacity
 of rural sector institutions, local governments, support organizations, local private sector, and
 communities is critical. A community-driven approach to planning and operation of RWS services is
 important for the sustainability in the sector.

 71.      Expenditure framework. An assessment of the expenditure framework of the proposed Program
 was carried out to understand whether the GoK is able to clearly budget, track, and report against the
 program expenditures on an annual and multiyear basis. The assessment reviewed the fiscal position of
 the state, the expenditure patterns of the RWS program, the financial sustainability and funding
 predictability, and the execution capacity of the government. The assessment found that the fiscal status
 of the state is satisfactory. Karnataka has a well-developed system of accounting based on budget coding
 system, which allows the detailed tracking of RWS sector expenditure patterns.


                                                       20
The World Bank
Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



 72.     The RWS expenditure is carried out through RDWSD which is the implementing department for
 the RWS programs in the state. Overall, the total expenditure in the rural WSS sector has been increasing
 since 2005/06. The GoI’s share in the total spending in the sector shows an oscillating pattern, indicating
 the major role played by CSS programs in determining the actual expenditure levels in the sector. Further
 in 2021/22, the total expenditure has nearly doubled from the previous year, primarily due to the JJM.

 73.      The capacity of the RWS sector to absorb the allocated funds is shown by the budget execution
 rate, which has been above 80 percent in nearly all previous years. However, in 2021/22, allocated funds
 from the center increased about five times due to the JJM and the execution rate fell from 81 percent to
 70 percent. However, in the latter months of 2022, RDWSD has been able to substantially step up its
 implementation capacity in terms of scheme construction. Given the stable fiscal position of the state and
 the strong commitment from the central and state Governments to the JJM, the financial sustainability of
 the Program is not of concern. Further, the Program expenditure is flexible, as seen from the fact that the
 share of RWS expenditure in the total expenditure made by RDPR has increased from 2 percent to 90
 percent in the last 15 years while the expenditure on direction and administration has remained at less
 than 5 percent. The budgetary allocations are sufficient to achieve intended results, and there are
 sufficient buffers if the Program undergoes any financial fluctuation. The efficiency of the Program
 expenditure is assessed based on the verification of the action plan which provides the intended activities
 and the timeline and comparison of the costs with similar programs in other states.

 74.       Results framework. The Program assessed RDWSD’ s results framework and found that only the
 provision of household taps is captured in the national JJM dashboard. Critical non-infrastructure
 indicators are not monitored or reported, including the functionality of schemes or the quality of service
 over time. The proposed Program supports the development of an advanced M&E system linking to the
 proposed O&M Policy. The system will include the ability to capture scheme functionality, household
 meter readings to ensure service delivery, non-revenue water, and GPs’ revenue collection from water
 billing. A key feature of the proposed advanced M&E system is the focus on capturing autogenerated data
 such as the electricity bill, bulk water bill and data from the GP’s bank account. Through the Program, the
 GPs and districts will be encouraged to strengthen internal data verification mechanisms and the use of
 routine monitoring data to improve data reliability, strengthen process tracking and develop feedback
 loops that enable districts and GP to take appropriate action.

 75.     Economic rationale. The Program is well justified based on direct benefits to nearly 10 million
 people who will have access to safe water supply. The ex-ante economic analysis (EA) reveals positive net
 benefits at a discounted rate of 10 percent, with an economic rate of return of 21.4 percent. The base
 case was stress tested for CAPEX costs overrun, increase in O&M costs, reduced expected benefits, and
 delayed implementation (table 4). The results show that the Program will produce net economic benefits
 even under potential high-risk scenarios. A more detailed EA is presented in annex 3.
                                   Table 4. EA Results and Sensitivity Analysis
                            Scenario                 Change       NPV (US$, millions)   IRR (%)
              Base case                                                    224            21.4
              Increase in capital costs                20%                 176            17.1
              Increase in O&M costs                    20%                 145            17.4
              Decrease in benefits                     20%                  52            14.1
              Implementation start delay             2 years               132            21.1
              Note: IRR = Internal rate of return; NPV = Net present value.



                                                       21
The World Bank
Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



  Fiduciary

 76.    An Integrated Fiduciary Systems Assessment (IFSA)35 for RDWSD was carried out in accordance
 with World Bank Policy and Directive for PforR financing. The IFSA concludes that RDWSD’s fiduciary
 system together with proposed mitigation measures provide reasonable assurance that the financing
 proceeds would be used for the intended purposes. Based on the IFSA and given the field level divisions
 engagement for operation and execution, the combined fiduciary risk is rated as ‘Moderate’. The
 summary of the IFSA is outlined in annex 4 and the detailed IFSA report is attached as a stand-alone
 document.

 77.      The GoK has a well-defined public financial management (PFM) framework including
 procurement which RDWSD follows. The PFM framework is embodied in various legislation and financial
 rules and guidelines issued by the state. The state departments have clearly defined delegation of
 authority, financial rules, and regulations which are followed. The existing governance and accountability
 arrangements include audits by the Comptroller and Auditor General (C&AG) of India which are done on
 time, review of audit reports by Public Accounts Committee, Right to Information (RTI) Act 2005, Central
 Vigilance Commission (CVC) Act 2003, and the Karnataka Lokayukta Act 1984. The Prevention of
 Corruption Act 1988 is the governing law which defines the legal framework to prevent corruption in the
 country. The central/state vigilance units have jurisdiction and power to undertake an enquiry and there
 are Civil Services (conduct) Rules. The Karnataka Lokayukta Act 1984 is strong and has been functioning
 over the years. Also, the Karnataka Sakala Services Act 2011 guarantees services to the citizens within a
 prescribed time frame and imposes penalties on officers if services are not provided timely. Complaints
 can be made online for non-receipt of services. Additionally, the Chief Minister’s Office has a special online
 grievance redressal system that is open to the public.

 78.      A Government Order (GO) has been issued by the GoK to operationalize the Program. The GO
 covers the entire program, implementation arrangements, budgets, and fund flow arrangements covering
 all the key aspects of the Program, including results and DLIs to be achieved.

 79.      RDWSD will use the existing FM framework for the Program. The GoK has an established budget
 preparation process which will be followed. RDWSD will prepare an annual work plan and budget
 requirements which would be incorporated in the state budget. The state would provide budget for the
 Program in its annual budget based on an annual work plan. The state will prefund the program and
 receive reimbursements from the World Bank on completion of DLIs. For implementation, RDWSD’s
 existing budget head will be used.

 80.     Single Nodal Agency (SNA) bank account used for the JJM program will be used for the Bank
 Program. All payments are made through the SNA bank account and are processed through the
 computerized accounting system. RDWSD will use the same SNA account for Program funds, payments,
 and accounting. In case of bank payments, controls are followed as per the guidelines. Regular bank
 reconciliations will be carried out at the state office.




 35 Annex 4 provides a summary of findings and should be read along with the stand-alone IFSA report which presents a detailed

 analysis of existing FM and procurement systems and contract performance toward ensuring proper utilization of Program
 funds. The detailed IFSA will be publicly disclosed along with the Program Appraisal Document (PAD).


                                                              22
The World Bank
Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



 81.     The Program audit report needs to be submitted within nine months from end of the financial
 year. The existing external auditor will be requested to provide the consolidated audit report for RDWSD.
 The Program audit report will be displayed on the PMU’s websites as per the World Bank disclosure policy.
 Interim financial reports are not required for the Program. RDWSD will submit the status of overall
 Program expenditure along with Program reports submitted to the World Bank every six months for
 information. The internal controls for RDWSD largely follow the state framework and clear delegation of
 powers exists, which defines all activities. Entity-level internal audits are not practiced in government
 agencies and departments. Preaudit of payments is carried out for all bills in all these agencies.

 82.    Being a PforR instrument, the procurement activities under the Program will be governed by
 the Karnataka Transparency in Public Procurements (KTPP) Act 1999, complemented by the KTPP Rules
 2000 (both updated on February 14, 2022) issued by the GoK. The RDWSD PMU shall have the
 responsibility for all procurement of goods, works, and services for the Program.

 83.     The Program envisages contracts of various values in goods, civil works, consultancy, and non-
 consultancy. However, it was confirmed that though there may be large-value contracts for bulk water
 supply works and the contracts under the Program may require many small contracts, no contract is
 expected to cross US$10 million for civil works and US$2 million for goods and consulting and non-
 consulting services. Most procurements in the districts are expected to be low value; therefore, the
 challenge will not be for complexity of procurement but for monitoring the large number of small-value
 contracts. Goods are procured mainly through the Government e-Marketplace (GeM) portal. For items
 which cannot be procured on GeM, the online e-procurement system will be used. Civil works and
 consultancy services are procured using the e-procurement platform of the GoK. Broadly, a two-stage
 tendering system is followed for contracts valued above INR 5 million.

 84.     This Program will be subject to ‘Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and Corruption
 in Program-for-Results Financing’, dated February 1, 2012, and revised on July 10, 2015.These guidelines
 shall be applied in an unrestricted manner to all activities within the ‘Program boundary’. To
 operationalize implementation of the various areas covered in the Anti-Corruption Guidelines (ACG), the
 PMU shall (a) maintain and compile a biannual report of complaints related to the Program, (b) ensure
 that the World Bank’s list of ineligible firms is incorporated in the filter used by the PMU when they
 conduct due diligence, and (c) ensure that each participating bidder shall submit a self-declaration that
 the firm is not subject to ineligibility or has not been sanctioned under the World Bank system
 of debarment and cross-debarment. The recommendations are included in the Program Action Plan
 (PAP).

 Environmental and Social

 85.     Under the Program, construction of infrastructure would be limited to (a) in-village works such as
 replacing/laying distribution pipelines, installing house connections/meters/automatic chlorination
 systems, constructing additional OHTs or borewells wherever required, and so on; (b) small renovation
 works on existing MVS infrastructure—no new MVS will be financed by this Program; (c) greywater
 disposal works, including in-village drainage network and final disposal infrastructure; (d) tank
 rejuvenation works—selected existing tanks of surface area lesser than 40 ha; and (e) construction of a
 new building for housing the Center of Excellence. Most contracts issued under the World Bank-supported
 PforR operation will be engineering, procurement, and construction ones.




                                                    23
The World Bank
Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



 86.      In line with the World Bank PforR Guidance, an Environmental and Social Systems Assessment
 (ESSA) was carried out. The ESSA comprised desk review of relevant systems documents and meetings
 with RDWSD officials at the state, district, and divisional levels, along with ‘key informant interviews’ with
 VWSC members and beneficiaries. Furthermore, the ESSA identified the risks and opportunities and
 confirmed compatibility of the Program with the core principles on (a) environmental and social
 management systems, (b) natural habitats and cultural properties, (c) public and worker safety, (d) land
 acquisition and livelihoods, and (e) the needs and concerns of vulnerable groups.

 87.      The Program is likely to have positive social impacts due to an increase in the number of
 households having access to safely managed rural drinking water services. It is also likely to result in
 improved health and time savings for communities, particularly women and children at large. Key
 environmental risks include impacts on ecologically or culturally sensitive/protected areas, groundwater
 stress and contamination-related issues, construction-related impacts, safety aspects in design and
 construction, waste management/disposal, and worker safety. Since most in-village water supply
 infrastructure activities are expected to take place in habitations having some previously created water
 supply infrastructure, location-related issues such as impacts on ecologically or culturally sensitive areas
 are likely to be minimal, including for construction of the Center for Excellence building that is to be sited
 on government land without encumbrance. Impacts due to limited groundwater availability and poor
 groundwater quality will also be largely offset by RDWSD’s focus on supplying bulk water to most villages
 in the state through the MVSs using surface water. Social risks related to the Program include (a) minor
 land-related impacts in cases where land is required for in-village infrastructure; (b) possible eviction of
 informal occupants near existing tanks for bund/waste weir and outlet repairs; (c) likelihood of users and
 community members facing temporary impacts during laying of pipelines, and repair of OHTs; (d) labor
 welfare, health, and safety risks in case of noncompliance of regulations by contractors; (e) possible
 inequity in service to low-income and marginalized communities may arise due to poor last-mile
 connectivity; and (f) inadequate resource allocation and geographical distribution of community outreach
 may result in limited awareness and participation of VWSCs and communities in the planning and
 monitoring process. The ESSA provides a negative list to exclude any activity from the Program that may
 have significant adverse E&S impacts and are sensitive, diverse, or unprecedented. Thus, the ESSA rated
 the E&S risks ‘Moderate’.

 88.      Overall, the ESSA found that the E&S policies and legal framework applicable to this sector are
 largely compatible with the E&S core principles of PforR. The Program is aligned to the JJM, which
 emphasizes aspects such as source sustainability, water treatment, use of advanced technology,
 community participation, transparency and inclusion through IEC, social audit, and other support
 activities. However, the ESSA recommends addressing institutional capacity issues and gaps within
 RDWSD across a range of E&S management system limitations. These include (a) hiring E&S staff in
 RDWSD at the state level as well as environment specialists at the district level who would address
 Program E&S requirements; (b) augmenting capacity through trainings; (c) conducting E&S screening to
 exclude activities that involve adverse impacts including avoidance of encumbered public lands; and (d)
 streamlining the monitoring and reporting process on E&S issues such as land procurement, occupational
 health and safety during civil works, citizen engagement, social inclusion, and grievance management.
 These recommendations will be summarized as actions to be incorporated in the PAP.

 89.     Gender. As Karnataka’s economy transitions away from agriculture, women’s access to non-farm
 jobs is a critical factor affecting the state’s growth trajectory. In rural Karnataka, women are mainly
 employed in informal jobs. The Program will prioritize women’s access to technical job roles in non-


                                                      24
    The World Bank
    Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



     traditional sectors as the priority gender gap. The Program will support training on plumbing
     complemented by training on digital, financial, reproductive, and legal literacy. The results indicator on
     gender will track informal women workers who transitioned to technical jobs such as plumbers.

     90.     Grievance redress. Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by
     a project supported by the World Bank may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance
     mechanisms or the Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are
     promptly reviewed in order to address project-related concerns. Project affected communities and
     individuals may submit their complaint to the Bank’s independent Accountability Mechanism (AM). The
     AM houses the Inspection Panel, which determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, as a result of
     Bank non-compliance with its policies and procedures, and the Dispute Resolution Service, which provides
     communities and borrowers with the opportunity to address complaints through dispute resolution.
     Complaints may be submitted to the AM at any time after concerns have been brought directly to the
     attention of Bank Management and after Management has been given an opportunity to respond. For
     information on how to submit complaints to the Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS), please visit
     http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For information on how to submit complaints to the Bank’s
     Accountability Mechanism, please visit http://accountability.worldbank.org.

      V. RISK

     91.     This PforR faces moderate risks. The risks associated with sector strategies and policies, technical
     design of the Program, fiduciary, macroeconomic, stakeholder management, political situation and
     governance, and E&S impacts are all rated ‘Moderate’. Since 2019, RDWSD has demonstrated a high
     capacity to implement rural water supply infrastructure at scale. The institutional capacity for
     implementation and sustainability is adequate and rated ‘Moderate’, as opposed to ‘Low’, because the
     PforR instrument is new to RDWSD.

     92.      The execution of the proposed policy reform involves a significant shift and will require careful
     management. First, COVID-19’s impact and the upcoming state elections pose broader fiscal and political
     economy-related risks, which may need to be carefully managed and mitigated. Second, even though the
     state leadership is committed to policy reforms, efforts on metering and higher tariffs for cost recovery
     may face resistance from within the government system and users during Program implementation.
     However, increased awareness programs linking high costs and improved service delivery and
     sensitization of communities through the O&M budgeting exercise and celebration of high performers will
     be undertaken. Third, the key service delivery agencies traditionally rely on input-based budget
     allocations. The transition toward close monitoring of overall service delivery performance and the
     emphasis on improved financial performance may require significant effort and time. Finally,
     implementation of reforms will require proactive and effective management of stakeholders such as
     service delivery agencies, nongovernmental organizations, and political leadership.
.




                                                         25
                             The World Bank
                             Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)




                                                                              ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK MATRIX



                                                                                        Results Framework
                                                                                          COUNTRY: India
                                                                         Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program

    Program Development Objective(s)
    To increase access to safely managed drinking water and strengthen institutions for sustainable rural water service delivery in Karnataka.

    Program Development Objective Indicators by Objectives/Outcomes
    RESULT_FRAME_TBL_ PD O




    Indicator Name                                                          DLI     Baseline                                End Target


    RA 1 - Increase access to safely managed rural water supply

    Functional Household Tap Connections Installed (Number)                DLI 1   5,584,665.00                             7,584,665.00

    RA 2: Strengthen institutions, policies, and finance to improved sustainability of water services

    Gram Panchayats with sustainably functioning water service
                                                                           DLI 3   0.00                                     5,000.00
    (Number)

    Gram Panchayats with water tariff collection rate above 90
                                                                                   0.00                                     3,500.00
    percent (Number)

    Sector M&E system enhanced (Yes/No)                                    DLI 2.1 No                                       Yes

    RA3: Improve water source sustainability and energy efficiency to enhance climate resilience

    Tanks rejuvenated in water scarce select districts (Number)            DLI 8   0.00                                     500.00

.



                                                                                                  26
                           The World Bank
                           Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



.
    Intermediate Results Indicator by Results Areas
    RESULT_FRAME_TBL_ IO




    Indicator Name                                                        DLI    Baseline             End Target


RA 1 - Increase access to safely managed rural water supply
People living in rural areas provided with access to safely
                                                                                27,923,325.00        37,923,325.00
managed drinking water (Number)
Gram Panchayats adhering to enhanced water quality testing,
                                                                                0.00                 5,000.00
monitoring and public dissemination criteria (Number)
Complaints received, categorized, and resolved (Percentage)                     0.00                 80.00
RA2: Strengthen institutions, policies, and finance to improved sustainability of water services
Development and implementation of behavior change
                                                                                No                   Yes
communication campaign (Yes/No)
Field Level Leadership Master Trainers (Number)                                 0.00                 100.00
Gram Panchayats with 24/7 service delivery (Number)                             0.00                 500.00
O&M Policy notified in official gazette (Yes/No)                         DLI 2.2 No                  Yes
Female plumbers educated (Number)                                               0.00                 3,000.00
Supply and installation of incinerators for village menstrual
                                                                                0.00                 2,000.00
hygiene management (Number)
Share of women trained as plumbers who are certified and
                                                                                0.00                 20.00
employed as technicians (Percentage)
Centre of Excellence for Water and Sanitation Established and
                                                                                No                   Yes
Operational (Yes/No)
RA3: Improve water source sustainability and energy efficiency to enhance climate resilience
Operationalize energy efficiency at MVSs (Yes/No)                               No                   Yes
Tanks meeting O&M sustainability criteria (Number)                              0.00                 500.00
Water Policy Implementation Roadmap Developed (Yes/No)                          No                   Yes



                                                                                                27
                           The World Bank
                           Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)


    RESULT_FRAME_TBL_ IO




    Indicator Name                                                        DLI    Baseline         End Target


Staff trained on solar water pumping (Number)                                   0.00             150.00

.




                                                                                            28
      The World Bank
      Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)


.
                                                        Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: PDO Indicators
                                                                                                       Methodology for Data        Responsibility for Data
    Indicator Name                         Definition/Description        Frequency      Datasource
                                                                                                       Collection                  Collection
                                           This indicator measured
                                           FHTC installed and
                                           registered. The indicator
                                           assumes an average of five
                                           (5) people connected per
                                           FHTC as per the average    Semi
Functional Household Tap Connections       household size in          annual            JJM official
                                                                                                       JJM methodology             RDWSD
Installed                                  Karnataka. Target: 10      verification      website
                                           million people.

                                           Safely managed drinking
                                           water - defined as per the
                                           JMP and as detailed in the
                                           POM.
                                           Sustainably functioning
                                           water service is a
Gram Panchayats with sustainably                                         Annual         M&E system
                                           functional water scheme as                                  As defined in the POM       RDWSD
functioning water service                                                verification   of the RDWSD
                                           per DLI 3 and further
                                           defined in the POM.
                                           The GPs annual collection
                                           rate must be a minimum of                                   The collection rate is the
                                           90% of the GP's set tariff.                                 number of FHTCs from
Gram Panchayats with water tariff          The tariff vary across GPs                   Sector M&E     which the agreed tariff is
                                                                         Annual                                                   RDWSD
collection rate above 90 percent           but will be captured in the                  system         collected divided by the
                                           sector's modernized M&E                                     total number of FHTCs in
                                           system. The target, 3,5000                                  the GP.
                                           GPs.
                                           The monitoring system will                   RDWSD sector   Data collection will take
Sector M&E system enhanced                                               Annual                                                    RDWSD
                                           include the ability to                       monitoring     place through GP


                                                                             29
    The World Bank
    Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



                                           capture, water scheme                    system   uploading information
                                           functionality, GPs’ revenue                       and interlink with other
                                           collection and                                    Government databases
                                           expenditures, monitor                             and bank accounts. .
                                           VWSCs activities, view
                                           O&M budget. The system
                                           functionality will be further
                                           defined in the POM.
                                           Small tank rejuvenation in
                                           selected districts namely,
                                           Bengaluru Rural, Bengaluru
                                           Urban, Bidar,
Tanks rejuvenated in water scarce select   Chikkaballapura, Kalaburgi,
                                                                         Annually   RDWSD    RDWSD                      RDWSD
districts                                  Kolara, and Tumakuru. The
                                           command area is not to
                                           exceed 40 ha. The
                                           rejuvenation process is
.                                          detailed in the POM.




                                                                            30
      The World Bank
      Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)


.
                                                 Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: Intermediate Results Indicators
                                                                                                      Methodology for Data   Responsibility for Data
    Indicator Name                           Definition/Description     Frequency    Datasource
                                                                                                      Collection             Collection
                                             People gained access to a
                                             FHTC. The indicator
                                             assumes an average of five
                                             (5) people connected per
                                             FHTC as per the average
People living in rural areas provided with   household size in                       JJM official
                                                                        Annual                        JJM methodology        RDWSD
access to safely managed drinking water      Karnataka. Target: 10                   website
                                             million people.
                                             Safely managed drinking
                                             water - defined as per the
                                             JMP and as detailed in the
                                             POM.
                                             GPs adhering to enhanced
Gram Panchayats adhering to enhanced         water quality testing,
water quality testing, monitoring and        monitoring and public      Annual       M&E system       District labs          RDWSD
public dissemination criteria                dissemination criteria;
                                             defined in the POM
                                             Complaints received,
                                             categorized, and resolved
                                             within the established
                                             timeframes with feedback
                                             to complainant.
Complaints received, categorized, and                                                Parihara
                                             The GRM will measure:      Annual                        Parihara call center   RDWSD
resolved                                                                             (GRM)
                                             number of complaints
                                             received and closed, type
                                             of complaints, response
                                             time, number of cases
                                             escalated.




                                                                           31
   The World Bank
   Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



                                            Development and
Development and implementation of
                                            implementation of BCC         Not
behavior change communication                                                      RDWSD          Not applicable   RDWSD
                                            campaign. Further defined applicable
campaign
                                            in the POM.
                                            Number of staff that have
Field Level Leadership Master Trainers      completed the FLL Master Annual        RDWSD          Desk review      RDWSD
                                            Trainer course
                                            Number of GPs with 24/7
Gram Panchayats with 24/7 service
                                            drinking water service;       Annual   M&E system     M&E system       RDWSD
delivery
                                            defined in the POM
                                            O&M Policy Notified in
O&M Policy notified in official gazette                                   Once     RDWSD          Not applicable   RDWSD
                                            official gazette
                                            Education completed for of
Female plumbers educated                                                  Annual   RDWSD          RDWSD database   RDWSD
                                            3,000 female plumbers
                                            Installation of incinerators
Supply and installation of incinerators for
                                            in village in schools,        Annual   RDWSD          RDWSD database   RDWSD
village menstrual hygiene management
                                            hospitals, women’s hostels
                                            The indicator will measure
                                            percentage of informal
                                            women workers that
Share of women trained as plumbers who                                             M&E system
                                            receive training in on-       Annual                  Phone survey.    RDWSD.
are certified and employed as technicians                                          of the RDWSD
                                            traditional job roles such as
                                            plumbing, that transitioned
                                            to technical job roles.
                                            Centre of Excellence for
                                            rural water and sanitation
Centre of Excellence for Water and                                                 Not
                                            established and               Once.                   Not applicable   RDWSD
Sanitation Established and Operational                                             applicable
                                            operational as per the
                                            definition of DLI 2.4.
                                            Energy audits implemented
Operationalize energy efficiency at MVSs                                  Once     RDWSD          Desk review      RDWSD
                                            at 50 MVSs
                                            O&M sustainability criteria
Tanks meeting O&M sustainability criteria                                 Annual   M&E system     GP reporting     RDWSD
                                            as per the POM definition


                                                                          32
    The World Bank
    Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



                                         Water Policy
Water Policy Implementation Roadmap      Implementation Roadmap
                                                                     Once     ACIWRM   Not applicable             Not applicable
Developed                                for Karnataka developed
                                         and disseminated
                                         Staff under RDWSD
                                         completed an online solar
Staff trained on solar water pumping                                 Annual   RDWSD    Online training platform   RDWSD
                                         water pumping training
.                                        program.




                                                                        33
                  The World Bank
                  Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



.
                                ANNEX 2. DISBURSEMENT LINKED INDICATORS, DISBURSEMENT ARRANGEMENTS AND VERIFICATION PROTOCOLS
.
                                                                        Disbursement Linked Indicators Matrix
DLI_TBL_MATRI X




    DLI 1                                   Functional Household Tap Connections Installed

    Type of DLI                             Scalability                   Unit of Measure       Total Allocated Amount (USD)       As % of Total Financing Amount

    Output                                  Yes                           Number                                    160,000,000.00 44.00
    Period                                  Value                                                      Allocated Amount (USD) Formula
Baseline                                    5,584,665.00

Prior Results                               1,125,000.00                                                            90,000,000.00 US$80 per FHTC installed

Year 1                                      218,750.00                                                              17,500,000.00 US$80 per FHTC installed

Year 2                                      218,750.00                                                              17,500,000.00 US$80 per FHTC installed

Year 3                                      218,750.00                                                              17,500,000.00 US$80 per FHTC installed

Year 4                                      218,750.00                                                              17,500,000.00 US$80 per FHTC installed

Year 5                                      0.00                                                                             0.00 US$80 per FHTC installed
DLI_TBL_MATRI X




    DLI 2                                   Strengthening institutions to ensure safe and reliable water services

    Type of DLI                             Scalability                   Unit of Measure       Total Allocated Amount (USD)       As % of Total Financing Amount

    Process                                 No                            Yes/No                                     40,000,000.00 11.00
    Period                                  Value                                                      Allocated Amount (USD) Formula



                                                                                         34
                  The World Bank
                  Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



Baseline                                    No

Prior Results                               No                                                                      0.00 -

Year 1                                      Yes                                                            10,000,000.00 DLI 2.1: US$10M

Year 2                                      Yes                                                            10,000,000.00 DLI 2.2: US$10M

Year 3                                      Yes                                                            10,000,000.00 DLI 2.3: US$10M

Year 4                                      Yes                                                            10,000,000.00 DLI 2.4: US$10M

Year 5                                      Yes                                                                     0.00 -
DLI_TBL_MATRI X




 DLI 2.1                                    Sector M&E system enhanced

 Type of DLI                                Scalability                  Unit of Measure   Total Allocated Amount (USD)   As % of Total Financing Amount

 Output                                     No                           Yes/No                            10,000,000.00 2.75
 Period                                     Value                                                Allocated Amount (USD) Formula
Baseline                                    No

Prior Results                               No                                                                      0.00 -

Year 1                                      No                                                                      0.00 -

Year 2                                      Yes                                                            10,000,000.00 US$10M upon achievement

Year 3                                      Yes                                                                     0.00 -

Year 4                                      Yes                                                                     0.00 -

Year 5                                      Yes                                                                     0.00 -



                                                                                     35
                  The World Bank
                  Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)


DLI_TBL_MATRI X




 DLI 2.2                                    O&M Policy Notified in official gazette

 Type of DLI                                Scalability                   Unit of Measure   Total Allocated Amount (USD)   As % of Total Financing Amount

 Output                                     No                            Yes/No                            10,000,000.00 2.75
 Period                                     Value                                                 Allocated Amount (USD) Formula
Baseline                                    No

Prior Results                               No                                                                       0.00 -

Year 1                                      Yes                                                             10,000,000.00 US$10M upon achievement

Year 2                                      Yes                                                                      0.00 -

Year 3                                      Yes                                                                      0.00 -

Year 4                                      Yes                                                                      0.00 -

Year 5                                      Yes                                                                      0.00 -
DLI_TBL_MATRI X




 DLI 2.3                                    Water Quality System Modernization

 Type of DLI                                Scalability                   Unit of Measure   Total Allocated Amount (USD)   As % of Total Financing Amount

 Output                                     No                            Yes/No                            10,000,000.00 2.75
 Period                                     Value                                                 Allocated Amount (USD) Formula
Baseline                                    No

Prior Results                               No                                                                       0.00 -

Year 1                                      No                                                                       0.00 -




                                                                                      36
                  The World Bank
                  Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



Year 2                                      No                                                                          0.00 -

Year 3                                      Yes                                                                 10,000,000.00 US$10M upon achievement

Year 4                                      Yes                                                                         0.00 -

Year 5                                      Yes                                                                         0.00 -
DLI_TBL_MATRI X




 DLI 2.4                                    Centre of Excellence for Water and Sanitation established & operational

 Type of DLI                                Scalability                  Unit of Measure      Total Allocated Amount (USD)    As % of Total Financing Amount

 Output                                     No                           Yes/No                                 10,000,000.00 2.75
 Period                                     Value                                                     Allocated Amount (USD) Formula
Baseline                                    No

Prior Results                               No                                                                          0.00 -

Year 1                                      No                                                                          0.00 -

Year 2                                      Yes                                                                 10,000,000.00 US$10M upon achievement

Year 3                                      Yes                                                                         0.00 -

Year 4                                      Yes                                                                         0.00 -

Year 5                                      Yes                                                                         0.00 -




                                                                                       37
                  The World Bank
                  Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)


DLI_TBL_MATRI X




 DLI 3                                      Gram Panchayats with Basic O&M Capacity

 Type of DLI                                Scalability                  Unit of Measure      Total Allocated Amount (USD)    As % of Total Financing Amount

 Output                                     Yes                          Number                                40,000,000.00 11.00
 Period                                     Value                                                    Allocated Amount (USD) Formula
Baseline                                    0.00

Prior Results                               0.00                                                                       0.00

Year 1                                      1,000.00                                                            8,000,000.00 US$ 8,000 per GP

Year 2                                      2,000.00                                                           16,000,000.00 US$ 8,000 per GP

Year 3                                      1,000.00                                                            8,000,000.00 US$ 8,000 per GP

Year 4                                      1,000.00                                                            8,000,000.00 US$ 8,000 per GP

Year 5                                      0.00                                                                       0.00 US$ 8,000 per GP
DLI_TBL_MATRI X




 DLI 4                                      Gram Panchayats with Improved Financial Sustainability of Water Services

 Type of DLI                                Scalability                  Unit of Measure      Total Allocated Amount (USD)    As % of Total Financing Amount

 Output                                     Yes                          Number                                50,000,000.00 13.77
 Period                                     Value                                                    Allocated Amount (USD) Formula
Baseline                                    0.00

Prior Results                                                                                                          0.00

Year 1                                      1,000.00                                                           14,286,000.00 US$ 14,286 per GP




                                                                                       38
                  The World Bank
                  Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



Year 2                                      1,000.00                                                       14,286,000.00 US$ 14,286 per GP

Year 3                                      1,000.00                                                       14,286,000.00 US$ 14,286 per GP

Year 4                                      500.00                                                          7,142,000.00 US$ 14,286 per GP

Year 5                                      0.00                                                                    0.00 US$ 14,286 per GP
DLI_TBL_MATRI X




 DLI 5                                      Gram Panchayats with 24/7 Water Service

 Type of DLI                                Scalability                 Unit of Measure    Total Allocated Amount (USD)    As % of Total Financing Amount

 Output                                     Yes                         Number                             18,000,000.00 5.00
 Period                                     Value                                                Allocated Amount (USD) Formula
Baseline                                    0.00

Prior Results                                                                                                       0.00

Year 1                                      100.00                                                          3,600,000.00 US$36,000 per GP

Year 2                                      100.00                                                          3,600,000.00 US$36,000 per GP

Year 3                                      100.00                                                          3,600,000.00 US$36,000 per GP

Year 4                                      100.00                                                          3,600,000.00 US$36,000 per GP

Year 5                                      100.00                                                          3,600,000.00 US$36,000 per GP




                                                                                      39
                  The World Bank
                  Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)


DLI_TBL_MATRI X




 DLI 6                                      Gram Panchayats with sustained water service

 Type of DLI                                Scalability                  Unit of Measure       Total Allocated Amount (USD)     As % of Total Financing Amount

 Output                                     Yes                          Number                                 21,000,000.00 5.78
 Period                                     Value                                                       Allocated Amount (USD) Formula
Baseline                                    0.00

Prior Results                                                                                                            0.00

Year 1                                      0.00                                                                         0.00 -

Year 2                                      0.00                                                                         0.00 -

Year 3                                      3,000.00                                                            18,000,000.00 US$ 6,000 per GP

Year 4                                      500.00                                                               3,000,000.00 US$ 6,000 per GP

Year 5                                      0.00                                                                         0.00 US$ 6,000 per GP
DLI_TBL_MATRI X




 DLI 7                                      Operationalize Energy Efficiency and Explore Solar Energy

 Type of DLI                                Scalability                  Unit of Measure       Total Allocated Amount (USD)     As % of Total Financing Amount

 Output                                     No                           Text                                   18,092,500.00 4.98
 Period                                     Value                                                       Allocated Amount (USD) Formula
Baseline                                    None

Prior Results                               0.00                                                                         0.00 -

Year 1                                      0.00                                                                         0.00 -




                                                                                        40
                  The World Bank
                  Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



Year 2                                      0.00                                                                          0.00 -

Year 3                                      Energy package implemented                                           18,092,500.00 US$18,092,500 upon achievement

Year 4                                      0.00                                                                          0.00 -

Year 5                                      0.00                                                                          0.00 -
DLI_TBL_MATRI X




    DLI 8                                   Tanks rejuvenated in water scarce select districts

    Type of DLI                             Scalability                   Unit of Measure        Total Allocated Amount (USD)   As % of Total Financing Amount

    Output                                  Yes                           Number                                 15,000,000.00 4.00
    Period                                  Value                                                      Allocated Amount (USD) Formula
Baseline                                    0.00

Prior Results                               0.00                                                                          0.00 -

Year 1                                      0.00                                                                          0.00 Unit cost: US$30,000

Year 2                                      50.00                                                                 1,500,000.00 Unit cost: US$30,000

Year 3                                      300.00                                                                9,000,000.00 Unit cost: US$30,000

Year 4                                      150.00                                                                4,500,000.00 Unit cost: US$30,000

Year 5                                      0.00                                                                          0.00 Unit cost: US$30,000
.




                                                                                         41
                        The World Bank
                        Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)


.
                                                                    Verification Protocol Table: Disbursement Linked Indicators
    DLI_TBL_VERIFICATI ON




    DLI 1                                         Functional Household Tap Connections Installed
                                                 The DLI will pay US$80 against rural metered FHTC installed in rural Karnataka. The DLI is applicable to both new and
                                                 rehabilitated infrastructure. The DLI is not time-bound, and the yearly targets are strictly for indicative purposes. The
                                                 following requirements will be detailed in the POM: i) FHTC: Defined as a household connection designed for 55 liters per
    Description
                                                 capita per day; ii) Volumetric meter installed; iii) FHTC is formally registered in the JJM system; iv) Water quality: Water
                                                 meets national water quality standards including total coliform; and v) Quality assurance: Water scheme verified by a Third-
                                                 Party Quality Assurance Inspection.
    Data source/ Agency                          RDWSD
    Verification Entity                          IVA
                                                 Verification Protocol - DLI 1: The verification covers, a 1. technical audit; 2. A physical verification of the household
                                                 connections; and 3. A physical verification of the water scheme. This will cover water services that have been
    Procedure
                                                 constructed, rehabilitated, or upgraded under the program and will begin following Program effectiveness. The
                                                 verification protocol will be detailed in the POM.
    DLI_TBL_VERIFICATI ON




    DLI 2                                         Strengthening institutions to ensure safe and reliable water services
    Description                                  DLI 2.1-2.4 are described below.
    Data source/ Agency                          RDWSD
    Verification Entity                          IVA
    Procedure                                    The verification protocol for DLI 2.1-2.4 is described below.
    DLI_TBL_VERIFICATI ON




    DLI 2.1                                       Sector M&E system enhanced
                                                 DLI 2.1. The achievement of DLI 2.1 requires the completion of two actions. 1. Action: Completion of the Advanced
                                                 monitoring system. The system must be able to capture a wide range of sector data at the GP-level (Defined in the POM).. 2.
    Description
                                                 Action: Sector performance benchmarking system to incentivize and reward high performance developed and launched at
                                                 district, block and GP levels (Defined in the POM).




                                                                                               42
                    The World Bank
                    Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



Data source/ Agency                          RDWSD
Verification Entity                          IVA
Procedure                                    The IVA will conduct a desk review of the evidence to verify the achievement. (Defined further in POM).
DLI_TBL_VERIFICATI ON




DLI 2.2                                       O&M Policy Notified in official gazette

Description                                  Requirements: O&M Policy notified in official gazette.
Data source/ Agency                          RDWSD
Verification Entity                          IVA
Procedure                                    The IVA will conduct a desk review of the evidence to verify the achievement.Defined in POM.
DLI_TBL_VERIFICATI ON




DLI 2.3                                       Water Quality System Modernization
                                             DLR 2.3: Water Quality System Modernization. The achievement of DLR 2.3 requires the completion of four actions: 1.
                                             Construction of 31 district labs with NABL accreditation 2. Construction of 40 taluk labs with NABL recognition 3. Water
Description
                                             quality app developed for citizens to view their water quality 4. One (1) mobile laboratories operational Further defined in
                                             the POM.
Data source/ Agency                          RDWSD

Verification Entity                          IVA
                                             Water Quality System Modernization Verification: The IVA to conduct a desk review of the evidence; carry out a site visit to
Procedure
                                             the mobile lab and inspect a sample of district and taluk labs on site. Defined in POM.
DLI_TBL_VERIFICATI ON




DLI 2.4                                       Centre of Excellence for Water and Sanitation established & operational
                                             This includes: - Centre of Excellence for Rural Drinking Water. Established and staffed - Core district staffing in place: DPMU.
Description
                                             - Digitalization of assets, data repository. Defined in POM.
Data source/ Agency                          RDWSD
Verification Entity                          IVA




                                                                                           43
                    The World Bank
                    Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



Procedure                                    The IVA will conduct a desk review of the evidence to verify the achievement. Defined further in POM..
DLI_TBL_VERIFICATI ON




DLI 3                                         Gram Panchayats with Basic O&M Capacity
                                             This scalable DLI pays against GPs that meet all the following performance criteria: - VWSC active (meeting minutes
                                             available, 50 percent gender balance) - Active GRM - Water scheme is functional - Water quality: Tested twice per year
Description
                                             including for total coliform and publicly disseminated - Greywater management plan developed The DLI is further defined in
                                             the POM.
Data source/ Agency                          RDWSD

Verification Entity                          IVA
                                             Verification Protocol: The DLI will be verified via the enhanced M&E system. The IVA will conduct phone interview with a
Procedure
                                             random sample of the GPs (PDO) and sites visits will be carried out on a sample basis. Further defined in the POM.
DLI_TBL_VERIFICATI ON




DLI 4                                         Gram Panchayats with Improved Financial Sustainability of Water Services
                                             This scalable DLI pays against GPs that meet all the following four (4) financial performance criteria (defined in the POM): 1.
                                             Designated GP water bank account in place; 2. O&M Budget exercise completed (includes electricity and bulk water costs);
Description
                                             3. Gram Panchayats with a water tariff collection rate above 90 percent; and, GP has paid electricity and bulk water bills for
                                             the current year (excluding arrears and interest on arrears).
Data source/ Agency                          RDWSD
Verification Entity                          IVA
Procedure                                    The DLI will be verified using the enhanced sector M&E system.
DLI_TBL_VERIFICATI ON




DLI 5                                         Gram Panchayats with 24/7 Water Service
                                             This scalable DLI pays against GPs that meet the criteria for 24/7 water service criteria (defined in the POM). In addition, the
Description
                                             GPs will also have to meet both the DLI 3 criteria; and the DLI 4 criteria.
Data source/ Agency                          RDWSD
Verification Entity                          IVA
Procedure                                    Verification Protocol: The IVA will conduct phone interview with all the 500 GPs (PDO). Sites visits will be carried out on a


                                                                                           44
                    The World Bank
                    Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



                                             sample basis. Further defined in the POM.
DLI_TBL_VERIFICATI ON




DLI 6                                         Gram Panchayats with sustained water service
                                             This DLI is only measured from January 2026 and to the closure of the Program. The DLI pays against Gram Panchayats that
                                             towards the end of the Program (Year 3 and onwards) meet the following performance criteria: 1. GP Water service
Description
                                             functional 2. GRM active 3. GP collection rate 90 percent of the fixed tariff 4. GP has paid electricity and bulk water bills for
                                             the current year (excluding arrears and interest on arrears)
Data source/ Agency                          RDWSD

Verification Entity                          IVA
                                             Verification Protocol: The DLI will be verified via the advanced M&E system. The IVA will conduct phone interview with a
Procedure
                                             random sample of the GPs (PDO) and sites visits will be carried out on a sample basis. Further defined in the POM.
DLI_TBL_VERIFICATI ON




DLI 7                                         Operationalize Energy Efficiency and Explore Solar Energy
                                             Energy package to "Operationalize energy efficiency and explore solar energy": 1. Energy audits implemented in 50 MVSs
                                             (with the highest energy cost) and implementation of core recommendations commenced in 10 MVSs (investments in solar
Description
                                             energy is also an eligible activity, further defined in the POM); 2. Scoping study on MVS solar energy plants (Defined in
                                             POM).
Data source/ Agency                          RDWSD
Verification Entity                          IVA
Procedure                                    Verification Protocol: Via desk review of evidence. Defined in POM.
DLI_TBL_VERIFICATI ON




DLI 8                                         Tanks rejuvenated in water scarce select districts
                                             This scalable DLI will pay US$30,000 for every small tank rejuvenated. The geographical scope of this DLI is limited to the
Description                                  following seven (7) select districts: Bengaluru Rural, Bengaluru Urban, Bidar, Chikkaballapura, Kalaburgi, Kolara, and
                                             Tumakuru. The small tank command area is not to exceed 40 ha. Further defined in the POM.
Data source/ Agency                          RDWSD
Verification Entity                          IVA



                                                                                            45
     The World Bank
     Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



                              Verification Protocol. A physical verification exercise will cover a sample of tanks that have been rejuvenated under DLI 8.
                              (Detailed in the POM).
    Procedure
                              Satellite image verification: The IVA will be provided with a software tool to verify via satellite images the impact of tank
.                             rejuvenation via before and after imagery. This desktop exercise will cover all 500 tanks.




                                                                            46
The World Bank
Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



                              ANNEX 3. SUMMARY TECHNICAL ASSESSMENT

 1.      The technical assessment evaluates the sector performance in Karnataka, its experience in RWS
 projects, and the key challenges in the sector.

 Strategic Relevance

 2.      The proposed Program—with the objective of increasing access to safely managed drinking water
 and strengthen institutions for sustainable rural water service delivery in Karnataka—is strategically
 relevant and aligned with the visions of both the GoI and GoK. It is also consistent with the World Bank’s
 country engagement as per CPF FY18–22.

 3.       National level. At the national level, the GoI has been making vast investments in improving
 sustainable access to safe water supply to rural communities. It has undertaken a number of programs to
 provide RWS since independence. More recently, it promoted flagship programs to improve services such
 as the National Rural Drinking Water Program introduced in 2008/09 ensuring sustainability of water
 availability using decentralized approach, which was restructured into the latest program, the JJM
 launched in 2019. While previous efforts were focused on providing safe drinking water to the rural
 population through hand pumps, protected wells, or piped water supply with public standposts as delivery
 points, the JJM aims to provide every household with an FHTC by 2024.

 4.       State level. The Program seeks to reap the benefits of the World Bank’s long-term engagement
 with Karnataka in the RWS sector over the past three decades. By engaging with an advanced state such
 as Karnataka, there is potential to set new benchmarks in the sector. Karnataka has consistently prioritized
 decentralized approaches to RWS management. In accordance with this approach, all SVSs and the in-
 village distribution network of MVSs have been handed over to the GPs and are managed by VWSCs/GPs.
 The decentralization process has been reinforced by the experience under the earlier World Bank-
 supported Jal Nirman Project, although some residual challenges remained under the project. The GoK
 recognizes the importance of sustainability of service delivery to achieve SDGs. It seeks to be the pioneer
 in India to demonstrate effective implementation of the Jaladhare program and achieve its goal of FHTCs
 to every rural household. The proposed Program will help the GoK move toward this goal.

 5.     World Bank engagement strategy in India. The Program is consistent with the World Bank CPF
 FY18–22 (Report 126667-IN), as elaborated in paragraph 14 of main text.

 Technical Soundness
 6.       Program design elements. Jaladhare is the GoK’s RWS program and is aligned with the GoI’s
 national JJM scheme. The state contributes 50 percent toward the program and is implementing various
 activities to ensure the expansion of RWS services in rural areas. The Program will support a three-pronged
 approach that will (a) develop a system of incentives for improvements in source, financial, technical,
 institutional, and social sustainability for improved service delivery; (b) establish a last-mile monitoring
 system to track performance at the GP level across technical, social, institutional, and financial
 parameters; and (c) establish a system of rewards to ensure that GPs are incentivized toward sustaining
 service delivery over time.




                                                     47
The World Bank
Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



 7.       Focus on five aspects of sustainability. The Program seeks to ensure that the goal of RWS in the
 state shifts from infrastructure delivery to quality of service and sustainability. For this reason, it will focus
 on five sustainability parameters: source, financial, technical, institutional, and social sustainability. The
 Program will incentivize the GPs in implementing the state’s O&M Policy toward achieving these
 sustainability parameters.

 8.      O&M. With the transitions to bulk surface water from groundwater source, larger water schemes,
 and household connections from public standposts, reforming the institutional and policy architecture is
 essential to achieve sustained service delivery. Conscious of the need for reform, the GoK has prepared a
 comprehensive O&M Policy with the clear objective of improving institutional capacity and human
 resources of the state IA, RDWSD, GPs, and VWSCs to provide sustainable water supply services. is shifting
 from. The shift in focus on building assets to sustaining services call for substantial capacity building for
 planning, implementation, O&M, and monitoring. The Program addresses this need. It is proposed to
 cover the entire state on institutional capacity building, so that such efforts become catalysts in improving
 the performance of the government’s overall rural WSS program in the state.

 9.      Service delivery. The state faces emerging challenges to demonstrate higher service levels in rural
 areas (that is, 100 percent house connections and metering, with water of prescribed quality on a regular
 and long-time basis) and establish effective O&M. The proposed Program of the GoK intends to bring an
 integrated approach to water supply, from recharge of source to supply to reuse. The Program is designed
 to support all these aspects of the government program and demonstrate sustainable service delivery
 models to address these challenges.

 Program Expenditure Assessment

 10.     An assessment of the expenditure framework of the proposed Program is carried out to
 understand whether the GoK is able to clearly budget, track, and report against the Program expenditures
 on an annual and multiyear basis. The assessment included a review of the fiscal position of the state, the
 expenditure patterns of the RWS program, the financial sustainability and funding predictability, and the
 execution capacity of the government in an efficient and timely manner.

 11.     The state of Karnataka has been in the forefront of other Indian states in terms of fiscal discipline
 and the quality of government expenditures. Over the last several years, with an exception in 2020/21,
 the fiscal deficit could be maintained within 3 percent of gross state domestic product (GSDP) as
 mandated by the Karnataka Fiscal Responsibility Act (KFRA) and managed by the GoI. Overall, the state
 has a well-defined medium-term fiscal plan (MTFP) for 2022–26 which does not exhibit any concerning
 patterns in the medium-term future of the state fiscal situation. The fiscal deficit is well under control, but
 the revenue deficit is marginally increasing. The revenue shortfall and increased expenditure
 commitments have pushed the state into revenue deficit. With the end of GST compensation from
 2022/23, the reduced revenue collection may result in reduction of CAPEX in future years.

 12.     Karnataka has a well-developed and systematic system of accounting based on a budget coding
 system which allows the tracking of RWS sector expenditure patterns on various dimensions. The RWS
 expenditure is carried out through RDWSD which is the main implementing department for all the RWS
 programs in the state. Overall, the total expenditure in the rural WSS sector has been increasing from the
 previous years since 2005/06. However, in certain years, it has shown a sudden decline. This is primarily
 due to the changes in capital spending, which is typical for the water sector where lumpy capital spending
 is commonplace.



                                                        48
The World Bank
Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



 13.      In terms of the sources of funds, except in 2010/11 and 2011/12, larger share of the total
 expenditure in the rural water sector in Karnataka is contributed by the state government. Moreover, it
 is interesting to note that the center’s share in the total spending in the sector shows an oscillating
 pattern, indicating the major role played by centrally sponsored programs in determining the actual
 expenditure levels in the sector. Further in 2021/22, the total expenditure has nearly doubled from the
 previous year, primarily due to the JJM. Expenditure in the sector from both the central and state funds
 has also increased, indicating the priority given to the JJM by both the center and state.

 14.     The capacity of the RWS sector to absorb the allocated funds is shown by the budget execution
 rate. The budget execution rate has been above the 80 percent in nearly all years. However, in 2021/22,
 allocated funds from the center increased about five times due to the JJM, but the execution rate
 substantially fell from 81.2 percent to 70.2 percent. This could raise some concerns about the execution
 capacity of the government system to implement the JJM even if more funds are available. However, over
 the past several months, RDPR has been able to substantially step up its capacity to construct schemes
 and provide FHTCs.

 15.      The GoK’s financing of the programs comes through its annual budgets. The achievement against
 the budgetary allocation for various sectors has been over 90 percent over the last 10 years. Given the
 stable fiscal position of the state and the strong commitment from the center and state governments to
 the JJM, the financial sustainability of the Program is not a major concern. Further, a good indicator for
 assessing budget flexibility is the share of the total expenditure that is allocated to salaries and
 administration. The program expenditure is flexible, as seen from the fact that the share of RWS
 expenditure in the total expenditure made by RDPR has increased from 2 percent to 90 percent in the last
 15 years while the expenditure on direction and administration has remained at less than 5 percent.
                      Table 3.1. Trends in Public Expenditure in Rural WSS (US$, million)
                           Year            Revenue           Capital             Total
                          2005/06           1,476           5,086               6,562
                          2006/07           2,182           6,535               8,717
                          2007/08           2,195           8,249               10,444
                          2008/09           2,662          10,967               13,629
                          2009/10           1,838                               1,838
                          2010/11           2,001           7,347               9,349
                          2011/12           2,592           9,575               12,167
                          2012/13           2,907          13,607               16,514
                          2013/14           5,773           9,010               14,783
                          2014/15           16,110          9,964               26,074
                          2015/16           33,542                              33,542
                          2016/17           51,783                              51,783
                          2017/18           53,404                              53,404
                          2018/19           31,914         15,347               47,261
                          2019/20           15,185         22,447               37,631
                          2020/21           18,455         19,327               37,782
                       2021/22 (RE)         65,637         12,217               12,217
                       2022/23 (BE)         72,110          3,480               75,590
                  Source: Budget documents and accounts and audits reports.




                                                      49
The World Bank
Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



 16.      With respect to whether Program budget allocations are aligned with government priorities, the
 priorities under each sector are assessed from the grassroots level and the financial support needed is
 estimated. This is consolidated in the budgetary proposal of the government. Hence, the Program is
 directly aligned to the priorities. With respect to whether budgetary allocations are sufficient to achieve
 intended results, the allocations are made with sufficient buffers if the Program undergoes any financial
 crisis. Budgetary allocations are made based on the priorities of the Program. The deviations from the
 proposed and approved action plans must be approved again by the government and the necessary
 additional budgetary needs are met from the available resources. Verification of whether the Program
 budget allocations are consistent with intended results is done based on the action plans. Analysis of
 budget allocations across the various types of Program transactions is conducted in the action plans which
 provide details of activities and the budgetary requirements. The efficiency of the program expenditure
 is assessed based on the verification of the action plan which provides the intended activities and the
 timeline and comparison of the costs with similar programs in the other states.

 Results Framework and M&E

 17.    The key result of the Jaladhare program is increased coverage of FHTCs for rural households.
 Although the JJM implemented under Jaladhare in Karnataka has a well-defined results framework with
 four key measurable outcomes on improved health conditions of rural communities, reduction in
 drudgery faced by women and girls and empowerment of women, reduced school dropout rates of upper
 primary level girls, and increased employment opportunities for rural communities, the indicators to
 measure these outcomes are not part of the JJM Integrated Management Information System or the JJM
 dashboard.

 18.      Program results. Program key RAs draw on the design of the Program scope. Within the three
 broad RAs, the Program has intermediate result indicators, consisting of DLIs and other results. Together,
 these would help measure the outcome of the two key activities of the Program: service delivery and
 institutional capacity building.

 Institutional Arrangements
 19.      The prime responsibility to provide safe drinking water falls to the state government and further
 to respective local self-governments, whether rural or urban. RDWSD has the overall responsibility for
 rural WSS in the state. It was established in 2014 under RDPR. The state institutional structure for rural
 WSS is decentralized with responsibilities delegated to GPs at the village level, taluks at the block level,
 and zillas at the district level.
 20.      The Karnataka Gram Swaraj and Panchayat Raj Act (KGSPRA) 1993 introduced a three-tier
 structure of rural local governments at the district, taluk, and village levels. The act empowered the
 5,963 GPs, 226 Taluk Panchayats (TPs, blocks), and 31 districts with ‘functions, functionaries, and funds’
 over 29 subjects, including drinking water. The act empowers the GPs to make bylaws regarding provision
 of water supply, use any source of water supply for drinking, and contract with any person for supply of
 water. The GPs were also given the power to fix water tariff, collect, and revise rates from domestic and
 commercial users according to Government Circular issued in 2013. GPs alone have been given powers to
 levy tax within the Panchayat limits on land and buildings. The major nontax revenue source for GPs is the
 water tariff collected from consumers for the water supplied for drinking and domestic purposes. At the
 GP level, village-level committees called VWSCs have been formed to coordinate, manage, operate, and
 maintain RWS schemes and sanitation. The state is now looking at involving self-help groups, comprising


                                                     50
The World Bank
Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



 mainly female members, in the collection of water charges for O&M. The administrative head of the GP
 is the Secretary who is assisted by a clerk and other personnel such as pump operators and watermen.
 The blocks have the power to perform the functions of prevention and control of water pollution,
 construction, and maintenance of drinking water supply systems beyond GPs and provide inputs and
 technical support to GPs for implementing drinking water supply. The Executive Officer of the blocks
 monitors and reviews the performance of the GPs.

 21.      The districts are empowered to establish drinking water projects, set up drinking water testing
 laboratories, provide financial support to GPs and TPs, and construct underground water recharge
 structures to ensure availability of water in the drinking water wells. The GPs are primarily responsible for
 the abstraction and storage (in the case of SVSs) and distribution of safe drinking water from both SVSs
 and MVSs to the entire population under its jurisdiction. In addition to the O&M of SVSs and In-Village
 Distribution Network (IVDN) and the distribution of water to the GP population, they also approve new
 connections, fix and revise tariffs, collect water tariffs from households, appoint watermen and pump
 operators, constitute and empower the GP subcommittee (VWSCs) and assign them responsibilities, be
 the first point of contact for SVSs and IVDN with regard to GRM, and ensure testing of water quality. They
 are aided by a subcommittee, called the VWSC, in their responsibilities to carry out water supply
 management in the villages. The GP also appoints a waterman for operation of pumps and distribution of
 water to the consumer community in the GP.

 22.    The tanks being considered for rejuvenation under the Program are minor tanks, with a
 command area of less than 40 ha, under the jurisdiction of GPs. RDWSD will implement this activity
 through its district engineers.

 23.     The Program is mainstreamed into this institutional structure and no new institutions are
 proposed to be created. However, given the staffing and skill shortages at all levels of government,
 capacity-building measures within these institutions will be undertaken and incentivized under the
 Program. The Program will support the training and capacity building and exposure programs for district,
 block, and GP-level potential champions who can be used for further strengthening O&M systems in other
 GPs, blocks, and the districts. These potential champions can be GP and VWSC representatives, ISAs,
 government officials such as panchayat development officers, other influential leaders, and so on. This
 will be coupled with the FLL approach, a broad-based decentralized leadership program to identify
 champions across the civil service ranks.

 Economic Justification
 24.     Methodology. A cost-benefit framework comparing ‘with’ and ‘without’ Program scenarios has
 been used to calculate the economic NPV and IRR for the Program. The stream of financial costs was
 adjusted to exclude applicable value added tax and was considered for shadow price of carbon to arrive
 at the economic value, using an estimated standard conversion factor of 0.97. The domestic price
 numeraire was used in the analysis. All prices are expressed in constant values of the base year 2022.

 25.      Assumptions. The Program will deliver many quantifiable and nonquantifiable benefits and will
 be implemented through eight DLIs. The EA presented in table 3.3 comprises only quantifiable benefits
 incurring from DLIs 1, 3, and 4 and therefore the estimated benefits are considerably lower than what the
 actual stream of benefits from the Program would be. The key assumptions used are listed in table 3.3.




                                                      51
The World Bank
Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



 26.     Economic benefits. A meta-analysis of different studies suggests improvements in water quality,
 sanitation, and hygiene reduce diarrheal incidents by 40 percent, 37 percent, and 32 percent, respectively
 and the result of water supply has been used to quantify the benefits in a ‘with-project’ scenario.36 The
 other with-project benefit is time saving because of the provision of on-premises piped water supply.
 According to ‘Periodic Evaluation Studies on Implementation of SBM-G and JJM in Karnataka 2021–2022’,
 41 percent households in the rural Karnataka collect water from a distance of 100 meters or longer. The
 benefits (or costs) of water interventions included in the analysis are the following:

   (a) Treatment cost savings (making up 40 percent of the benefits) from averted incidents of
       waterborne diseases among the targeted beneficiaries of FHTCs.
   (b) Time saved (making up 34 percent of the benefits) due to on-premises piped water supply.
   (c) Energy cost savings (making up 10 percent of benefits) due to the Program’s energy efficiency
       measures from the energy efficiency measures provisioned in DLI 7. There will also be energy
       savings in case of 24/7 water supply as the water pumps will consume less energy due to fewer
       hours of pumping.
   (d) Direct benefits (making up 16 percent of total benefits), from households paying portion of capital
       and O&M costs as connection fee and water tax.

                                         Table 3.2. Key Assumptions Used in the EA
                                               Description                                                            Estimates
  Estimated population served with improved piped water supply                                                        10 million
  Population growth rate (World Bank)                                                                                   0.98%
  Average household size in rural areas (National Family Health Survey 5, 2019–21)                                        4.4
  Number of FHTCs provisioned under the Program                                                                        2 million
  Number of districts to be covered                                                                                       31
  Number of GPs to be covered                                                                                           5,000
  Portion of the households that need to trip 100 m or more to collect water (Periodic Evaluation
                                                                                                                         41%
  Studies on Implementation of SBM-G and JJM in Karnataka 2021–2022)
  Estimated time saved per household per day due to on-premises water (minutes/day)                                       12
  Treatment cost saving due to on-premises water supply, household/month (Maharastra PforR,
                                                                                                                         195
  Waddington et al.)
  Portion of energy cost saved by the Program through energy efficiency (team’s estimation)                              15%
  Number of connections to be given 24/7 water supply                                                                  10,000
  Portion of the energy saved due to 24/7 water supply (team’s estimation)                                               16%
  Price of carbon emission, US$/tCO2e (lower and upper bound, World Bank)                                             40 and 80
  Estimated project life (years)                                                                                          20
  Opportunity cost of capital                                                                                            10%

 27.     EA results. The Program’s economic net benefit is significant in the base case at a 10 percent
 discount rate—which is the opportunity cost of capital—with a positive NPV for 20 years and an IRR
 of 21.4 percent. The base case was stress tested for CAPEX costs overrun, increase in O&M costs, reduced
 expected benefits, and delayed implementation. The results show the Program will produce net economic
 benefits even under potential high-risk scenarios.

 36 Waddington, H., and B. Snilstveit. 2009. “Effectiveness and Sustainability of Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene Interventions in

 Combating Diarrhea.” Journal of Development Effectiveness 1 (3): 295–335.


                                                                52
The World Bank
Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



 Evaluation of Technical Risks
 28.     The Program’s overall technical risk is assessed as ’Moderate’. Risks have been assessed in three
 areas as listed in table 3.3, for which mitigation measures were developed.
                                 Table 3.3. Technical Risks and Mitigation Measures
        Risk                                                 Mitigation Action
   Inadequate      GPs have been unable to establish cost recovery mechanisms and tariff collections are not met,
   O&M budget      leaving critical O&M activities underfunded. Moreover, the full O&M costs of the water
   at the GP       schemes are not being borne by the GPs as the energy and staff costs are paid by the state. To
   level           avoid a situation where inadequate O&M leads to defunct or partially defunct water schemes,
   (Moderate)      the following activities will be funded under the DLIs:
                   1. Notification and implementation of the O&M Policy to include systematic training and
                      capacity building of communities for sustainable service delivery.
                   2. A designated GP water bank account, to ring-fence the revenue and expenditures for WSS.
                   3. The GP adopts an annual O&M budget approved at the district level.
                   4. The GP ensures that a minimum of 90% of the planned O&M budget is collected annually.
                   5. An advanced M&E system to the monitoring of GPs’ financial performance remotely.
   Opposition      Under the Program, the ISAs play a role in the last-mile delivery of the Jaladhare and toward the
   to higher       implementation of Karnataka’s O&M Policy. ISAs and local stakeholders will be trained on
   tariffs from    sensitizing communities through the O&M budgeting exercise and the celebration of high
   customers       performers. This will be simultaneously undertaken with improved service delivery parameters.
   (Substantial)   BCC campaigns on the link between high costs and improved service delivery will also be
                   undertaken. It is important to note that rural households are currently accustomed to paying for
                   water; this risk presents itself when moving the sector toward O&M cost recovery. Lastly and
                   noteworthy, the Program does not mandate the GPs to raise water tariffs.
   Lack of         One of the key capacity gaps for RDWSD is staffing shortages and staff retention, which is
   adequate        hampering its ability to implement to speed, scale, and quality. To address this issue, the
   technical       Program will
   staff at        1. Establish a center of excellence as a consultancy service which will provide troubleshooting,
   RDWSD and          guidance, and so on to staff within the department.
   GPs             2. Outsource responsibilities to the private sector, such as a GRM call center and O&M for
   (Moderate)         MVSs.
                   3. Offer international training opportunities, exposure visits, and FLL training to RDWSD staff.
   Groundwater     Groundwater levels have been declining at an alarming rate for several decades in many parts
   depletion       of the state, which is attributed to overreliance on groundwater, especially by the irrigation
   (Moderate)      sector, coupled with insufficient groundwater recharge. Water sources thus have increasingly
                   become seasonal, or simply dried up, accelerated by climate change. The Program will support
                   tank rejuvenation and demand management activities to mitigate declining groundwater. In
                   particular, the Program envisages the following activities:
                   1. Household water meter readings to increase awareness on water consumption levels.
                   2. BCC campaigns on the need for water conservation and measures aimed at households.
                   3. Support for tank rejuvenation in water-stressed districts.
                   4. Improved selection of sites for tank rejuvenation.




                                                          53
The World Bank
Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)




                              ANNEX 4. SUMMARY FIDUCIARY SYSTEMS ASSESSMENT

 1.      The IFSA37 found that present fiduciary systems of RDWSD together with proposed mitigation
 measures provide reasonable assurance that the proposed financing would be used for the intended
 purposes, with due attention to the principles of economy, efficiency, effectiveness, transparency, and
 accountability. The scope of the IFSA is limited to the boundaries of the proposed Program’s expenditure
 framework. Institutional and implementation arrangements for the Program rely on the use of country
 systems. The IFSA identified key fiduciary risks that may affect the PDO and recommended system
 improvement and mitigation measures that will be implemented during the life of the Program as part of
 the PAP. Based on the IFSA and given the RDWSD engagement for operation and execution, the combined
 fiduciary risk is rated ‘Moderate’.

 2.       The GoK has a clear PFM framework including procurement which is followed by RDWSD. The
 PFM framework is included in the state’s budget manual, Karnataka Treasury Code 1963, Karnataka
 Financial Code 1958, and other financial rules guided by the principles embodied in the Constitution of
 India. These are supplemented by legislations such as the KFRA 2002 and 2003, KTPP Act 1999, and KTPP
 Rules 2000. An institutional framework to implement the PFM is also in place. From time to time, the
 government issues orders and circulars with clear delegation of powers which are well established and
 followed. The existing governance and accountability arrangements include audits by the C&AG of India
 which are done on time, review of audit reports by the Public Accounts Committee, RTI Act 2005, CVC Act
 2003, and the Karnataka Lokayukta Act 1984. The state departments and government agencies have
 clearly defined delegation of authority, financial rules, and regulations which are followed.

 3.      The overall government program is worth US$2,926.16 million to be implemented over five
 years (FY23/24 to FY28/29). The Program is estimated at US$1,144.91 million, of which the World Bank
 (IBRD) will finance US$363 million (or 32 percent) as per table 4.1 below.
                     Table 4.1. Government Program versus PforR Program by Activity (US$, millions)

                      Activities                               Bank PforR Program (‘P’)          Government program (‘p’)
   In-village water supply infrastructure                             1,055.00                          2,725.00
   Staffing, PMU, and office improvement                                13.00                            104.25
   Lab construction and O&M                                             10.00                             30.00
   Tanks rejuvenation                                                   15.00                             15.00
   Energy efficiency                                                    10.00                             10.00
   M&E and IVA                                                          10.00                             10.00
   Training, capacity building, and exposure visits                     6.00                              6.00
   Other program related activities including IEC                       25.00                             25.00
   Sub total                                                          1,144.00                          2,925.25
   Front end fee38                                                      0.91                              0.91
   Total                                                              1,144.91                          2,926.16


 37 This annex provides a summary of findings and should be read along with the stand-alone IFSA report which presents a detailed

 analysis of existing FM and procurement systems. The detailed IFSA will be publicly disclosed along with the PAD.
 38 Front end fee of US$907,500 has been rounded off to one decimal place.




                                                               54
The World Bank
Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



 4.       Program expenditure and procurement profile. Program expenditure will be a combination of
 capital and operating expenditure activities. The Program will finance procurement of goods, consultancy
 services, works, and operational and administrative costs associated with the implementation units.
 Operational and administrative expenditure will include remuneration and salaries of incremental staff,
 building rentals, annual maintenance, IT systems, and recurring administrative and general expenses.
 Investments can be in civil works including groundwater recharge, rejuvenation of tanks, water quality
 testing improvements, water meters; in-village water networks; consulting services; and non-
 procurement activities such as training, workshops, and operational cost.
 5.       State budget and absorptive capacity. The overall state budget has been increasing every year.
 For FY20/21, the actual expenditure was US$28 billion. As per the FY22/23 budget, the total expenditure
 is expected to be US$31 billion. This PforR Program funds 1 percent of the state budget over five years.
 Hence, this PforR will not affect the state finances. The state had revenue surplus for a decade. However,
 it is now facing a revenue deficit over the recent years starting from FY20/21, and this trend is expected
 to continue as per the MTFP projections. The revenue deficit has increased in the last two years due to
 economic slowdown caused by COVID-19 which led to a reduction in revenue as well as an increase in
 expenditure to meet the needs of the pandemic. The state fiscal deficit is within the norms of the state’s
 fiscal responsibility and budget management and is expected to be less than the allowed ceiling. The
 state’s overall liabilities including off-budget borrowings are below the allowed limit of 25 percent of GSDP
 except in 2021/22. State expenditure outturn has been consistently over 90 percent, which reflects a good
 alignment between the budget and the actual expenditure. The share of CAPEX from total expenditure
 has been increasing over the years.
 6.       State rural WSS budget expenditure is covered under two budget heads: (a) 2215: Rural WSS
 head, which includes certain operational heads as well as heads for transfers for creation of capital
 assets, and (b) 4215: Capital outlay for rural WSS. RWS programs have been implemented for more than
 a decade. The water supply expenditure as per budget has been around US$360 million on average over
 the past six years. In the last two years, due to JJM, the allocation and budget increased considerably. The
 government provided adequate budget over the years and the budget outturn has been above 90 percent
 except in 2019/20, due to COVID.
                     Table 4.2. Budget Outturn and Expenditure for RDWSD (US$, millions)

      RDWSD        Budget         Release        Expenditure      Release/Budget     Expenditure/Budget
     2018/19         205            222              244               109%                119%
     2019/20         349            336              349               96%                 100%
     2020/21         379            320              307               84%                  81%
     2021/22         738            853              476               116%                 64%
     2022/23        1,391           196              421               14%                  30%
     Total          3,063          1,928            1,797
     Average         613            386              359               63%                   59%

 7.     RDWSD is the department through which a major portion of rural WSS budget expenditure and
 implementation is done. It is clear from the analysis that RDWSD incurs expenditure to the tune of
 US$360 million on average. This PforR is a part of the envisaged government spending and will not affect
 the capacity of the department. As shown in table 4.2, expenditure is increasing every year and post-
 COVID has improved due to the removal of restrictions. RDWSD has good absorptive capacity, and it is
 expected that the Program will not adversely affect the capacity of the department.




                                                      55
The World Bank
Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



 8.       Planning and budget preparation. The Program’s institutional and implementation arrangements
 will use the existing government systems. The GoK has an established budget preparation process guided
 by the budget manual. RDWSD shall prepare an annual work plan and annual budget requirements that
 will be incorporated in the state budget through RDPR. For RDWSD, the existing program budget heads
 will be used. The state will provide the budget to the IAs to achieve the DLIs.
 9.      Procurement. The procurement activities under the Program will be governed by the KTPP Act
 1999 and KTPP Rules 2000 updated on February 14, 2022, issued by the FD of the GoK, with agreed
 changes in the bid document. RDWSD shall have the responsibility for all procurement of goods, works,
 and services under the Program.
 10.     The Program envisages contracts of various values in goods, civil works, consultancy, and non-
 consultancy. However, it was confirmed that though there may be large-value contracts for bulk water
 supply works, the contracts under the Program may require a large number of small contracts; no contract
 is expected to cross US$10 million for civil works and US$2 million for goods and consulting and non-
 consulting services. Most procurements in the districts are expected to be of low value; therefore, the
 challenge will be monitoring the large number of small-value contracts. Goods are procured mainly
 through the GeM portal. For items which cannot be procured on GeM, the online e-procurement system
 will be used. Civil works and consultancy services are procured using the GoK e-procurement platform
 (www.eproc.karnataka.gov.in). Broadly, a two-stage tendering system is followed for contracts valued
 above INR 0.5 million, on an item rate basis.
 11.      Procurement exclusion. The Program will not procure large contracts valued at or above the
 thresholds (US$75 million for works, US$50 million for goods and non-consulting services, and US$15
 million for consultant services), in line with the ‘Moderate’ risk rating. The PMU shall report to the World
 Bank if any large contracts appear throughout Program implementation. In addition, the World Bank will
 review the audit, the Program budget execution, and contract management reports to ensure conformity
 with the World Bank’s policy on PforR.
 12.      RDWSD has model standard bidding documents (SBDs) for procurement of goods, works, and
 services issued by the FD of the GoK. The department follows these documents with the data to suit the
 specific work/goods/service requirement. To ensure uniformity, it is agreed that RDWSD will incorporate
 provisions related to implementation of the World Bank’s ACG.
 13.       The following actions will be implemented and monitored during Program implementation: (a)
 annual procurement audit to be done by an independent firm; (b) adequate staffing at the block and
 district levels; (c) appropriate capacity-building and strengthening strategy to be designed for consistent
 and expedited actions; (d) a procurement manual, along with SBDs, incorporating the World Bank’s ACG,
 to be developed.
 Budget Execution
 14.     The GoK has implemented a comprehensive Integrated Financial Management Information
 System and human resource management information system, namely Khajane-2 (K-2). K-2 is the state
 treasury system on which all departments work. The departments get budget allocation through K-2,
 which is further allocated to their subordinates. Drawing and disbursing officers of all departments are
 registered in K-2 and all payments are made through K-2. All bills are passed and paid through the state
 treasury.




                                                     56
The World Bank
Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



 15.     RDWSD uses two mechanisms: payments through the treasury and payments through the SNA
 bank account for CSSs. For the JJM program funds, the SNA bank account opened at the state level is
 used. For Bank Program the same account will be used. Central government funds are directly transferred
 to this account through the PFMS. Once the funds from the center are released, a matching share is
 provided by the state from the state treasury into this bank account. Amounts released by the center and
 state are held in the designated SNA Bank account for Program and support activities. This parent account
 has link accounts/child accounts, which are zero balance accounts, in which all the division offices are
 enrolled. This account is registered with the central government portal Public Financial Management
 System (PFMS) and K-2 PFMS a separate module to track CSS funds and accounting. All payments are
 made through this bank account.
 Accounting Systems and Financial Reporting
 16.      For RDWSD, implementation is mainly carried out at the district level, where payments are
 initiated. SVSs are implemented by RDWSD through contractors. Upon completion, the work is verified
 by the Executive Engineer and the bill is processed by the division. Divisional accountants validate the bills
 for payments. Once the bill is ready, it is sent to the district CEO for approval and payment. Payments are
 made through the SNA bank account and are processed through the computerized K-2 PFMS, and
 accounting is done automatically. Expenditures are available from the K-2 PFMS. The division office also
 maintains cash book and check registers. For JJM, expenditure is also booked in the central management
 information system. The accounting platform has been changed from PFMS to K-2 in the state. While the
 system is operational, it needs enhancement in terms of report generation and linkage to PFMS portal.
 This is added as a PAP action.
 Contract Performance and Administration
 17.     From the national legal framework point of view, the main acts which govern the contracting are
 Indian Contract Act 1872, Sale of Goods Act 1929, and Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996 (Revised 2015
 and 2018). Contracts are administered in line with the contractual provisions listed in the Standard
 Procurement Documents. To ensure effective oversight and as a forward-looking action, all procurements
 under the proposed Program shall be monitored through a set of dedicated indicators.
 18.     Internal controls and internal audit. Internal controls are being practiced and are included in the
 financial rules supplemented by defined delegation of financial powers. Oversight regarding compliance
 with internal controls is vested with the head of the Administrative Department and FD, and these are
 reviewed by the C&AG during annual audits. Clear delegation of powers exists which defines all activities.
 The state continuously monitors division payments. Regular reconciliations are carried out by divisions for
 payments with the bank account. Entity-level internal audits are not practiced in departments. Preaudit
 of payments is carried out for all bills RDWSD. Internal audit under the Program is included as a PAP action.
 19.     External audit. The State Audit for FY20/21 has been completed. For RDWSD, the audit is carried
 out by a chartered accountant firm. The Program audit report will be displayed by the PMU as per the
 World Bank disclosure policy. The audit will also cover all aspects of procurement undertaken in the
 Program.
 20.      Program governance and ACG. The World Bank’s ‘Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud
 and Corruption in Program for Results Financing dated February 1, 2012 and revised on July 10, 2015
 (https://ppfdocuments.azureedge.net/3682.pdf)’ shall apply to the Program. Requirements under these
 guidelines include, but are not limited to, (a) the borrower’s obligation to inform the World Bank about
 all fraud- and corruption-related allegations and investigations, (b) the World Bank’s right to conduct



                                                      57
The World Bank
Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



 administrative inquiries, and (c) ineligibility of debarred firms for contract awards. It has been clarified to
 the PMU that these guidelines shall be applicable to all activities within the Program boundary and not to
 the parts of the government program that are outside these boundaries. To operationalize the various of
 the ACGs, the nodal agency shall ensure that all bidding documents refer to the World Bank’s ACG and
 maintain and compile an annual report on all fraud and corruption allegations and investigations that are
 related to the Program and share it with the World Bank in the prescribed format. If the borrower, PMU,
 or World Bank determines that fraud and corruption have occurred in connection with the Program, the
 borrower and the PMU will take timely and appropriate action, satisfactory to the World Bank, to remedy
 or otherwise address the situation and prevent its recurrence. If the World Bank decides to conduct an
 administrative review into allegations or other indications of fraud and corruption in the Program, the
 PMU will cooperate fully with the World Bank for carrying out review. The PMU shall acknowledge and
 consent to the borrower’s right of restitution of any amounts disbursed under the Program with respect
 to which fraud and corruption have occurred or with which an ineligible expenditure has been paid.
 21.    The PMU shall implement their activities under the Program, in compliance with the ACGs for
 the Program, and ensure the following actions:

       •   Each procurement entity shall ensure incorporation of the World Bank’s debarment list in the
           filter used by implementing entities when they conduct due diligence. This list is available at
           https://www.worldbank.org/en/projects-operations/procurement/debarred-firms.
       •   For every bidding opportunity under the Program, each participating bidder shall submit (as part
           of the bidding process) a self-declaration that the firm is not subject to ineligibility or has not
           been sanctioned under the World Bank system of debarment and cross-debarment.
       •   The PMU shall add to scope of the auditor to validate that, under the Program Expenditure
           Framework, no contract is awarded to World Bank debarred firms.
       •   The PMU would set up a centralized procurement complaint redressal system to receive
           complaints and defined rules and authorities to resolve/process the complaint/suggestions.

 22.      Procurement and FM capacity. The PMU has engineers who are engaged in carrying out
 procurement and are well versed with the KTPP Act, but there is a need to assign staff especially for the
 Program who will also undergo trainings in contract management and e-procurement aspects. For FM,
 staff are available in RDWSD but they require training in accounting for program expenditure, DLI
 disbursements, and other FM requirements. The Program can either depute internally or hire staff from
 the market on a contractual basis as required and the cost can be charged to the Program. In addition, for
 RDWSD, it is envisaged that FM and Procurement staff will be hired at each division level to support the
 existing staff.

 Key Fiduciary Risks and Mitigation Measures
 23.       The proposed mitigation measures for the abovementioned key fiduciary risks are as follows:
       •   Issue a GO and create budget heads. A GO covering the entire Program should be issued and
           budget heads as required for the Program should be created/assigned.
       •   Strengthen staffing and fiduciary capacity of the PMU (PAP action). Fiduciary staffing and
           capacity of the PMU need to be strengthened through appropriate and timely appointments and
           regular fiduciary training in regard to procurement, contract management, e-procurement,
           audits, program accounting, and submission of DLI claims.


                                                       58
The World Bank
Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



     •    Strengthen internal controls through a robust fiduciary complaint handling mechanism (PAP
          action). A centralized fiduciary complaint redressal mechanism preferably with a web interface
          with clearly defined rules, roles and responsibilities, authorities, and definite timelines to
          resolve/process the complaints/queries is to be developed to receive and address fiduciary
          complaints.
     •    Ensure bidding and contract management (procurement) information system (PAP action). For
          day-to-day monitoring of procurement and contract management aspects and timely corrective
          actions, a management information system is to be developed and implemented.
     •    Enhance reporting of the K-2 PFMS software and link to PFMS (PAP action): GoK has
          implemented K-2 PFMS module. Enhanced reporting and linkage to PFMS needs to be completed
          within six months of effectiveness.
     •    Disclose the Program audit report (legal). Program audit reports should be disclosed by the PMU
          on its website as per the World Bank policy on disclosure of audit reports.
     •    Appoint Internal auditor for the Program (PAP action): Internal auditor will be appointed for the
          Program which will cover the entire program and provide timely reports. The auditor is to be
          appointed within six months of effectiveness.
     •    Annual procurement audit to be conducted by independent procurement agency.
 24.     Continuous support would be given to the client for implementing the PAP. The mission would
 review the program expenditure on a regular basis. RDWSD will regularly share key performance indicator
 reports with the World Bank to monitor the FM and procurement performance, identify gaps, and
 recommend actions. These reports will be reviewed, and issues identified will be addressed appropriately.
 The World Bank will monitor the following performance indicators provided in table 4.4.

                                        Table 4.4. Performance Metrics
       Indicator                                       Measure                                     Timeline
   Adequate          1. Percentage of contracts completed within the original contract period     Annually
   monitoring of     2. Average number of quotation/bids received.
   the procurement   3. Number of procurement-related complaints received and upheld.
   activities        4. No contract exceeds the threshold for high-value contracts
   Adequate          5. Budget allocation as per the annual work plan                             Every
   monitoring of     6. Release of funds on time                                                  mission
   FM activities     7. Payments made on time
                     8. Accounting system operational and Program reports are generated on time   Annually
                     9. Audits completed and reports submitted to the World Bank on time
   Adequate          10. Reports submitted on receipt and action taken on Fraud & Corruption      Every
   monitoring of         complaints                                                               mission
   Fraud &                                                                                        and half
   Corruption                                                                                     yearly
   activities




                                                     59
The World Bank
Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



               ANNEX 5. SUMMARY ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SYSTEMS ASSESSMENT

 1.      Objectives and scope. This ESSA examined the following aspects: (a) the E&S impacts of the
 Program including direct, indirect, induced, and cumulative impacts, as relevant; (b) the borrower’s
 capacity—legal framework, regulatory authority, organizational capacity, and performance to manage
 those impacts; (c) an assessment of the borrower’s systems—laws, regulations, standards, procedures,
 and implementation performance against the core principles and key planning elements to identify any
 inadequacies that could affect Program performance; (d) the likelihood that the proposed Program
 achieves its E&S objectives; and (e) recommendation of measures to address any shortcomings pertaining
 to capacity and/or implementation performance relevant to managing the Program risks through a PAP.

 2.       Methodology. This included secondary literature review, screening, consultations (field and state
 level), assessment of E&S system strengths, and areas for improvement. As a part of community
 consultation, key informant interviews and focus group discussions were held between September and
 November 2022. A varied set of stakeholders were consulted to solicit feedback (refer to the ESSA report
 for details on stakeholders consulted).

 3.      A state-level consultation stakeholder workshop was held on December 6, 2022. On
 environmental issues, the participants highlighted the need for replenishment of borewells, closing of
 contaminated borewells, sustainability of RO plants where needed, management and monitoring of
 drinking water assets, including training and capacity building of field staff on social and environmental,
 health, and safety aspects. On social issues, the importance of capacity building and strengthening of GP
 and VWSC members’ participation in FTK testing, community contribution, social audits, and O&M for
 social sustainability was discussed. Further, participants reiterated the need for involvement of other
 agencies in IEC and training activities on the benefits of drinking water.

 4.      Disclosure. The stakeholder workshop was organized on December 6, 2022, to disclose the draft
 ESSA. The Executive Summary was translated to Kannada and distributed among the participants before
 the workshop. The feedback obtained during the workshop was used to further refine and finalize the
 ESSA. The revised/final ESSA report will be disclosed on RDWSD’s website and the World Bank portal.

 Environmental and Social Assessment

 5.      Regulatory. Comprehensive and overarching legal and regulatory provisions on E&S, applicable
 to water supply and allied sectors, exist at the national and state levels. Although not explicitly apparent,
 conformance to these is implicit in the implementation procedures followed by the PMU. Similarly,
 environmental norms, guidelines, and good practices including standard practices of RDWSD and those
 outlined in JJM guidelines are well-known. Contract documents make it obligatory for the contractors
 engaged for works to comply with all applicable environmental, social, and labor regulations. Work in
 progress is monitored by the PMU. Thus, there are no significant gaps in the national and state-level
 regulatory systems in relation to the World Bank’s Program that need to be addressed.

 6.      Assessment against the PforR core principles. The borrower’s E&S management systems and
 capacity were assessed against the six core principles for assessing PforR investments. It was determined
 that the borrower systems will be in alignment with the first five, provided gaps pertaining to lack of
 dedicated E&S screening and monitoring procedures and E&S specialist manpower are addressed through
 the ESSA recommendations and PAP. The sixth core principle was found to be ‘not applicable’. The
 assessment confirmed overall adequacy and consistency with these core principles.


                                                      60
The World Bank
Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



 Findings

 7.       Program exclusion. The assessment confirmed the activities do not include those which are not
 eligible for PforR financing. There are potentially no significant adverse E&S impacts likely to arise from
 activities under the Program. During the implementation, it will be required to ensure that all such
 activities ineligible for PforR financing remain excluded.

 8.      Environmental. Possible negative environmental impacts include groundwater stress, poor
 groundwater quality, impacts on ecologically sensitive areas and/or cultural heritage sites, inadequate
 tank catchment protection, improper greywater collection/disposal arrangements, and construction-
 related environmental, health, and public safety impacts. These impacts are localized, of low to medium
 intensity, and reversible through appropriate safeguard measures. Some issues of concern such as
 groundwater stress and quality are already addressed by way of the GoK’s initiative of supplying bulk
 water from surface sources through the MVS. However, borrower systems lack dedicated procedures for
 assessing scheme-specific E&S issues and preparation of commensurate scheme-specific Environmental
 and Social Management Plans (ESMPs). They also lack specialist staff for undertaking environmental due
 diligence or monitoring functions. Similarly, tendering and contracting documents also do not adequately
 cover scheme-specific E&S requirements that become part of the contractor’s contractual obligations.
 The PAP provided in the ESSA suggests ways of strengthening these systems by adding procedural steps
 on E&S screening, ESMP preparation, E&S monitoring, and conduction of audits.

 9.        Social. The Program is aligned with the JJM, which emphasizes participation, transparency, and
 inclusion through IEC, participatory rural appraisal, social audit, and other support activities. Currently,
 social risk screening before the commencement of infrastructural works is not being carried out under the
 Program. RDWSD does not have in-house staff to manage social risks related to labor, community health
 and safety, land, and livelihood. Clauses on labor standard compliance are integrated in the contractors’
 contracts/bid documents, but there is no provisioning for site-specific E&S management plans nor are
 health, safety, and security of workers monitored at the site. The government program has a robust
 system for stakeholder/beneficiary engagement, grievance redressal, and social inclusion. These
 mechanisms, however, require scaling up through resource allocations (financial and manpower). As per
 the requirements of the JJM, social audits must be carried out, which have not yet been initiated. The
 GRM of RDWSD needs to be strengthened, including its extension to tank rejuvenation activities. External
 monitoring, extensive public outreach and awareness, addressing of complaints beyond O&M, and
 strengthening of systems of documentation and reporting on complaints received directly are some of
 the aspects to be considered.

 10.      Recommendations. The World Bank’s institutional strengthening and implementation support
 should focus on building the E&S management capacity of RDWSD through (a) hiring E&S staff (a social
 specialist at the PMU and an environmental specialist at the PMU and at the district level to support the
 implementation); (b) standardizing E&S due diligence, monitoring, and reporting procedures; (c)
 strengthening contract provisions pertaining to E&S for civil works under the PforR; and (d) initiating social
 audits and external environmental audit process to track overall performance of E&S risks management.
 It should also focus on building awareness and competence on E&S issues and augmenting the grievance
 management system and extending ambit of RDWSD’s grievance portal (Parihara) for managing
 grievances related to tank rejuvenation.




                                                      61
        The World Bank
        Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)


  .

                                             ANNEX 6. PROGRAM ACTION PLAN



Action
Description            Source         DLI#       Responsibility           Timing               Completion Measurement

Hiring at PMU          Environmental DLI 2      RDWSD             Other        Within one     Staff contracted and joined
State-Level: Senior    and Social                                              month after    duties.
Environment            Systems                                                 effectivenes
Specialist, Junior                                                             s
Environment
Specialist, Senior
Social Specialist,
Junior Social
Specialist,
Documentation
Specialist, M&E
Specialist.
District level (31):
Environment
Specialist, Social
Specialist
Develop and adopt      Environmental DLI 2      RDWSD             Due Date     01-Jun-2023 E&S screening, mitigation,
systems and            and Social                                                          planning and monitoring
procedures to          Systems                                                             procedures developed, adopted
identify, manage                                                                           and applied across all proposed
and monitor                                                                                investments under the
environmental and                                                                          program.
social risks and
impacts in the
                                                                                              Quarterly E&S compliance
Program activities.
                                                                                              reports by RDWSD field staff.
Review and             Environmental DLI 2      RDWSD             Due Date     01-Jun-2023 Standard bid / contract
strengthen E&S         and Social                                                          documents include
provisions in          Systems                                                             environmental and social
tendering                                                                                  provisions as specified in ESSA
procedures, bid
documents, work
orders, contract
agreements, etc.
pertaining to civil
works to be
awarded under the
World Bank
Program.

Enhance capacity       Environmental DLI 2      RDWSD             Due Date     01-Sep-        Training plan, Evidence of
of RDWSD staff,        and Social                                              2023           training conducted, and
including              Systems                                                                number of persons trained
PMU/District
(DTSS) staff,
contractors, ISA,
DWSM, VWSC, GPs



                                                             62
       The World Bank
       Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



and other
implementing
entities on E&S
risks management
and application of
revised
implementation
procedures.
Conduct social        Environmental DLI 2     RDWSD            Due Date    01-Dec-      Social Audit manual, social
audit to track the    and Social                                           2023         audit reports disclosed
vulnerable people     Systems
accessing benefits
under
JJM/Jaladhare

Undertake third       Environmental DLI 2     RDWSD            Due Date    01-Jun-2026 Mid-term and End-term
party                 and Social                                                       Environmental Audit Reports.
Environmental         Systems
Audit/ Review to
determine the
extent to which
due diligence is
being carried out
effectively
Develop a template    Environmental DLI 2     RDWSD            Due Date    01-Dec-      E&S compliance reports by
and commence          and Social                                           2023         RDWSD field staff every six (6)
periodic monitoring   Systems                                                           months.
and reporting on
environmental and
social risk
management
Strengthen            Environmental DLI 2     RDWSD            Due Date    01-Jun-2023 Manpower and financial
Grievance             and Social                                                       resources allocated for GRM,
Redressal             Systems                                                          external GRM evaluation
Mechanism in                                                                           disclosed.
terms of scope
capacity, outreach
and impact.

Strengthen staffing   Fiduciary     DLI 2.2   RDWSD            Recurrent   Continuous   Fiduciary staffing and capacity
and fiduciary         Systems                                                           of the PMU and all IAs need to
capacity of the IAs                                                                     be strengthened through
                                                                                        appropriate and timely
                                                                                        appointments and regular
                                                                                        fiduciary training in regard to
                                                                                        procurement, contract
                                                                                        management, eprocurement,
                                                                                        audits and program accounting
Enhance reporting     Fiduciary               RDWSD            Due Date    01-Dec-      Reports generated from K-2
of K-2 PFMS           Systems                                              2023         PFMS module and linkage with
software and link                                                                       PFMS completed
to PFMS within six
months of
effectiveness




                                                        63
       The World Bank
       Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



Strengthen internal   Fiduciary   DLI 2     RDWSD              Due Date    01-Jun-2023 Centralized fiduciary complaint
controls through      Systems                                                          redressal mechanism
fiduciary complaint                                                                    operational.
handling
mechanism.

Develop bidding       Fiduciary   DLI 4     RDWSD              Due Date    01-Jun-2023 Contract management
and contract          Systems                                                          information system developed
management                                                                             and implemented.
information system
Ensure that the       Fiduciary             RDWSD              Recurrent   Continuous   Anti-Corruption Guideline
World Bank Anti-      Systems                                                           systematically included in every
Corruption                                                                              contract.
Guideline is added
in every bid
document as part
of the contract.
Annual                Fiduciary             RDWSD              Recurrent   Yearly       Annual procurement audit
procurement audit     Systems                                                           conducted and complied with.
to be conducted by
independent
procurement
agency
Appoint internal      Fiduciary             RDWSD              Due Date    01-Dec-      Auditor appointed
auditor within six    Systems                                              2023
months of
effectiveness

  .




                                                        64
The World Bank
Karnataka Sustainable Rural Water Supply Program (P179039)



                                 ANNEX 7. IMPLEMENTATION SUPPORT PLAN

 Main Focus of Implementation Support

 1.       The implementation support plan is adapted to the design and risk profile of the Program. The
 borrower is responsible for the Program’s overall implementation, including its technical aspects. Since
 RDWSD is new to the PforR instrument, the Program will require considerable focused support from the
 World Bank team, particularly during the early stages of implementation. At the block and district levels,
 RDWSD staff will need to make a rapid shift in their focus especially on outreach, sensitization, and
 capacity building of GPs. The PforR instrument transfers performance risk to the implementing districts
 and will require the change of existing operational practices and norms. The basic mandate for the World
 Bank implementation support under the PforR is to:

          (a)   Review implementation progress and achievement of Program results and DLIs;
          (b)   Provide support for resolving emerging Program implementation challenges;
          (c)   Provide technical support for the implementation of the PAP, the achievement of DLIs and
                other results, and institutional development and capacity building;
          (d)   Monitor systems performance to ensure their continuing adequacy through Program
                monitoring reports, audit reports, and field visits; and
          (e)   Monitor changes in risks to the Program and compliance with Legal Agreements and, as
                needed, the PAP.

 2.       Key to effective implementation support will be the coordination of its timing with critical points
 in the timelines of planning and verification of results for payments request to the World Bank. The first
 implementation support mission will take place immediately after effectiveness to provide direct
 feedback and implementation support with critical input and involvement of environmental, social, and
 fiduciary teams.
                                         Table 7.1. Implementation Support
       Time                      Focus                          Skills Needed             Resources Estimate

   First 12        Enhancing M&E systems, design       Procurement, FM, social and        Four (4)
   months          of GP performance and reward        environment, water specialist,     implementation
                   scheme, 24/7 capacity building,     M&E, FLL, and tank rejuvenation    support missions
                   and rollout of FLL training. This                                      (ISMs)
                   phase will also include support
                   on tank selection technology
                   and independent verification of
                   prior results
   12–48           Review of implementation            Procurement, FM, social and        Two (2) ISMs
   months          progress, field verification of     environment, water specialist,
                   verification reports from the IVA   M&E, FLL, energy specialist, and
                                                       tank rejuvenation




                                                        65
