Public Disclosure Authorized
                                         The World Bank
                                         Balochistan Water Security and Productivity Improvement Project(P179227)




                                  @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                       Project Information Document (PID)

                                                      Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 07-Nov-2025 | Report No: PIDA35475




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Nov 07, 2025                                                                                       Page 1 of 11
          The World Bank
          Balochistan Water Security and Productivity Improvement Project(P179227)


   @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
   BASIC INFORMATION


   A. Basic Project Data
   Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                 Operation Name
   Pakistan                       P179227                      Balochistan Water Security and Productivity
                                                               Improvement Project
   Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
   MID EAST,NORTH                 12-Feb-2024                  24-Jun-2025                   Water
   AFRICA,AFG,PAK
   Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                  Implementing Agency
   Investment Project             Ministry of Economic         Balochistan Irrigation
   Financing (IPF)                Affairs                      Department

  Proposed Development Objective(s)
   increase access to water for productive use, improve efficiency of water use and improve water supply service delivery
   in selected locations of Balochistan

   @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
   PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

   Maximizing Finance for Development

   Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?
   Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?

   SUMMARY
     Total Operation Cost                                                                                           100.00

     Total Financing                                                                                                100.00
                 of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                   94.00
     Financing Gap                                                                                                     0.00

   DETAILS
     World Bank Group Financing
       International Development Association (IDA)                                                               100.00
          IDA Credit                                                                                             100.00


Nov 07, 2025                                                                                                        Page 2 of 11
          The World Bank
          Balochistan Water Security and Productivity Improvement Project(P179227)




     @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
 Environmental and Social Risk Classification                     Concept Review Decision
 Substantial                                                      The review did authorize the preparation to continue



     Other Decision (as needed)

     B. Introduction and Context

     Country Context

 1.      Over the past two decades, Pakistan significantly reduced poverty, but human development outcomes have
 lagged, and severe economic challenges put past gains at risk. Pakistan made significant progress toward reducing
 poverty between 2001 and 2018 when the expansion of off-farm economic opportunities and increased inflow of
 remittances allowed over 47 million Pakistanis to rise out of poverty. However, this rapid poverty reduction has not fully
 translated into improved socioeconomic conditions, as human capital outcomes have remained poor and stagnant, with
 high levels of stunting at 38 percent and learning poverty at 75 percent. The deterioration of economic conditions, in
 combination with non-economic shocks such as the COVID-19 pandemic and the devastating floods of 2022, are expected
 to reduce household incomes and increase their vulnerability to falling below the national poverty line
 2.       Pakistan’s economy is currently under severe stress with low foreign reserves, a depreciating currency, and high
 inflation. Reflecting a consumption-driven growth model, with limited productivity-enhancing investment and exports,
 strong economic growth has often come at a cost of economic imbalances and frequent macroeconomic crises. Long-
 term growth of real gross domestic product (GDP) per capita has therefore been low, averaging only around 2.2 percent
 annually over 2000–22. With high public consumption, economic growth increased substantively above potential in fiscal
 year 2022 (FY22), which led to strong pressures on domestic prices, external and fiscal sectors, the exchange rate, and
 foreign reserves. These imbalances were exacerbated by the catastrophic flooding in 2022, surging world commodity
 prices, tightening global financing conditions, and domestic political uncertainty. Furthermore, distortive policy measures,
 including periods of informal exchange rate restrictions and import controls, delayed the International Monetary Fund
 (IMF) Extended Fund Facility (EFF) program, and contributed to creditworthiness downgrades, lower confidence, high
 yields and interest payments, and the loss of access to international capital markets.
 3.      The recently published Country Climate Development Report1 shows that Pakistan’s high vulnerability to
 climate change is a risk multiplier, compounding its human and economic development challenges. The country
 consistently ranks among the top ten countries worldwide most affected by climate change.2 Extreme weather events
 have increased in frequency and intensity, impacting ecosystems, people, settlements, and infrastructure. Heatwaves,
 heavy precipitation events, droughts, and cyclones are prevalent risks. Attribution research on the 2022 floods has shown
 that the 5-day maximum average rainfall of Balochistan and neighboring Sindh was around 75 percent more intense than


 1
     World Bank Group (2022). Pakistan Country Climate Development Report.
 2
     Germanwatch, Global Climate Risk Index 2021. https://www.germanwatch.org/en/19777

Nov 07, 2025                                                                                                        Page 3 of 11
          The World Bank
          Balochistan Water Security and Productivity Improvement Project(P179227)


 it would have had the climate not warmed by 1.2 degrees.3 Climate projections have been predicting such a shifting trend
 for years. Historical records show that heavy rainfall has significantly increased in the region alongside the increase in
 greenhouse gas emissions, strongly suggesting climate change played a central role in the event. The floods came on the
 heels of a severe heatwave and saw temperatures continuously above 45°C, resulting in crop losses, power outages, and
 forest fires. These changes in climate and extreme events are likely to disproportionately affect the most disadvantaged
 groups, among, poorer farmers, women, and children.

     Sectoral and Institutional Context

 4.      Water is critical to Balochistan’s economy and contributes an essential public health service. Agriculture,
 livestock, and industries that depend on water account for at least 52 percent of the provincial GDP, and agriculture
 remains the primary source of employment for 67 percent of the province’s 20.6 million population.

 5.      However, Balochistan is experiencing a water crisis because of decades of underinvestment in water
 infrastructure, low services delivery standards, and weak sector institutions. Further, variability in water availability is
 far higher than the national average as per capita water storage represents only 20 percent of the national average. The
 low investment in water storage has hampered the possibility of buffering the high variability of water resources. The
 province has a semi-arid climate compounded by rugged topography, insecurity, and sparse water management schemes
 rendering the delivery of development interventions, particularly challenging. Recent economic growth in the province
 has been largely driven by the expansion of unsustainable tube-well irrigation for high-value agriculture, especially
 horticulture, and orchards. Anarchic groundwater use has led to considerable stress on water resources in rural and urban
 areas. Already groundwater discharge exceeds average recharge, and expanding use is causing rapid depletion of one
 meter per year on average 4.

 6.       The Climate and Disaster Risk Screening revealed that Balochistan is particularly vulnerable to natural disasters
 due to its geographical location, socio-economic background, and climate change. The province is acutely susceptible to
 floods and droughts, which are becoming increasingly variable, intense, and frequent due to climate change. These
 hazards include floods, droughts, extreme heatwaves, wildfires, cyclones, coastal erosion, and rising sea levels, and are
 likely to increase in frequency and intensity due to climate change. Recurring floods in 2010, 2011, and 2022 led to
 significant loss of life, livestock, and cropland and caused critical infrastructure damage.5 Balochistan lacks resilience to
 both riverine and pluvial floods. Poor watershed management and low drainage investment also make Balochistan
 substantially contribute to this vulnerability. The reduction in vegetation cover has decreased interception and retention
 of rainwater, increasing the risk of flash floods and decreasing groundwater recharge. Due to extreme climate variability,
 Balochistan is also subject to prolonged droughts with dire consequences for rural livelihoods6. Balochistan often
 experiences severe drought conditions with a 4–5-year cyclical frequency. The long dry spells take a heavy toll on the
 livelihood patterns of the local population as irrigation and potable water resources dry up7. Water availability is
 drastically reduced during extended droughts. The rural poor are the most vulnerable to water scarcity in Balochistan.

 3
     World Weather Attribution, 2022. https://www.worldweatherattribution.org/wp-content/uploads/Pakistan-floods-
 scientific-report.pdf
 4 Van Steenbergen, F., Kaisarani, A. B., Khan, N. U., & Gohar, M. S. (2015). A case of groundwater depletion in Balochistan, Pakistan: Enter into the

 void. Journal of Hydrology: Regional Studies, 4, 36-47
 5 World Bank. 2010. Pakistan Floods 2010: Preliminary Damage and Needs Assessment.
 6 Kakar, Z., Shah, S. M., & Khan, M. A. (2018, September). Scarcity of water resources in rural area of Quetta District; challenges and preparedness.

 In IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering (Vol. 414, No. 1, p. 012013). IOP Publishing.
 7 Kakar, Z., Khair, S. M., Khan, M. Z., & Khan, M. A. (2016). Socio-economic impact of water scarcity on the economy of Pishin Lora Basin in

 Balochistan. Journal of Applied and Emerging Sciences, 5(2), pp90-96.

Nov 07, 2025                                                                                                                                  Page 4 of 11
          The World Bank
          Balochistan Water Security and Productivity Improvement Project(P179227)


 The groundwater in Balochistan’s aquifers provides a buffer against drought for crop production, for livestock and human
 needs8. Improving rural livelihoods and stimulating economic growth require vastly improved management of the scarce
 water resources of the province. With a very limited per capita storage infrastructure capacity, managing the ever-
 increasing seasonal and inter-annual rainfall variability and water availability will continue to be a significant challenge for
 water security and service provision.
 7.      Quetta, the provincial capital and main urban center of Balochistan, is already facing a water crisis, and the
 demographic, hydroclimatic, and water management trends suggest it will worsen. Between 2010 and 2021, the average
 depth to the water table in Quetta increased by about 90 meters. Groundwater irrigated orchards in the Quetta Valley are
 a major driver of depletion that affects Quetta’s water supply. At the same time, rainfall runoff and snow melt water from
 mountain ranges around Quetta city has been identified as a potential source of water for Quetta. Extensive plans and
 studies have been undertaken but without commensurate investment9. The potential for managed aquifer recharge in
 the Quetta valley is high but has not been systematically investigated. Water quality is also an issue and 65 percent of
 drinking water sources are deemed unsafe for human consumption. Sanitation and wastewater management are largely
 neglected, which contributes to the fecal contamination of drinking water in Quetta, while there is unfettered agricultural
 use of untreated wastewater in urban orchards. The last main aspect of Quetta’s water insecurity is poor institutional
 performance, which is a window into larger water governance issues in Balochistan. Water supply and sanitation service
 delivery in Quetta is affected by poor institutional capacity, overlapping mandates, and lack of coordination.
 8.       The Balochistan Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) Policy 2006 represented a paradigm shift in
 thinking about water management in Balochistan, but water sector institutions were unable to translate this concept
 into a tangible investment and institutional development model. Instead, the legacy of siloed and uncoordinated
 institutions persists and the capacity of individual departments/agencies to manage water resources, deliver services, and
 mitigate risks remains weak. Currently, the Balochistan Irrigation Department (ID) oversees water resources management
 with an almost exclusive focus on irrigation development and flood protection infrastructure. The project management
 capacity of the ID has improved over the years with the implementation of large-scale operations financed by the World
 Bank, by Asian Development Bank (ADB) and by the European Union. However, the ID still lacks a service delivery approach
 and progress on legal and institutional reform has been slow and often marred by poor inter-departmental cooperation.
 Nevertheless, an updated IWRM policy has been drafted and is currently under review, and work on a provincial water
 resources law is underway. Effective implementation will require strengthening of ID and other water-sector agencies.
 9.      The GoB has requested World Bank support in addressing these pressing irrigation, flood management, and
 water supply and sanitation issues in priority areas that undermine water security in the Province. The Balochistan
 Water Security and Productivity Improvement Project (BWSPIP) is designed in response to this request. It is envisioned
 that through this operation, the Bank will also support Balochistan in developing a credible long-term program to improve
 water security for production and public health and enhance the productivity of key water-related sectors of the economy
 to create jobs and improve livelihoods following an IWRM approach.

  Relationship to CPF

 10.     The project is consistent with the World Bank Group’s (WBG) Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) FY15–19 for
 the Islamic Republic of Pakistan discussed by the WBG Board of Executive Directors on May 1, 2014 (Report No. 84645-

 8 Ashraf, M., & Routray, J. K. (2013). Perception and understanding of drought and coping strategies of farming households in north-west

 Balochistan. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 5, 49-60. Siebert, S., Burke, J., Faures, J. M., Frenken, K., Hoogeveen, J., Döll, P., &
 Portmann, F. T. (2010). Groundwater use for irrigation–a global inventory. Hydrology and earth system sciences, 14(10), 1863-1880.
 9 Mangi Dam 8 Million Gallons per Day (MGD); Burj-e-Aziz Dam, 23 MGD; Babar Kach Dam, 60 MGD; and Halak 2.5 MGD. Mangi dam has been

 completed but is not currently supplying to Quetta, while the other dam projects are yet to commence.

Nov 07, 2025                                                                                                                                       Page 5 of 11
          The World Bank
          Balochistan Water Security and Productivity Improvement Project(P179227)


 PK). The CPS was extended to FY20 by the corresponding Performance and Learning Review dated May 18, 2017 (Report
 No. 113574). The preparation of the new Country Partnership Framework (CPF) was deferred in FY21 due to the COVID-
 19 crisis and paused due to the recent unprecedented and catastrophic monsoon floods. A new CPF is expected to be
 delivered in the second half of FY24. The focus areas and objectives of the CPS remain relevant and are reflected in the
 ongoing engagement in the country. This project contributes to CPS Outcome 2.2: Increased Productivity in Farms in
 Selected Irrigations Schemes; Outcome 3.2: “Reduced Vulnerability for Groups at Risk;” and Outcome 3.3: “Increased
 Resilience to Disasters in Targeted Regions.”

 11.       Paris Alignment: The Project is consistent with the country’s Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC). In the
 latest NDC (2021) submitted to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), the country
 commits to prioritizing investments in resilient infrastructure and institutions for managing increasing flood risks in the
 water and other related sectors. Activities supported under this project will be specifically targeted to address these risks
 by building infrastructure and institutional capacity, as well as through the application of improved methodologies that
 better incorporate climate shocks and uncertainties as well as O&M and asset management practices informed by the
 latest climate science. Similarly, the project is aligned with the recently published Pakistan CCDR (2022), as it contributes
 to strengthening human capital through improving shock responsiveness and through the expansion of access to water
 which will contribute to reducing child stunting. The project is also consistent with the PDNA (2022) and supports the
 implementation of the Government of Pakistan (GoP)’s 4RF in Balochistan.10 The watershed management, rangeland
 management, and flood control activities under Component A are expected to be Universally Aligned, as the project is
 expected to protect and improve the quality of natural landscapes (including forests) and improve the resilience of the
 watershed and natural landscapes, while avoiding threats to biodiversity and land use change that would release
 sequestered carbon. Any additional water storage constructed is expected to be small-scale and Universally Aligned. The
 irrigation and agricultural activities under Component A will enhance the beneficiaries’ resilience to climate impacts, while
 also avoiding relying primarily on diesel as the main energy source and avoiding locking in high-emission assets or
 practices, and thus expected to be aligned. Changes in energy demand for irrigation systems due to increased water use
 efficiency will be assessed during project preparation, as will on-farm activities from a GHG standpoint. The water supply
 activities under Component B will increase the beneficiaries’ resilience to climate impacts, while also increasing energy
 efficiency and avoiding relying primarily on diesel as the main energy source, and are thus expected to be Universally
 Aligned.

  C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

  12.      The proposed Project Development Objective is to increase access to water for productive use, improve
  efficiency of water use and improve water supply service delivery in selected locations of Balochistan

      Key Results (From PCN)

 13.     The following indicators will be used to assess PDO level indicators:
        • People gaining access to water for productive use (of which % women, youth). Water for productive use means
          water for irrigated agriculture, rainfed agriculture, livestock, fisheries, and small-scale processing. “Access”
          means any of the following (a) water is delivered at the point of production or within 250m from the point of
          production; (b) water is provided in form of groundwater recharge or as soil moisture.
        • Cultivable land area (ha) brought under production

 10
   Government of Pakistan. 2022. Resilient Recovery, Rehabilitation, and Reconstruction Framework.
 https://www.pc.gov.pk/uploads/downloads/Final_4RF.pdf.

Nov 07, 2025                                                                                                         Page 6 of 11
          The World Bank
          Balochistan Water Security and Productivity Improvement Project(P179227)


      •    Volume of water (m3/year) saved through leakage reduction in water distribution networks and irrigation
           efficiency interventions
      •    People receiving improved water supply services (where improved water supply services mean a minimum of 8-
           hour water supply meeting GoP water quality standards, and supplied at an average pressure of 12m at
           predetermined points in the distribution network for no less than 300 days in a year, unless the service area is
           declared a disaster affected area

  D. Concept Description

 14.     Considering the magnitude of the water security crisis across Balochistan Province, the geographical scope and
 thematic focus of the Project represent areas where both the need for water-related services and the opportunities for
 achieving water-dependent development outcomes are the greatest. The Project will focus on the River Basins of the
 Kachhi plains for flood protection and irrigation investments, and on the Quetta Valley in the Pishin-Lora Basin for water
 supply and sanitation investments. The Kachhi plain has been selected because it is the poorest, one of the most
 vulnerable areas to floods generated by hill torrents. It is also an area with immense productive potential subject to
 coordinated and integrated development. The project will bring about a major paradigm shift to the watershed
 management through watershed level spatial planning including top-down and bottom-up approaches. For Quetta WSS,
 given the major institutional and operational challenges faced by Q-WASA, the vision of the Project is gradual systemic
 improvement in service delivery with a focus on: (i) demand-side management; (ii) introduction of a performance-based
 approach to utility management; (iii) operation and maintenance; and (iv) strengthening of technical and professional
 capacity for service delivery.
 Component A: Improving water availability, productivity, and efficiency in the Kachhi plains and in Pishin-Lora Basin
  Total Costs US$55 M (IDA US$55 M)

 15.      Sub-component A1: Water Infrastructure. This sub-component will support the development of priority flood
 protection, flood water detention, dispersion structures, leaky weirs and water harvesting structures across the Kachhi
 plains with a well-equipped piezometer for groundwater monitoring, an automatic weather station and gauge to increase
 the resilience of the Kachhi plain communities who are constantly exposed to the devastating impact of floods and drought
 and to address the destructive impact of flash floods. This sub-component will also support the construction or
 rehabilitation of water supply schemes with O&M for local communities.

 16.     Sub-component A2: Watershed Management. This sub-component will support a combination of watershed
 management interventions aimed at limiting erosion, promote groundwater recharge and provide fodder for livestock.
 The sub-component will be implemented through Participatory Watershed Management. For each sub-watershed, a
 Participatory Watershed Management plan (PWMP) will be developed following a Participatory Watershed Management
 Manual to be developed as part of project preparation. The project will recruit support organizations (SO) who will be
 responsible for helping community organizations design and implement their PWMP. The sub-component will introduce
 rotational grazing and stocking rate limits. These watershed improvement activities will increase productivity by allowing
 three cropping cycles per year.

 17.       Sub-component A3: Improvements of farm productivity and water use efficiency. The sub-component will enhance
 agriculture-based rural livelihoods by increasing productivity of agriculture, horticulture, and livestock. It will support the
 improvement of farm productivity and water use efficiency through the promotion of climate smart agricultural technics.
 It will also introduce adapted high value-crops in the context of spate irrigation systems. This sub-component will finance
 improvement of production and post-harvest technologies, field demonstrations of modern agricultural technologies and


Nov 07, 2025                                                                                                           Page 7 of 11
          The World Bank
          Balochistan Water Security and Productivity Improvement Project(P179227)


 practices, and more effective farm advisory services. SO will assist with the formation and training of water users
 associations (WUAs) and will provide assistance to WUAs for the preparation, implementation, and monitoring of brief
 Scheme Development and Management Plans (SDMP). SDMPs may cover construction/rehabilitation of infrastructure
 and sustainable conjunctive surface and groundwater use.

 Component B: Improving Water Supply Service Delivery in Quetta
 Total Costs US$36 M (IDA US$36 M)

 18.      This component will finance priority investments and institutional strengthening activities to enhance the
 efficiency, resilience, and sustainability of Q-WASA’s operations to deliver improved, safe, reliable, and inclusive water
 supply services in the Quetta. The proposed project focuses support on strengthening internal processes and procedures
 across priority areas including operational efficiency, customer relationship management, citizen engagement, human
 resource policies, and gender balance and inclusion. These interventions are well aligned with the priorities identified in
 the diagnostic and plans developed for Q-WASA through the Utility of the Future (UoF) Program. Given Q-WASA’s current
 institutional capacity, it is critical to adopt a gradual, phased approach in institutional strengthening.

 19.     Sub-component B1: Bulk water supply to Quetta. This sub-component will bolster water supply to Quetta, with a
 primary focus on vulnerable and unserved neighborhoods of the city. The activities to be financed will diversify and
 augment Quetta’s water supply sources through mainly improved multipurpose surface water storage, groundwater
 recharge, and reduction of network leakages. The ongoing master planning exercise will provide technical specifics for
 sites and nature of water storage infrastructure to build, groundwater recharge solutions.

 20.     Sub-component B2: Improving Water Supply Service Delivery in Quetta. This sub-component will support the
 following activities: physical water losses reduction, asset management, and energy efficiency program.

 21.     Sub-component B3: Strengthening the Performance of Q-WASA. This sub-component will support activities aiming
 to improve the capacity of key institutions in the water supply and sanitation sector. To create the necessary incentive
 and keep the momentum, selected activities under this component will be realized under performance-based conditions
 related to both institutional and technical performance indicators.

 Component C: Project management, technical assistance and capacity strengthening
  Total Costs US$9 M (IDA US$9 M)

 22.      This component will support project management, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), technical assistance and
 technical studies, capacity strengthening. It will finance project implementation costs associated with the Project
 Management Unit (PMU) and the Project Implementation Units (PIUs). It will support M&E consultancy and Project
 Supervision and Implementation Assistance (PSIA) consultancy. It will also finance both studies directly related to project
 implementation and the preparatory studies for future investments. The component will design and establish a project-
 specific Integrated Management Information System (IMIS) shared among the departments involved in the project
 implementation with the objective of the IMIS becoming part of the project management tools of GoB. It will also support
 the development and establishment of a WaSH Management Information System (WMIS) housed at PHED.

 Component D: Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)
  Total Costs US$0 M (IDA US$0 M)




Nov 07, 2025                                                                                                       Page 8 of 11
          The World Bank
          Balochistan Water Security and Productivity Improvement Project(P179227)


 23.     This component will support preparedness for, and rapid response to climate and natural disasters, emergency,
 and/or catastrophic event as needed. The provisional zero cost for this component will allow for rapid reallocation of
 credit proceeds from other components under streamlined procurement and disbursement procedures.

   @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
 Legal Operational Policies
                        Policies                                                    Triggered?
   Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                          No
   Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                    No



   Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts


 24.      The key project environmental risks and impacts are mainly associated with the civil works involved in different
 project interventions. These include air and noise pollution, generation of dust due to movement of vehicles and
 machinery, generation of construction and solid waste, surface/ground water contamination, land clearance, generation
 of spoil material, oil and chemical spillages, soil contamination, reduction of surface water flow during
 rehabilitation/construction of irrigation structures, deterioration of water quality during rehabilitation of water pipeline
 system, occupational health and safety risks associated with the construction, unsafe and unhealthy working conditions,
 risk of accidents and incidents at work place, lack of compliance with local OHS rules and regulations, exposure to
 hazardous materials and security related issues. Most of the project activities will be carried out in the built environment
 and is not likely to have a significant impact on the biodiversity and forests. Key social risks include risks related to
 moderate civil works for flood protection and water storage infrastructure including land use and potential land conflicts,
 labor management/influx, community health and safety, as well as inadvertent exclusion of potential beneficiaries, elite
 capture, and Gender-Based Violence, Sexual Exploitation and Abuse, and Sexual Harassment (GBV/SEA/SH). The risks will
 be mitigated through the development, consultation, disclosure, and application of a range of E&S tools. Based on this
 risk classification, requisite institutional strengthening measures and GRMs to address social risks (including those related
 to GBV/SEA/SH) have been incorporated into the project design. Throughout implementation, the project will be required
 to keep an active GRM wherein affected parties can submit complaints and concerns on how the project has/will affect
 them; the PIUs are expected to address complaints submitted through the GRM. The Bank will regularly monitor the
 functionality of the project’s GRM. SEA/SH risk assessment tools for civil works and social protection were applied for the
 project’s civil works under Components A and B, and capacity building of WUAs under Component A. SEA/SH risks are
 moderate as per both risk assessment tools as women and children may be exposed to labor and other project workers
 during the moderate level civil works and the project’s capacity building activities at the community level with the WUAs.
 25.     Climate resilience. The project is expected to significantly contribute to climate resilience and adaptation.
 Investments under component A will follow a spatial planning strengthening the systemic resilience of the targeted areas
 of the Kachhi plains to recurrent floods and droughts. Investments under component B will contribute to climate resilience
 and co-benefits by reducing water losses and improved energy efficiency of the water supply operations.
 26.      Gender and Social Inclusion. Gender aspects will be mainstreamed through: (i) systemic engagement of women
 as participants and decision-makers in WUAs through outreach and dedicated capacity building efforts, including targeted
 community-level behavior change initiatives; and (ii) integration of clearly defined roles for women in planning,
 monitoring, and O&M; structured consultations with women groups as part of the baseline survey and O&M phases. In

Nov 07, 2025                                                                                                         Page 9 of 11
          The World Bank
          Balochistan Water Security and Productivity Improvement Project(P179227)


 addition, Q-WASA has committed to developing a gender strategy to promote gender mainstreaming and integration into
 the institutions' regular rules, procedures, and practices. During preparation, a detailed gender assessment will be
 conducted to identify key gender gaps at the institutional and service delivery level for both water supply and sanitation.
 27.     Citizen engagement. The project will adopt various complementary approaches to citizen engagement. WUAs
 will serve as an important platform for two-way dialogues and participatory feedback processes as part of regular
 monitoring. The project will support the development and implementation of a robust customer and stakeholders'
 engagement strategy using both traditional and digital communication platforms to maximize the participation of Quetta
 residents.
   @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
   CONTACT POINT

   World Bank
     Basharat Ahmed Saeed
     Senior Water Specialist

   Borrower/Client/Recipient
    Ministry of Economic Affairs

   Implementing Agencies
    Balochistan Irrigation Department

   FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

   The World Bank
   1818 H Street, NW
   Washington, D.C. 20433
   Telephone: (202) 473-1000
   Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

   @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
   APPROVAL


   Task Team Leader(s):                      Basharat Ahmed Saeed

   Approved By

   Practice Manager/Manager:                 Josses Mugabi                            14-Jun-2023

   Country Director:                         Anjum Ahmad                              04-Aug-2023



Nov 07, 2025                                                                                                      Page 10 of 11
          The World Bank
          Balochistan Water Security and Productivity Improvement Project(P179227)




Nov 07, 2025                                                                         Page 11 of 11
