Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project (P180429)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                           Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                    (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                       Date Prepared/Updated: 03/22/2024 | Report No: ESRSA03285




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Feb 07, 2025                                                                        Page 1 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project (P180429)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                 Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P180429                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)      Bahia que Alimenta          2025

                     Operation Name            Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries          Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Brazil                    Brazil                                  LATIN AMERICA AND           Agriculture and Food
                                                                                       CARIBBEAN

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Board Date

                     State of Bahia            CAR - Companhia de Desenvolvimento      23-Apr-2024                 07-Nov-2024
                                               e Acao Regional

                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost
                     Review Date



Public Disclosure
                     02-Apr-2024               158,680,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     To increase market access, agricultural productivity and develop resilience of family farmers to shocks while expanding
                     access to resilient water services in selected rural areas.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The proposed project aims to improve access to markets, climate change resilience of family farmers, and access to safe
                     water in selected rural areas. The project will benefit mostly small-scale family farmers, indigenous people, and
                     traditional communities.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                   Page 2 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project (P180429)



                     The state of Bahia has 417 municipalities distributed in 27 Territories and encompasses an area of 567.4 thousand km2,
                     which corresponds to 6.7% of the total area of the country and more than a third of the Brazilian Northeast Region.
                     With an estimated population of 14.9 million inhabitants in 2021, it is the 4th largest state in Brazil in population size.
                     The state is in an area with very different climatic characteristics and three Brazilian biomes coexist in its territory: (i)
                     Caatinga, (ii) Atlantic Forest and (iii) Cerrado. Caatinga biome, in the semi-arid region, represents 78.6% of the entire
                     area of the state. The occurrence of climate events such as droughts in the semi-arid region and floods along the coastal
                     zones are getting more frequent over the last years.
                      Indigenous peoples, quilombola communities and other traditional communities are overrepresented among the poor
                     rural population in the state of Bahia. According to the National Indigenous People Foundation (Fundação Nacional dos
                     Povos Indígenas or FUNAI in Portuguese) there are 16 Indigenous Peoples in the state of Bahia. They account for 16,817
                     people, living in 31 indigenous lands, which comprise 113 local communities. Nearly 56 percent of them live with
                     monthly per capita income up to ¼ of the Brazilian minimum wage and 80% earn up to ½ of the minimum wage. There
                     are also 468 quilombola communities and 507 communities (11,431 families) in which the system of “fundo de pasto”
                     prevails.
                     Bahia has the largest economy in the Northeast Region. In 2019, it accounted for approximately 4% of Brazil's Gross
                     Domestic Product (GDP) and for 27.9% of the economy of the Northeast Region and has achieved important economic
                     results and remains in a prominent position in the national economy, however, even in this positive economic scenario,
                     most recent social indicators shows that there is still maintenance of poverty data in Bahia. In the context of food
                     security, the most recent impacts resulting from the Covid-19 pandemic pointed out in the National Survey on Food
                     Insecurity in the Context of the Covid-19 Pandemic in Brazil, carried out in 2021, indicate an increase in the food
                     insecurity index of the Brazilian population. It is noteworthy that, for the Northeast Region, this index reached 71.9% of




Public Disclosure
                     the population in 2021, being above the national average.
                     Regarding family agriculture, out of a total of 762 thousand agricultural properties, 593,000 are family production units,
                     according to the Agricultural Census (IBGE, 2017). Of the total area of 28 million hectares occupied by rural properties,
                     family farmers occupy 9 million (32%) and are responsible for 25% of the total value of state agricultural production.
                     Family farming in the semi-arid region of Bahia is fundamentally characterized by rain-dependent production systems
                     that integrate animal husbandry, plant production and extractives.
                     Considering water access, only 49.4% of rural households in Bahia have a general distribution network as a source of
                     water supply. 32% depend on wells and springs. 18.6% have a water source from another type of source (generally in a
                     fragile, insecure and non-regular way), which highlights the need for investments that seek to expand or even
                     universalize access to water for consumption and production in rural areas.
                     Despite the interventions of numerous public policies to promote rural development, including the Bahia Produtiva
                     Project (Phase I), the rural population still has limited access to credit lines, technologies, good agricultural practices,
                     technical assistance services, difficulties in accessing profitable markets and infrastructure limitations.


                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Project Management Unit will be hosted under the Company for Development and Regional Action (CAR), which
                     will be responsible for the general management, planning, coordination, execution, monitoring and evaluation of all
                     activities of this project, as known as locally “Bahia que Produz e Alimenta” Project. CAR will continue to be the leading
                     agency during project implementation, in coordination with CERB (Companhia de Engenharia Hidrica e Saneamento da
                     Bahia) - co-executor and responsible for component 2 action -Water supply systems.



                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                        Page 3 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project (P180429)



                     The Project will build on five years of experience of implementing phase 1 of Bahia Produtiva - BAHIA SUSTAINABLE
                     RURAL DEVELOPMENT PROJECT (P147157), and substantial implementation capacity and operational procedures
                     developed and largely mainstreamed in the CAR, CERB and others involved institutions. Throughout this time, CAR has
                     installed a reliable management system following the requirements for environmental and social assessment,
                     monitoring and evaluation (M & E), reporting, gender, and generation, technical approaches for sustainable land
                     management at family agriculture, Indigenous Peoples, and grievance redress. The previous project was implemented
                     under the former Safeguards Operational Policies and closing rating was Satisfactory in terms of Environmental and
                     Social Safeguards compliance. The project has also received Award of Best practices in International Fundraising in the
                     State level from International Economic Affairs Secretariat (SAIN) / Brazilian Development Association (ABDE).
                     Despite CAR’s experience working with the Bank’s Safeguard Policies and robust and institutional platform developed
                     for Bahia Produtiva Project (phase 1), the Bank team has been providing close support and follow-up on the
                     development of the E&S instruments. Specific workshops on the ESF for capacity building have also been provided
                     during preparation missions.

                     The Environmental and Social Safeguards team, which worked on implementing the old environmental and social
                     safeguards framework, has received training to update the ESF requirements. The team will include an environmental
                     specialist, a social specialist and an engagement and communication specialist. In addition to the PMU socio-
                     environmental team, CERB (co-executor and responsible for implementing Component 2) will designate focal points -
                     environmental and social - who will work in coordination with the PMU team for socio-environmental management, as
                     set out in the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan - ESCP.
                     Additionally, the Project's Component 4 includes institutional strengthening actions to improve the Borrower's capacity.




Public Disclosure    II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                         Moderate


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                  Moderate
                     Overall, the Components covered by this Project are expected to contribute to sustainable, resilient, and inclusive
                     rural development, generating positive environmental impacts and co-benefits. Notwithstanding, the environmental
                     risk classification is proposed as Moderate. This is to account for the project scope and potential environmental risks
                     and impacts resulting from the activities related to the small scale primary agricultural production, food processing,
                     and the construction or rehabilitation works from small rural water supply systems “centrais de água”. These impacts
                     may include: (i) waste streams and surface water contamination from food processing plants such as dairy and yuca
                     processing; (ii) diffuse impacts from agricultural production such as soil erosion, environmental contamination with
                     pesticides; (iii) small scale construction wastes, erosion, environmental noise and dust emissions, small leaks of
                     lubricants and fluids from construction machinery; (iv) sludges and other water treatment plant wastes from filters,
                     sedimentation and flotation tanks; (v) OHS hazards and risks from a variety of activities covered under project’s sub
                     components such as exposure to hazardous refrigerant gases (ammonia), unprotected moving parts and machinery,
                     exposure to hazardous chemicals and pesticides, construction traffic hazards, exposure to electrical hazards, working
                     at heights, entering in confined spaces; exposure noise and dusts emissions, excavation hazards, ergonomic hazards;


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                     Page 4 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project (P180429)



                     among others. Under component two, although the main source of water is expected to be from wells, water may
                     eventually be drawn from surface water sheds, which may require the construction of small structures to allow water
                     catchment. However, there won’t be the construction or use of large Dams, or any Dams with water retention
                     capacity, or Dams that could cause safety risks. Under component 3, the project also includes Technical Assistance to
                     support technological innovation and climate resilient agriculture practices. The supported activities will prioritize the
                     use of environmentally sustainable technologies and are not anticipated to cause significant impacts
                                                                                                                                      Moderate
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The project has a Moderate Social Risk rating, primarily associated with activities under Components 1 and 2. These
                     activities involve financing small to moderate scale civil works. During the preparation phase, identified social risks
                     include the acquisition of land on small scale under Component 2. However, this acquisition should not result in
                     physical displacement or major disruption of community health and safety. The project does not anticipate a
                     significant influx of workers, as priority will be given to hiring local labor. The risk of GBV, SEA)/SH, and Violence
                     Against Children (VAC) during the activities under Component 1 and the construction of water and sanitation
                     infrastructure in rural areas (Comp.2) is considered low. However, these risks will not be neglected, especially for
                     activities in rural areas where supervision can be challenging. Another risk is related to project selection criteria and
                     beneficiaries, which may lead to the capture of project benefits by the elite. To mitigate such risks, vulnerability,
                     inclusion (, indigenous people, gender, youth) aspects will be incorporated into the technical criteria for selecting
                     communities under Comp.1 and 2. Social risks associated with cultural and social practices that discourage adherence
                     to safe sanitation and water services will be addressed through robust support for the communities served under
                     Component 2. Additionally, community engagement work will be included in the scope of Components 1 and 2




Public Disclosure
                     activities. Other mitigation measures will be the social work activities of CERB and "Centrais das Águas." Regarding
                     Component 1, community labor risks have been identified and will be addressed through training such as on the
                     proper use of PPE and appropriate contracting practices. Risks and barriers faced by vulnerable groups in accessing
                     the project are being adequately addressed. The project plans to implement an Indigenous ATER (Assistance and
                     Technical Extension Service), which will enhance community capacities in rural areas. To mitigate potential risks and
                     to address the demand for small communities, including indigenous people and other traditional groups, women and
                     youth, the project is engaging these groups during the preparation phase to analyze alternatives and appropriate
                     selection criteria. The risk classification also considers the capacity of implementing agencies to manage social risks
                     and impacts. CAR and CERB has previous experience working with the Bank’s Policies. Women are disproportionately
                     affected with lack of access to water and has less access to the market impacting productivity, profitability and
                     sustainability of rural businesses. Therefore the project will address the gender gaps and will include indicators and
                     targets to reduce the identified gaps. Increasing participation of women and young people in organizations in both
                     Components; and Improving the level of autonomy in decision-making of women and young people benefiting from
                     the Project will reduce inequalities in the intervention area that can benefit from the Project. The main positive social
                     impacts of the project are associated with: (i) Impact on women's health and reduction of time spent on domestic
                     work; increase in the productivity, market access, and income of rural women. (ii) Meeting the needs of women, the
                     youth, indigenous and traditional communities, marginalized and vulnerable communities; sensitized design,
                     facilitating access to information, and support to strengthen community organizations for management and system
                     maintenance. (iii) Use of Local Labor: Engagement of Indigenous ATER and specific initiatives for indigenous and
                     quilombolas communities. The Project also includes pilot investments for innovations to promote climate change
                     resilience in selected communities.



                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                       Page 5 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project (P180429)



                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                Relevant

                      This standard is relevant. Project interventions are expected to result in more environmentally sustainable and
                      climate-smart production among beneficiaries, generating positive social and environmental co-benefits.
                      Nevertheless, subprojects may cause site specific and reversible impacts, as described below: Under component 1,
                      the project will support small farmers’ associations and agriculture production chains, financing primary agricultural
                      production and processing, which may include machinery, infrastructure, vehicles and tools. The main potential
                      environmental risks and impacts associated with these activities are soil erosion and runoff of sediments to the rivers
                      and water bodies, environmental contamination with pesticides, environmental pollution with empty pesticide
                      containers, land conversion and habitat loss for farming production, inadequate disposal of construction wastes,
                      environmental pollution with wastewater streams from processing agriculture products processing (i.e. dairy, casava,
                      meat processing etc.). To manage these risks and impacts from the project, CAR completed an advanced draft of
                      Environmental and Social Framework (ESMF) which includes risks and impacts identification, the regulatory
                      framework analysis with the correspondence with the ESF requirements, environmental licensing requirements,
                      environmental and social baseline, and a set of environmental and social risk management tools. These tools in turn
                      contain a set of exclusion criteria for the selection of subprojects (under the ESMF) which excludes activities that
                      result in habitats conversion for agriculture land, activities in or impacts to protected areas, the procurement of
                      pesticides, discharge of untreated wastewater, harvesting of native species of wood (logging), Impacts to critical
                      habitats, among others. CAR will also complete the Good Practice Guidelines for Agriculture production (under



Public Disclosure
                      component 3), consistent with WBG EHS guidelines, which will be disseminated by CAR’s rural extension activities. As
                      set forth in ESCP, CAR must finalize the MGAS and submit for Bank review and approval before effective date.
                      Component 2 includes water access to remote rural communities through central water supply systems. Potential
                      impacts associated with component 2 are related to civil works from water supply systems (construction wastes,
                      earth works, emissions of noise and vibration, Occupational Hazards, etc.) and the impacts from water treatment
                      facilities (solid wastes from primary treatment), which are expected to be limited in number as in most cases the
                      water should come from wells and therefore, just chlorination treatment is required. Although the main source of
                      water shall be from wells, water may eventually be drawn from surface water streams, but no dams are needed. The
                      ESMF also covers the risks and impacts from the construction and operation of water supply systems which includes
                      measures to mitigate theses impacts such as the waste management plan, construction traffic control, sustainable
                      water extraction based on hydrological studies and installation of water meters, water treatment and water quality
                      monitoring, OHS prevention plan and so forth. Under component 3, the project will support the adoption of climate-
                      smart technologies and measures focusing on climate mitigation, adaptation and resilience. It will promote technical
                      assistance services and technological innovation, prioritize the production of healthy foods, food and nutritional
                      security, income generation and the commercialization of products. It is unclear at this stage what could be the
                      impacts related to TA activities (if any), which will be further explored during project implementation. Nevertheless
                      recommendations from TA documents must be in line with ESF objectives. According to the ESMF, all sub projects
                      must be screened and reviewed using an Environmental and Social Review Form (Formulário de verificação Ambiental
                      e Social, in Portuguese), which must be completed and adopted during project implementation, as set forth in ESCP.
                      This form must include sub project’s risk classification, a check list of the requirements from the exclusion list and
                      identification of individual subprojects risks and impacts. Going forward, CAR must identify the applicable GIIP


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                    Page 6 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project (P180429)



                      Guidelines for primary agriculture production, or complete a project specific ESMP (food processing and water
                      supply) with applicable control and mitigation measures commensurate with the requirements from the ESMF. The
                      project will have mostly social positive benefits that include: a) improved access to water and sanitation; b) increased
                      income generation and technical capacity for farmers and rural households; c) expand opportunities for rural youth
                      and women; d) strengthened institutional capacity for better planning and practices due to enhanced skills in
                      management. The project social risks and impacts are primarily possibility of excluding vulnerable groups from full
                      participation in project benefits either due to lack of information or benefit allocation decisions; related to small land
                      acquisition for project activities; community impacts during civil works, risks related to labor and working conditions.
                      A more detailed description of relevant risks and impacts identified at concept stage are described above in
                      Subsection A. Based on the experience from previous project “Bahia Produtiva”, CAR has already developed a robust
                      framework, and related systems to manage subprojects’ risks and impacts, including sub projects selection and
                      exclusion criteria, impact identification, and monitoring of performance. The Project’s ESMF would pay special
                      attention to the distributive impacts and benefits of Project interventions on disadvantaged and vulnerable social
                      groups, including analysis and measures to reduce gender inequalities in access to water and to improve women's
                      income and participation conditions. Family agriculture encompasses an array of social groups that are more likely
                      than others to be disadvantaged and vulnerable as well as excluded from taking advantage of project benefits. They
                      include Indigenous Peoples, quilombola and traditional communities as well as the poorer Afro-Brazilian small
                      landholders and the female small landholders without secure tenure. The Project’s ESMF would pay special attention
                      to the impacts and benefits of Project interventions on these disadvantaged and vulnerable social groups and the
                      Project’s SEP would define – as needed – special measures to engage, disseminate information and consult in a
                      culturally appropriate manner with them, as detailed in ESS 10. A draft ESMF was prepared by the borrower and will




Public Disclosure
                      be disclosed on the borrower’s website (http://www.car.ba.gov.br/) before Appraisal. The draft will be discussed with
                      stakeholders as part of the Project consultation process. The final version of the ESMF will include the results and
                      feedback from stakeholders, as applicable, and will be disclosed and adopted within 30 days after Project
                      Effectiveness.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                        Relevant

                      This standard is relevant. The Project is expected to benefit the diversified array of social groups that comprise family
                      agriculture. They include small rural landholders who mostly rely on the family workforce in their productive
                      activities, traditional communities (such as Indigenous Peoples, Quilombola communities, family agriculture
                      organizations and unions, producers’ organizations and cooperatives. The water and sanitation service activities also
                      require a systematic and intensive engagement of stakeholders at an early stage of the project and through its
                      implementation guided by the World Bank’s Directive on Addressing Risks and Impacts on Disadvantaged or
                      Vulnerable Individuals or Groups. The stakeholder mapping and outreach has been included from the earliest stages
                      of the Project and in the design of SEP, to ensure the project is designed and implemented effectively and
                      successfully. A draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) has been prepared and disclosed prior to appraisal on the
                      website (http://www.car.ba.gov.br) and also discussed through focus group meetings during preparation. The SEP
                      includes details of types, frequency and approach to consultations, information sharing and Grievance Redress
                      Mechanism (GRM) related procedures. The SEP will be updated throughout the lifetime of the project as a result of
                      ongoing consultations, which will be key to achieve objectives of the project. The SEP mapped out the various
                      stakeholders and sat out a strategy on how they will be engaged throughout the life cycle of the project; how and
                      what project information will be shared at the different levels; how stakeholder concerns and feedback will be


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                       Page 7 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project (P180429)



                      considered during the project design and implementation phases and how the project intends managing grievances
                      through the implementation of a project Grievance Readiness Mechanism (GRM). The SEP also allows for meaningful
                      consultation in a participatory manner and was tailored to ensure involvement of disadvantaged and vulnerable
                      groups in the communities, including specific provisions and information methods and communication techniques
                      appropriate to the level of literacy of the stakeholders (particularly beneficiaries) and take advantage of focus groups
                      consultation with women, youth, indigenous and quilombolas people. The stakeholder mapping, included in the SEP
                      indicated that the main stakeholders are: Bahia State Planning Secretariat (Secretaria do Planejamento do Estado da
                      Bahia), Development and Regional Action Company (Companhia de Desenvolvimento e Ação Regional), Bahia Water
                      and Sanitation Engineering Company (Companhia de Engenharia Hídrica e de Saneamento da Bahia), family farming
                      associations and cooperatives, Councils (state and municipal) of water resources, NGOs, organizations and leaders
                      representing indigenous and quilombola communities. In order to incorporate stakeholders' opinions and concerns
                      about the Project, several meetings were held with focus groups especially indigenous people reresentatives,
                      quilombolas, rural women and rural youth. For the Component 2, planning and team mobilization will take place prior
                      to the start of construction. The summary of these meetings was included in the SEP and the results of these
                      consultations have improved the design of the Project. A wide-ranging virtual consultation will be carried out, prior to
                      the effectiveness of the Project, to discuss the benefits and risks of the Project and the socio-environmental
                      management measures that will be adopted, detailed in the instruments prepared (ESMF, RPF, IPPF). The
                      engagement strategy at the community level involves robust work to be carried out in each community served, which
                      includes a series of actions initiated with meetings at the community level to seek adhesion to the Project. These
                      activities will be carried out before works begin in each community. The final version of the SEP – updated with the
                      feedback collected through the consultation process – would be publicly disclosed on a dedicated Project website




Public Disclosure
                      within 30 days of Project Effectiveness.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                            Relevant

                      This standard is relevant. This standard is relevant. A draft LMP will be prepared prior to board approval and the final
                      version LMP will be disclosed by 30 days after Project Effectiveness. Project implementation may involve direct
                      workers (including civil servants from the implementing agencies), contract workers and primary supply workers, as
                      well as community workers for the purpose of promoting community-driven development in Component 1, and
                      supporting the operation of water supply systems - Component 2 - which occurs through community shared
                      management. For voluntary workers, the Borrower should implement measures to ensure that such labor is provided
                      voluntarily as a result of an individual or community agreement (as provided for in ESS 2, paragraph 34).. The project
                      will involve physical works with most expected to take place only in rural areas. Due to the nature of the activities,
                      these works may pose a (low and manageable) safety risk to workers. The Borrower is preparing a Labor
                      Management Procedures (LMP) that will include considerations, among other risks, on child labor in family farms, as
                      there may be occasions where children may help their parents in carrying out activities related to the Project
                      supported activities, as part of broader family task sharing. The LMP would also assess the potential risks faced by
                      different groups of workers, including gender discrimination, GBV, and propose occupational health and safety
                      measures. The LMP would state that the Borrower would make reasonable efforts to ascertain that the employers of
                      contracted workers and primary supply workers are legitimate and reliable entities and have in place labor
                      management procedures applicable to the project that will allow them to operate in accordance with the
                      requirements of ESS 2. The ESMF identified potential risks (low and manageable) of child labor, forced labor and
                      serious safety issues that may arise in relation to primary suppliers and the LMP would set out roles, responsibilities,


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                     Page 8 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project (P180429)



                      and measures to remedy these risks. The LMP would state the need to establish a standalone grievance redressing
                      mechanism to raise workplace concerns and would define the features of this mechanism in line with the
                      requirements of ESS 2. The workers grievance mechanism may utilize existing grievance mechanisms – providing that
                      they are properly designed and implemented, address concerns promptly, and are readily accessible to such project
                      workers - and would be put in place within 30 days of Project effectiveness and operated thereafter. The GRM would
                      be accessible to direct and contracted workers. The LMP would also include measures to prevent SEA/SH in the
                      workplaces and in the relationships between project workers and beneficiary community populations. Finally, the
                      LMP would address potential risks related with labor influx and propose a code of conduct to which all project
                      workers will abide in their relationships with the beneficiary community populations. To ensure the health and safety
                      of workers during project implementation, all construction contractors will be required to complete and implement a
                      C-ESMP, in line with ESS2 and LMP, including an OHS Incident Prevention Plan (OHSPP, or PPRA in Portuguese). This
                      plan must follow the requirements from the OHS Regulatory Standards from Ministry of Labor (known as NRs),
                      including the NR18 for civil works, which are consistent with the WBG’s EHS Guidelines and Good International
                      Industry Practice (GIIP). The OHSPP must include work procedures and requirements for hazard identification and
                      control (applying the hierarchy of controls), allocation of OHS responsibilities and accountability, Hazardous works
                      procedures (i.e. excavations, working at heights, Lifting and howling, entering in confined spaces, etc.), workplace
                      inspections and disciplinary policy, construction traffic safety, the use of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE),
                      Monitoring of OHS performance, planning of training activities, investigation/reporting of accidents, and also include
                      measures for prevention, infection control and case management of infectious diseases.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                             Relevant




Public Disclosure
                      This standard is relevant. The construction of water supply system and Agriculture processing facilities may result to:
                      (i) the generation and disposal of construction wastes; (ii) air emissions from construction combustion sources
                      (machines and backup power generators); (iii) noise and fugitive dust emissions; (iv) environmental contamination
                      risks from the use and storage of fuels and lubricants for the construction machines and power generators; Likewise,
                      the operation of food processing facilities and water supply systems, potential key environmental impacts are (i)
                      process wastewater discharges to surface water streams, air emissions from boilers, generation and disposal of
                      process solid wastes, including wastes from water treatment facilities. Finally, farming activities under component 1
                      can potentially result in soil erosion and surface water streams contamination from runoff sediments, environmental
                      contamination with pesticides and empty pesticides containers, and air emissions from land clearing fires etc. To
                      manage the risk and impacts from primary agriculture production the ESMF indicates a series of mitigation measures
                      that must be consolidated in a format of Agriculture Good Practice Guidelines, which will be disseminated under CAR
                      rural extension programs. These Guidelines will be completed during project implementation as set forth in ESCP. The
                      ESMF has also identified a series of measures to mitigate the risks and impacts from food processing facilities, and all
                      subprojects must have individual E&S management plans commensurate with the risks and impacts of the activity.
                      This may include waste management plans, wastewater treatment and monitoring, OHS accident prevention plans,
                      use of firewood (furnace and boilers) from replanted sources, air (pollutants) emissions control and GHG emissions
                      accounting, and so forth. Finally, the ESMF has also identified specific mitigation measures and programs for the
                      construction and operation of isolated water supply systems, which includes the sustainable use of water resources,
                      completion of hydrological studies, request of water use permits, installation of water meters, land rehabilitation
                      after construction, prevention of surface water and ground water contamination, water treatment and potable water
                      quality monitoring.


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                     Page 9 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project (P180429)



                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                            Relevant

                      This Standard is Relevant – Whilst the impacts from civil works under component 1 are expected to be small, and
                      therefore only minor nuisance to nearby communities are foreseen, if any, the construction works under component
                      2, can potentially be hazardous to the nearby community, including open excavations for water distribution lines, the
                      traffic of construction machinery, and nuisances from noise and dust emissions, disruption to access to ecosystem
                      services, and its associated risks including GBV, spread of infectious diseases, etc. However, labor influx is not
                      expected, for this type of minor construction activities, local labor will be used. As described above in ESS1 section,
                      these subprojects must complete individual ESMPs including specific control and mitigation measures consistent with
                      the requirements from the ESMF, and which must include the E&S specifications for contractors’ Environmental and
                      Social Management Plan, or other form of requirements for contractors, which will include protocols for prevention
                      of SEA/SH. Component 2 includes water supply systems, which could be a hazard for the communities if the water is
                      not suitable for human consumption. Therefore, water must be tested and treated to meet potable water standards
                      in accordance with local regulatory framework. According to the ESMF, all subprojects from component 2 must
                      complete a project specific ESMP describing the process, procedures and methodologies to test, treat and monitor
                      the supply of drinking water quality. Dam Safety: Project activities would neither support the design and construction
                      of new dams or rely on existing dams. Water is expected to be supplied mostly by tubular wells, but less likelly also
                      from surface water streams. Whereas the catchment of water from run of the river may require the construction of
                      small hydraulic structures (less than one meter tall), they must not fall under the category of accumulation or water
                      flow regularization dams or structures that could cause significant safety hazards as defined in ESS4.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                Relevant



Public Disclosure
                      This Standard is relevant. No civil works or activities under the project are expected to have impacts that result in
                      involuntary resettlement or on livelihoods. However, based on the experience of the previous project, with similar
                      activities, Component 2 interventions may be required land acquisition (small scale) or land use restrictions (in water
                      catchment areas). Under Component 1 interventions, investments are likely to be built on land owned by the family
                      farmers associations benefiting from the subprojects. The ownership situation of the areas is part of the socio-
                      environmental screening conducted in the subprojects and was be detailed in the ESMF, which will vet activities
                      involving involuntary resettlement as not eligible for Project support under component 1. Whenever necessary, land
                      acquisitions will be of unoccupied areas, preferably non-productive, or land that either belongs to the local
                      government or are voluntary community donations. For the latter, dsubject to prior Bank approval, this may be
                      acceptable providing the Borrower demonstrates that: (a) the potential donor or donors have been appropriately
                      informed and consulted about the project and the choices available to them; (b) potential donors are aware that
                      refusal is an option, and have confirmed in writing their willingness to proceed with the donation; (c) the amount of
                      land being donated is minor and will not reduce the donor’s remaining land area below that required to maintain the
                      donor’s livelihood at current levels; (d) no household relocation is involved; (e) the donor is expected to benefit
                      directly from the project; and (f) for community or collective land, donation can only occur with the consent of
                      individuals using or occupying the land. The Borrower will maintain a transparent record of all consultations and
                      agreements reached, aligning with the requirement’s ESS5 (footnote 10).Under Component 3, for the technical
                      assistance activities no impacts related to involuntary resettlement or acquisition of areas are expected. Based on the
                      borrower's previous experience with the Bank's operational standards for involuntary resettlement and the small
                      possible impact scale of land acquisition needed for Component 2 works, the requirements for preparing RAPs (if
                      needed) was described in the Resettlement Framework – RF. After the proposed sites are identified and based on the

                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                   Page 10 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project (P180429)



                      screening and selection criteria of communities to be served by the project, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) or an
                      abbreviated version of it will be prepared (if necessary) for those communities where land acquisition is required.
                      Site-specific RAPs will address issues of inclusion, social vulnerability, GBV, consultation and communication strategy
                      (developed in the SEP), and any other issues identified through the ESMF and stakeholder consultations. Site-specific
                      RAPs should be prepared and implemented prior to the execution of works in communities where land acquisition is
                      required, following the requirements of this Standard. As part of Project preparation, the Borrower prepared and
                      disclosed prior to Appraisal, a Draft Resettlement Framework (RF) following the requirements of this Standard. The
                      final version of the RF to be issued and disclosed within 30 days after Effectiveness.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                     Relevant
                      Resources

                      This standard is relevant. Small scale farming can potentially result in diffuse impacts to biodiversity and habitat loss
                      from land conversion to farming production. Likewise, construction works for water supply systems may potentially
                      result in the small land clearings, or habitat fragmentation for the water piping. Nevertheless, as set forth in the
                      ESMF’s exclusion list, the project will not support: · Activities carried out in areas of primary native vegetation or at an
                      advanced stage of ecological succession. Except (i) in the specific cases provided for by law and duly authorized by the
                      competent bodies; (ii) in cases of sustainable use activities approved by the competent bodies, or (iii) those carried
                      out by indigenous peoples and traditional communities according to their culturally recognized customs; · Activities
                      involving the extraction of natural timber or wildlife resources (poles, timber, bamboo, charcoal, wildlife, etc.) for
                      large-scale commercial purposes; · Activities that have the potential to cause any significant loss or degradation of
                      critical habitats, directly or indirectly, or that lead to losses or adverse impacts on natural habitats; · Activities that



Public Disclosure
                      have the potential to cause a significant impact on any ecosystems of importance, especially those that support rare,
                      threatened or endangered species of flora and fauna; · Any construction in protected areas that does not comply with
                      the respective rules of use; · Carried out in environmental protected areas without proper authorization from the
                      competent bodies; · Any construction carried out in fully protected conservation units, or in their buffer zones,
                      without the proper authorization from the competent bodies; However impacts from small land clearances for water
                      supply systems or small constructions under component 1, must be identified and managed under subproject’s
                      ESMPs in accordance with the requirements from ESMF.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                                Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      This standard is relevant. The Project is not expected to have any adverse impact on Indigenous Peoples. On the
                      contrary, it aims to contribute to promote sustainable development interventions that would benefit Indigenous
                      Peoples in a manner that respects their aspirations, unique cultural identities, traditional knowledge and natural
                      resource-based livelihoods and is culturally appropriate and inclusive. Indigenous peoples are a priority target of this
                      project (especially under Subcomponent 1.3) as they are overrepresented among the poor rural population of the
                      state of Bahia. According to FUNAI (the Brazilian Agency of Indigenous Affairs) there are 16 Indigenous Peoples in the
                      state of Bahia (Arikosé, Atikum, Botocudo, Kaimbé, Kantaruré, Kariri, Kiriri, Kiriri-Barra, Pankararé, Pankararú, Pataxó,
                      Pataxó Hã-Hã-Hãe, Tupinambá, Tuxá e XucuruKariri). They count for 16,817 people, living in 31 indigenous lands,
                      which comprise 113 local communities. Nearly 56 percent of them live with monthly per capita income up to ¼ of the
                      Brazilian minimum wage and 80% earn up to ½ of the minimum wage. Poor soils in drought prone areas and low
                      technology productive practices compromise their livelihood. Perennial water shortage reduces quality of life in


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                        Page 11 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project (P180429)



                      indigenous villages at the North Northwest portions of the state and land conflicts prevail in some areas at the
                      southern coastal region. As the exact type, nature and location of subprojects to be financed would not be known
                      prior to project appraisal, an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) has been prepared and disclosed by the
                      client in compliance with the ESS7, before Appraisal (draft version). The IPPF draws on lessons from previous
                      operations implemented by CAR, which have set participatory processes of consultation and planning and have
                      benefited indigenous communities (3,337 families from 23 indigenous lands).. The Borrower contacted IP
                      organizations or representatives that were identified in the stakeholder engagement process to provide feedback on
                      the scope of the Project and its potential environmental and social risks, impacts and benefits to IPs. Given the on
                      demand nature of the Project, the IPPF details procedures for holding consultations with potential beneficiaries and
                      ensuring broad community support for subprojects to be supported by their communities. No Project activity will
                      require an FPIC. The final version of the IPPF must be issued and disclosed within 30 days after Effectiveness.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                       Relevant

                      Project activities may include minor impacts, for example excavations, especially those under Component 2 water
                      supply. A chance finds procedure has been included in the QGAS and will also be included as a contractual
                      requirement once subprojects are identified. Based on the information available so far, the Project's activities are not
                      located in, or in the vicinity of, known cultural heritage sites. However, the Project would support interventions
                      within Indigenous Lands, “quilombola” and traditional communities. As assessed so far, the Project does not intend to
                      promote the commercial use of cultural heritage. Nevertheless, some possible activities to be supported in
                      Component 1 may involve community-based tourism to indigenous and “quilombola” territories and sale of cultural
                      crafts. Such heritage will be identified through the preparation of subprojects, the necessary measures following the



Public Disclosure
                      requirements of this Standard will guide the development of action plans at community level.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                 Not Currently Relevant

                      This standard is not currently relevant



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                         No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                  No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                             No
                       The use of Borrower Framework is not being considered


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                No
                       None




                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                    Page 12 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project (P180429)



                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     •       Disclosure and implementation of the final versions SEP, ESMF, IPPF, RF and LMP within 30 days of project
                     effectiveness


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Eirivelthon Santos Lima                 Title:          Senior Agriculture Economist

                      Email:                  elima@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Carlos Bellas Lamas                     Job Title:      Senior Transport Specialist

                      Email:                  cbellas@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Luis Alfonso Alvestegui Justiniano      Job Title:      Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                      Specialist




Public Disclosure
                      Email:                  aalvestegui@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                Eirivelthon Santos Lima, Carlos Bellas Lamas, Luis Alfonso Alvestegui Justiniano

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:       Eric Shayer

                     ADM Social Specialist:              Juliana Medeiros Paiva




                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                     Page 13 of 13
