Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Mexico Biocarbon Emission Reduction Program (P180533)




Public Disclosure Authorized



                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                          Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                    (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


      Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 11/25/2025 | Report No: ESRSA04503




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Jan 07, 2026                                                                         Page 1 of 15
                              The World Bank
                              Mexico Biocarbon Emission Reduction Program (P180533)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P180533                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)     Mexico BioCarbon ERP        2026

                     Operation Name            Mexico BioCarbon Emission Reduction Program

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries          Region                      Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Mexico                    Mexico                                 LATIN AMERICA AND           Environment, Natural
                                                                                      CARIBBEAN                   Resources & the Blue
                                                                                                                  Economy

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)               Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Board Date

                     SEMARNAT                  CONAFOR                                17-Oct-2025                 13-Feb-2026


                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost



Public Disclosure
                     Review Date

                     01-Oct-2025               108,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The program will generate payments for measured, reported, and verified Emission Reductions (ER) from the Land Use,
                     Land Use Change, and Forestry (LULUCF) sector in the jurisdiction and will distribute ER payments in accordance with an
                     agreed benefit sharing plan.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The proposed Mexico Emission Reductions Program (Mexico’s ERP) is led by the Government of Mexico (GoM) with the
                     goal of generating verified ISFL emission reductions and distribute emission reductions payments in accordance with an
                     agreed Benefit Sharing Plan. Mexico’s ERP will be implemented across four northern states Chihuahua, Coahuila,
                     Durango, and Nuevo León. The selection of these states is based on their mitigation potential in the forestry and
                     agricultural sectors, as well as their political commitment to integrated landscape management. For the GoM, this

                    Jan 07, 2026                                                                                                  Page 2 of 15
                              The World Bank
                              Mexico Biocarbon Emission Reduction Program (P180533)



                     program represents an opportunity to scale up various interventions at the forest-landscape level to better address the
                     main drivers of deforestation and degradation. The Program recognizes that deforestation and forest degradation are
                     complex and multifactorial phenomena, especially considering that in Mexico forests are found in multiple land use
                     landscapes and deforestation is not only determined by direct productive activities but also by underlying causes
                     involving multiple stakeholders. Thus, the program seeks to: (i) strengthen intersectoral collaboration to better align
                     investments in forest landscapes, (ii) reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from the land sector and improve forest
                     livelihoods through the promotion of activities to conserve and sustainably use and restore forest landscapes, (iii)
                     maintain and enhance Mexico’s capacity to monitor and report GHG emissions. By achieving the Program objectives,
                     the GoM will enhance its capacity to access new sources of climate finance. Mexico’s Emissions Reduction Program will
                     adopt a programmatic approach beginning with interventions in the LULUCF sector and aiming to transitioning a
                     potential second phase to emissions reductions from the AFOLU sector. This ESRS focuses on the first phase. A potential
                     second phase which would be prepared separately will require a stand alone E&S assessment depending on program
                     activities under this second phase. The Program measures/activities that will generate the Emission Reductions will be
                     financed by CONAFOR and implemented through its public incentive programs. The ERP is designed in three
                     components: Component 1: Landscape investments. Subcomponent 1.a.: Underlying activities that will generate ERs
                     (activities financed and implemented by CONAFOR) and Subcomponent 1.b: Strengthen value chains in sustainable
                     forest landscapes; Component 2. Payment for Emission Reductions distributed in accordance with the agreed BSP:
                     Subcomponent 2.a.: Payment for ERC, and Subcomponent 2.b.: Distribution of Emission Reductions payments as per an
                     agreed BSP; and Component 3: Program Operation and Coordination. Activities through this component will better
                     target Program measures, maintain program operation, enhance GHG inventory data, improve interagency
                     collaboration, and mainstream gender.




Public Disclosure
                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The ERP will be implemented in four northern states: Chihuahua, Coahuila, Durango, and Nuevo León, covering 30% of
                     Mexico's land and 23% of its forests. These states are vital for forestry, agriculture, and livestock production,
                     contributing over half of Mexico's timber and non-timber forest products. They also account for 13.8% of the live cattle
                     inventory (2018) and are key dairy and meat production centers. Additionally, they lead in producing walnuts, apples,
                     forage corn, alfalfa, beans, and oats, linking 1.3 million farmers, communities, and workers to the market. These states
                     provide vital environmental goods and services and are recognized for their high biodiversity, including 56 Natural
                     Protected Areas.

                     This vast and ecologically significant territory is home to approximately 14.5 million people, of whom 888,015 (6.1
                     percent) live in forest areas and 2.24% (325,499) self-identify as indigenous peoples, nearly half of whom are women. It
                     is thus socially diverse, featuring a rich mosaic of Indigenous and Afro-Mexican communities, although the make up a
                     small proportion of the population in the region. Chihuahua and Durango host populations of Rarámuri, Tepehuán,
                     Huichol, and Mexicanero peoples, while Coahuila and Nuevo León are home to Kickapoo, Nahua, Mazahua, and Otomí
                     groups, as well as Afro-Mexican communities. About a quarter of these states population lives in conditions of poverty
                     and marginalization, particularly in rural areas. The Program will be implemented in rural communities (i.e., ejidos).

                     These areas face major environmental challenges, including deforestation and degradation caused by overgrazing,
                     extensive livestock production, commercial agriculture, forest fires, and illegal logging. Indirect deforestation drivers
                     include weak inter-institutional coordination and law enforcement. Social challenges are also present, with organized

                    Jan 07, 2026                                                                                                       Page 3 of 15
                              The World Bank
                              Mexico Biocarbon Emission Reduction Program (P180533)



                     crime contributing to high homicide and feminicide rates. Despite these challenges, the ERP presents opportunities for
                     sustainable development through improved coordination and community engagement.

                     Mexico has a robust legal framework, including the General Law of Ecological Balance and Environmental Protection
                     (LGEEPA), General Law of Climate Change (LGCC) and the General Law for Sustainable Forest Development (LGDFS), all
                     of which prioritize sustainable forest development. Mexico has a system of land tenure and communal property. A large
                     part of the country’s forest land is owned collectively by Indigenous and local communities. This system helps support a
                     community-based approach to managing the land and forests.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Program will be implemented by CONAFOR, which has extensive experience with WB financed operations and a
                     strong track record in implementing demand-driven programs. CONAFOR applies robust Operational Rules which are
                     updated annually to integrate E&S management considerations, including some that were required by the Bank
                     safeguards policies – the World Bank-financed project P164661 (PROFOEM) helped strengthen the Operational Rules by
                     institutionalizing requirements of the safeguards policies. Its proven capacity and institutional commitment make it well
                     positioned to lead this Program and implement E&S policies effectively. CONAFOR recently concluded the Project to
                     Strengthen Entrepreneurship in Productive Forest Landscapes (P164661), financed by the World Bank between 2018
                     and 2025, and satisfactorily implemented it in compliance with the Bank’s safeguard policies.

                     CONAFOR’s organizational structure includes a Program Management team and state and local Forest Development
                     Promoters, supported by a Program Coordinator, environmental and social specialists, and a gender specialist. This




Public Disclosure
                     configuration will ensure adequate oversight of the technical, operational, and environmental and social management
                     aspects of the Program. The Program also established the enabling conditions for environmental and social
                     management within CONAFOR by developing an Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) (as described
                     under ESS1).

                     Effective implementation and long term sustainability of the Program will require both vertical and horizontal
                     coordination. This includes alignment between central agencies and local offices, as well as cross-agency collaboration.
                     Although the regulatory framework mandates coordination mechanisms, their practical effectiveness has been limited
                     in recent years. To address this, CONAFOR has established institutional agreements with subnational governments of
                     the participating jurisdictions which are intended to strengthen interinstitutional coordination and define roles within
                     the Program. Collaboration across federal and subnational levels will support policy coherence and the implementation
                     of incentive programs in the rural landscapes. To ensure proper implementation of the ESF, CONAFOR’s central office
                     and the state representation offices (previously known as forest local promoters) operating in the four states have
                     already participated in ESF training courses provided by the WB. Additional training will be delivered throughout
                     implementation to those preparing and executing the ERP.

                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                       Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                 Moderate



                    Jan 07, 2026                                                                                                    Page 4 of 15
                              The World Bank
                              Mexico Biocarbon Emission Reduction Program (P180533)



                     The environmental risk rating is considered moderate. The Program includes activities to support landscape
                     management investments designed to generate verified emission reductions (ER) while addressing key regional
                     drivers of deforestation and forest degradation. The ER Program underlying activities will: i) strengthen efforts to
                     promote community forest management for the sustainable and diversified use of forest resources; ii) protect forest
                     ecosystems from fires, pests and forest diseases; iii) preserve and restore the capacity of the landscape to provide
                     ecosystem services through payment for environmental services, forest restoration and productive reconversion; iv)
                     foster the development of competitive local value chains (non timber sector), to stimulate local economic growth
                     through technical assistance, community strengthening, and engagement with the private sector; and v) support the
                     training of development agents that promote territorial transformation. These investments are expected to promote
                     a shift from conventional land use practices towards more sustainable models that restore ecosystem functions,
                     enhance environmental services and improve productive efficiency per unit of land. In addition, the Program it is
                     expected to expand CONAFOR's capacity to generate jurisdictional level impact through integrated landscape
                     investments while ensuring effective management of environmental risks and impacts.. While these activities are
                     expected to generate environmental benefits, several challenges remain. These include uncertainties related to the
                     exact location and scale of investments, the complexity of multi-stakeholder implementation , and the need for
                     strong coordination mechanisms. Key potential environmental risks and impacts from ER investments and
                     development of local value chain, include soil degradation (erosion, sediment runoff, nutrient depletion, and changes
                     in soil microorganisms), land use changes, biodiversity loss, and disruption of biological corridors. Additional risks may
                     involve overexploitation, loss of biodiversity, ecosystem service degradation, water contamination from waste,
                     potential use of agrochemicals, and occupational health and safety hazards related to the use of machinery and
                     equipment. These impacts are expected to be temporary and reversible, provided that proper environmental




Public Disclosure
                     management measures are applied. The program will rely on CONAFOR’s ESMS and ESMF which has already
                     integrated many of these mitigation measures and best practices into its Operational Rules (as described under ESS1).
                     Furthermore, the Program will apply an exclusion list to prevent the implementation of ER activities that could pose
                     significant adverse environmental impacts.
                                                                                                                                     Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risk of the Program is rated Substantial. Social risks relate mainly to potential stakeholder conflicts over
                     land tenure and resource access in areas with complex social and ownership structures, including ejidos, communal
                     lands with avecindados (recognized residents), and private landowners and possessors. Many women and youth lack
                     formal titles due to the agrarian social property system, where communal and ejido lands serve a social function
                     under rules distinct from private property. This complexity, coupled with inheritance practices that often exclude
                     women and young people, increases risks of disputes and unequal benefit distribution, underscoring the need to
                     strengthen local participation, conflict resolution, and culturally appropriate engagement. A key challenge is the
                     inclusion of vulnerable groups—Indigenous Peoples, Afro-Mexicans, women, youth, persons with disabilities, and
                     migrant workers—who face barriers such as language, remoteness, and limited access to information. The Program
                     will apply differentiated engagement, use of translators, culturally relevant communication, and affirmative measures
                     to enhance participation. CONAFOR’s Operational Rules will be updated to align with ESF requirements and support
                     stakeholders without formal land titles. To address these risks, the Program will also rely on CONAFOR’s
                     Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS), including the National Strategy for Gender and Inclusion in
                     the Forestry Sector, to manage environmental and social (E&S) risks across activities, grants, and the Benefit Sharing
                     Plan (BSP). The Citizen Attention Mechanism (MAC) will also continue to manage grievances and information
                     requests, ensuring accessibility and timely, culturally appropriate responses. Dedicated budget allocations will


                    Jan 07, 2026                                                                                                       Page 5 of 15
                              The World Bank
                              Mexico Biocarbon Emission Reduction Program (P180533)



                     support participation activities and engagement of vulnerable groups. Contextual factors—rising agricultural prices,
                     poverty, violence, and climate vulnerability— also constitute social risks as they intensify social inequalities and
                     deforestation pressures. The Program does not expect to exacerbate such risks but does consider them to determine
                     mitigation measures. The Program also recognizes the risk of child and forced labor in rural supply chains and will
                     ensure full compliance with national law and international standards through ongoing assessment and monitoring.
                     Finally, the Program’s exclusion list prohibits activities causing significant adverse impacts, including those in
                     protected areas not allowed under management plans, resettlement or involuntary restrictions on resource access,
                     and irreversible impacts on Indigenous Peoples and their cultural heritage. These measures ensure a preventive,
                     inclusive, and ESF-aligned social management approach.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                    Relevant

                      A systems-based approach to identify, manage, and monitor mitigation measures for environmental and social (E&S)
                      risks in the Mexico Emission Reduction Program (ERP) will be applied in accordance with the World Bank Directive on
                      Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts for Emission Reductions Programs under the Forest Carbon
                      Partnership Facility and the BioCarbon Fund Initiative for Sustainable Forest Landscapes. CONAFOR currently operates
                      an Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) that includes: (i) Operational Rules embedding E&S
                      requirements aligned with the Bank’s safeguard policies, developed through the Bank-financed project



Public Disclosure
                      “Strengthening Entrepreneurship in Productive Forest Landscapes”, PROFOEM in Spanish, (P164661); (ii) measures to
                      comply with applicable national E&S legislation; (iii) technical manuals for activities supported; and (iv) monitoring of
                      such activities including compliance with Mexican legislation through its regional and local offices. The Mexico ERP
                      ESMS will build on CONAFOR’s existing system to identify and manage E&S risks in both underlying activities and
                      benefit-sharing arrangements. It is described in a document, called Environmental and Social Management System for
                      the Mexico ERP, which details the elements which it consists of: (i) legal framework; (ii) CONAFOR’s Operational
                      Rules, which are updated annually, and the specific Special Operational Guidelines designed for the ERP based on the
                      Operational Rules; (iii) E&S checklists for different types of interventions to be applied once activities are defined; (iv)
                      an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) which includes an assessment of E&S risks and impacts
                      and mitigation measures to address gaps between CONAFOR’s current ESMS and the system to be applied for the
                      ERP, ensuring full alignment with the World Bank’s ESF as described in the Program’s E&S instruments (ESCP, ESMS,
                      SEP and IPP); (v) Environmental and Social Good Practice Guidelines (ESGPGs) detailing risk mitigation and good
                      practice measures by activity type that generate emission reductions and benefit-sharing modality; (vi) an exclusion
                      list to screen out activities that could cause significant adverse E&S impacts or contravene national legislation; (vii) a
                      monitoring framework for underlying activities and benefit sharing under the ISFL, including periodic self-reporting
                      and third-party monitoring requirements in accordance with the Bank’s Directive; and (viii) CONAFOR’s National
                      Strategy for Gender and Inclusion in the Forestry Sector. An advanced draft of the ESMS document has been disclosed
                      for consultation by CONAFOR and will be finalized after including the feedback gathered during the consultation
                      period and re-disclosed prior to the signature of the Emission Reductions Program Agreement (ERPA) signature or the
                      Grant Agreement signature, whichever happens first. The ESGPGs will provide site-specific procedures and guidance
                      for managing E&S risks, including waste and wastewater management, traffic management, occupational health and


                    Jan 07, 2026                                                                                                        Page 6 of 15
                              The World Bank
                              Mexico Biocarbon Emission Reduction Program (P180533)



                      safety, biodiversity conservation, sustainable use of timber and non-timber forest resources, integrated pest
                      management, fire management, and protection of tangible and intangible cultural heritage. Designed to support
                      CONAFOR’s beneficiaries and ERP affected persons in mitigating E&S risks across both underlying (non-retroactive)
                      and benefit-sharing activities, the ESGPGs will serve as practical tools to ensure responsible implementation of
                      Program activities in full alignment with the ESF. They will also include checklists for periodic self-assessment to
                      report beneficiaries’ compliance with good practices. They will be developed within 120 days after ERPA signature or
                      the Gran Agreement signature, whichever happens first, and may be updated or expanded during implementation as
                      needed. Once finalized, they will be incorporated into the ESMS. CONAFOR has prepared and disclosed for
                      consultation an advanced draft of the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP). A final version, which will include the
                      feedback gathered during the consultation with interested parties, will be disclosed within 30 days of the Emission
                      Reductions Program Agreement (ERPA) signature or the Grant Agreement signature, whichever happens first. The
                      SEP outlines specific and targeted actions to enhance the participation of interested parties within the ISFL
                      jurisdiction, including vulnerable groups, such as indigenous peoples, women and youth, consistent with ESS10. The
                      Program’s grievance mechanism, described in the SEP, builds on the one used by CONAFOR under the PROFOEM
                      Project, which is being strengthened to meet ESS10 objectives and requirements based on a specific action plan
                      designed for that purpose. Additionally, CONAFOR will prepare an Indigenous Peoples Plan to enhance engagement
                      of indigenous communities and their equitable access to Program benefits in an effective, inclusive and culturally
                      appropriate manner, consistent with ESS7. The advanced draft of the IPP will be consulted with indigenous
                      representatives and finalized and disclosed within 60 days of the Emission Reductions Program Agreement (ERPA)
                      signature or the Grant Agreement signature, whichever happens first. In alignment with the Directive and the ESF, the
                      Benefit Sharing Plan (BSP) ensures the fair and inclusive distribution of benefits among participating communities.




Public Disclosure
                      CONAFOR has prepared a detailed consultation plan for the BSP consistent with the SEP and will also prepare a
                      consultation and communication protocol to further detail consultation methods with a differentiated approach,
                      dissemination of information, documentation of agreements, and integration of feedback of consultations conducted
                      with local communities and indigenous peoples in the jurisdiction. The BSP will be fully consulted in accordance with
                      ESS10 after ERPA signature and will constitute a condition of effectiveness for the Program. The Program will also
                      include a retroactive period (2022 to 2025), consistent with ISFL provisions and subject to ERPA negotiations.
                      Activities implemented during the retroactive period are expected to comply with the Bank’s E&S policies, as they
                      followed CONAFOR’s Operational Rules. Nonetheless, CONAFOR will conduct an E&S audit for the retroactive period
                      in accordance with the Directive and the ESF, while the Bank’s task team will undertake a due diligence through its
                      review of monitoring reports. Independent third-party E&S monitoring will also be carried out during
                      implementation.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                     Relevant

                      The Emission Reductions Program (ERP) has an extensive and diverse stakeholder landscape, as outlined in the
                      Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)—whose final draft will be completed within 30 days of the ERPA or Grant
                      Agreement signature, whichever happens first—and the Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS). Key
                      stakeholders include ejidos and communities, collective landholders and possessors of forest lands, as well as
                      residents without formal land rights but recognized by local community authorities. Other affected parties comprise
                      vulnerable groups such as Indigenous Peoples, Afro-Mexicans, women, youth, persons with disabilities, and migrant
                      workers. The SEP, the BSP, the Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) and ESMS establish differentiated engagement
                      strategies to ensure equitable participation and access to benefits across these populations. Other interested parties


                    Jan 07, 2026                                                                                                    Page 7 of 15
                              The World Bank
                              Mexico Biocarbon Emission Reduction Program (P180533)



                      include federal, state, and municipal institutions—notably CONAFOR, Environment and Natural Resources Secretariat
                      (SEMARNAT), National Institute of Ecology and Climate Change (INECC), Agriculture and Rural Development
                      Secretariat (SADER), National Institute of Indigenous Peoples (INPI), and the Secretaría de las Mujeres—which play
                      roles in policy implementation, coordination, and benefit distribution and as described in the SEP and BSP.
                      Engagement also extends to civil society organizations, academia, as well as international partners such as the World
                      Bank, BioCarbon Fund Plus, FAO, WOCAN, UN-REDD+, and UK PACT, which provide financial and technical support.
                      The SEP, BSP and ESMS emphasize adaptive, inclusive, and culturally appropriate engagement through participatory
                      workshops, consultations, and dissemination in Indigenous languages, supported by a strengthened grievance
                      mechanism. Between May and July 2022, 16 participatory workshops were conducted in two rounds (consultation
                      and validation), engaging 649 participants representing ejidos, communities, producers, Indigenous Peoples (2% and
                      4% of total participants in the first and second rounds, respectively), public officials, civil society, and academia. These
                      workshops informed the Program Document, identifying deforestation drivers and corresponding mitigation
                      strategies in a participatory manner. The participatory process will continue throughout ERP implementation. The
                      Program Document and draft Benefit Sharing Plan (BSP) have been shared through a multi-stage consultation
                      process. Following an internal consultation within CONAFOR on March 30, 2023, additional rounds have been
                      conducted through state mandated civil society oversight bodies, state forestry councils and state governmental
                      offices. In 2025, the ERP and draft BSP were presented before the State Forestry Councils—advisory bodies on
                      sustainable forest development—in Nuevo León (ERP April 24; BSP May 8), Chihuahua (ERP April 25; BSP May 30),
                      Durango (ERP April 8; BSP August 12), and Coahuila (May 28). A dedicated consultation and communication protocol
                      will be produced and will include consultation methods, documentation of agreements, and integration of feedback.
                      Before ERPA signature, a presentation of the program to the Climate Council is expected. After ERPA signature




Public Disclosure
                      consultations will be conducted on the BSP with local communities, Indigenous and Afro-Mexican Peoples, women,
                      youth, smallholders, and rural populations. The final BSP will also be socialized with SEMARNAT, SADER, INPI, state
                      governments, and State Forestry Councils. The draft SEP prepared by CONAFOR defines timely, accessible, and
                      culturally appropriate disclosure through multiple communication channels, including websites, radio, infographics,
                      social media, meetings, and workshops. It gives special attention to Indigenous Peoples, women, youth, persons with
                      disabilities, Afro-Mexicans and migrant workers, with tailored measures such as translation and travel support. Both
                      the SEP and BSP address barriers to participation and benefit access—related to gender, age, tenure, and
                      representation—and incorporate affirmative actions to include historically marginalized groups, consistent with
                      CONAFOR’s National Strategy for Gender and Inclusion in the Forestry Sector developed with World Bank support. To
                      ensure accountability, the Grievance Mechanism (GM)—the Mecanismo de Atención Ciudadana (MAC)—will be
                      strengthened and adapted to ESF requirements. Previously implemented under PROFOEM with satisfactory results,
                      the MAC provides channels for information requests, claims, complaints, and suggestions managed by CONAFOR. An
                      action plan has been designed by CONAFOR with World Bank supervision to strengthen the MAC and align it with ESF
                      requirements; CONAFOR started implementing it prior to Appraisal and will continue to do so progressively to
                      complete all steps within thirty days after the ERPA or Grant Agreement signature, whichever happens first. It will
                      ensure timely, culturally appropriate responses, including anonymous submissions and Indigenous-language access.
                      The GM is described in the SEP and will continue serving as a central tool for transparent and responsive engagement
                      throughout ERP implementation.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                               Relevant




                    Jan 07, 2026                                                                                                         Page 8 of 15
                              The World Bank
                              Mexico Biocarbon Emission Reduction Program (P180533)



                      The Program has established comprehensive measures to complement Mexican legislation and ensure full
                      compliance with Environmental and Social Standard 2 (ESS2), as detailed in the Environmental and Social
                      Management System (ESMS), the National Strategy for Gender and Inclusion in the Forestry Sector and related
                      operational instruments. Building on CONAFOR’s institutional framework, the Program strengthens labor and working
                      conditions through the provisions set out in the ESMS, specifically in the ESMF and the Environmental and Social
                      Good Practice Guidelines (ESGPG). Although the exact number of workers involved is not yet known, CONAFOR’s
                      Operational Rules include clear stipulations on labor and conduct conditions applicable to all categories of workers.
                      Labor management measures ensure that civil servants, direct workers, community workers, contract workers, and
                      consultants are engaged under fair, safe, and transparent working conditions. The Program also promotes the hiring
                      of local labor, particularly for activities such as forest management, reforestation, sanitation, and fire management,
                      with preferential scoring awarded to proposals that incorporate local workforce participation. The ESMS defines
                      specific procedures to manage labor-related risks and impacts. It requires the provision of adequate and safe working
                      conditions, detailed in the ESMS itself as well as in the Operational Rules, Technical Annexes, Terms of Reference, and
                      Verification Guides. The system also includes capacity-building initiatives in occupational safety and health, ensuring
                      that all Program workers receive appropriate training. Technical verification mechanisms confirm compliance with
                      safety measures, and corrective actions are applied in cases of non-compliance. All forms of child and forced labor are
                      strictly prohibited. While Mexico’s Federal Labor Law establishes a minimum hiring age of 15, the Program applies a
                      higher standard, setting the minimum age at 18 years as a preventive measure to mitigate risks of child labor, given
                      the social complexity of the Program’s jurisdiction. A verification mechanism is in place to ensure that no person
                      under 18 years of age is employed in Program activities. The ESMS also mandates fair employment terms and
                      conditions, emphasizing non-discrimination, equal opportunity, and a zero-tolerance policy for any form of child or




Public Disclosure
                      forced labor. In addition, it explicitly promotes the rights to freedom of association and collective bargaining for all
                      Program workers, in accordance with Mexican law and international labor standards.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                              Relevant

                      This standard is relevant. The activities to be financed under the Program are not expected to cause significant
                      adverse impacts on the environment from hazardous materials, air pollution, disturbance by noise, or other forms of
                      pollution. However, as part of the ESMS, the Program includes ESGPSs, which provide guidelines and procedures to
                      be applied to the activities financed by the Program, as deemed necessary. Compliance with these guidelines will be
                      monitored and reported throughout implementation. The ESGPSs include measures for resource management and
                      pollution covering: (i) hazardous and non-hazardous solid waste; (ii) agrochemical discharge to surface water through
                      runoff; (iii) vectors and pesticides; (iv) use of agrochemical chemicals and related waste; and (v) conservation of
                      natural resources. The Program also includes an exclusion list that establish provisions for the prevention of activities
                      that may cause significant adverse impacts on pollution. Given the nature of the activities to be financed under the
                      Program, the main positive environmental impacts are expected to include a reduction in greenhouse gas (GHG)
                      emissions from land use, and forestry, as well as enhanced livelihood opportunities. The Program will support the
                      improvement of forest-based livelihoods by promoting inclusive activities that conserve, restore, and promote the
                      sustainable use of forest landscapes. Retroactive claims of GHG credits for OP safeguards-complying activities from
                      2022-2025 will require an E&S audit following the E&S risk management considerations detailed in the ESMS.
                      Capacity building for technical activities relevant ESS3 elements will be provided related to environmental services,
                      soil degradation, biodiversity, use of agrochemical by promoting best practices, including integrated pest
                      management, occupational safety, and improved soil management. Additionally, efforts to increase forest cover


                    Jan 07, 2026                                                                                                      Page 9 of 15
                              The World Bank
                              Mexico Biocarbon Emission Reduction Program (P180533)



                      through agroforestry and forestry management will contribute to enhanced ecosystem connectivity, soil stability, and
                      water quality.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                               Relevant

                      This standard is relevant as Mexico is vulnerable to climate related events, such as fires, floods, landslides which can
                      significantly impact local communities. The ESGPs, as part of the ESMS, include specific guidelines and provisions for
                      emergency preparedness, particularly in relation to exposure to hazardous materials and potential impacts from
                      natural disasters that may affect the surrounding communities. They also include traffic management measures to
                      address the increased risk of traffic-related accidents and injuries in local communities during the implementation of
                      Program activities. The application of these measures will be guided by the checklists included in the ESMS, which
                      must be completed for each activity financed under the Program. The Bank will support the Borrower with technical
                      guidance and capacity building to manage occupational and community health and safety risks, ensuring compliance
                      with ESS4. The due diligence process, reflected in the ESMS, concluded that project activities do not exacerbate risks
                      and potential impacts to local communities related to illegal logging, insecurity, organized crime, femicide, homicide
                      and societal violence will be taken. CONAFOR has prepared the National Strategy for Gender and Inclusion in the
                      Forestry Sector (2025-2030), with technical assistance provided by the World Bank, to be implemented by CONAFOR
                      in all its operations, including the ERP where it will serve as the framework for the measures integrated in the ESMS
                      and in the ESGPG to explicitly address GBV and SEA/SH, in addition to the requirements set in the Mexican legislation.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                   Relevant




Public Disclosure
                      This standard is relevant to the Program. However, in terms of land acquisition or involuntary resettlement, the ERP
                      does not foresee any activities that would require or result in such actions because they are included in the exclusion
                      list of the ESMS. Likewise, the Program does not envisage interventions within Natural Protected Areas (Áreas
                      Naturales Protegidas, ANPs) that would lead to involuntary restrictions on access to natural resources. The
                      Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) explicitly incorporates an exclusion list that prevents financing
                      of activities with potential adverse social or environmental impacts. This list includes, among others: (i) activities that
                      promote the conversion of forest land to non-forestry uses; (ii) activities within ANPs that are not permitted under
                      the corresponding Management Plan; (iii) activities that alter the ownership regime of forest resources or that
                      promote resettlement or involuntary restrictions on land or natural resource use; (iv) activities causing involuntary
                      physical or economic displacement; (v) activities generating adverse impacts on lands and natural resources under
                      traditional ownership or customary use and occupation; and (vi) activities leading to the relocation of Indigenous
                      Peoples from traditionally owned or used lands and resources. In this regard, all Program activities to be
                      implemented within ANPs—including those related to underlying activities and the Benefit Sharing Plan (BSP)—must:
                      (i) remain consistent with the objectives and limits defined in the respective ANP Management Plan, and (ii) result
                      from community agreements that ensure local consent and participation. Furthermore, CONAFOR’s Operational Rules
                      require the inclusion and effective participation of women and youth to strengthen integrated community
                      development in forest management and value chains. These provisions and guidelines will be fully reflected and
                      operationalized in the ESMS of the ERP, ensuring alignment with the World Bank’s Environmental and Social Standard
                      5 (ESS5) and the principles of voluntary, inclusive, and participatory engagement in all Program activities.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                    Relevant
                      Resources


                    Jan 07, 2026                                                                                                       Page 10 of 15
                              The World Bank
                              Mexico Biocarbon Emission Reduction Program (P180533)



                      This standard is relevant. The Program aims to support biodiversity conservation and sustainable resource
                      management by promoting long-term sustainability of the livelihoods of vulnerable populations living in or near
                      forest areas. Program activities include sustainable forest management, restoration, agroforestry, commercial
                      plantations, payment for environmental services, and forest fire and pest control, among others. The Program also
                      seeks to promote sustainable productive practices in silvopastoral systems. It aims to reduce deforestation and land
                      degradation caused by extensive livestock ranching through the restoration of degraded pastures, improvement of
                      forage quality and quantity, and the protection and rehabilitation of soils. The ESGPs included in the ESMF and ESMS
                      provide guidelines and procedures aligned with ESS6, to be applied to Program-financed activities as needed. These
                      include measures to prevent and minimize soil degradation, land use change, biodiversity and ecosystem loss, and
                      disruption of biological corridors. An exclusion list, included in both the ESMS and ESMF, will be used to prevent
                      Program activities in areas that could potentially affect critical or sensitive habitats. Additionally, checklists will help
                      guide implementation and ensure that activities do not adversely impact biodiversity. Compliance with these
                      guidelines will be monitored and reported throughout the Program’s implementation.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                                  Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      ESS7 is relevant. Indigenous Peoples (IPs) engaged in LULUCF activities are present in the jurisdiction and are both
                      affected parties and potential beneficiaries of the Mexico ISFL. In the four ERP states, approximately 1.58% of the
                      population (about 230,000 people) are IPs—mainly Rarámuri, Kikapú, and Nahuatl (INEGI, 2020). The Atlas of
                      Indigenous Peoples (INPI, 2015) reports a higher share (2.24%, or 325,499 people) who self-identify as Indigenous
                      Peoples, highlighting Mexico’s complex social fabric where IPs and local communities often overlap. Project activities



Public Disclosure
                      occur in territories where IPs are present, but expected impacts are predominantly positive, promoting sustainable
                      activities, forest community management, and recognizing traditional knowledge. Furthermore, the Program’s
                      exclusion list (ESMS, Section 8.2) prohibits activities that would trigger FPIC under ESS7, such as land-use change from
                      forest to non-forest, natural habitat conversion, resettlement, restriction of resource access, or impacts on cultural
                      heritage. Still, meaningful engagement of Indigenous Peoples and their broader agreement with the overall Program
                      and the BSP is central to the ISFL. The Program will ensure culturally appropriate consultations and broad
                      participation of IPs in the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP), Benefit Sharing Plan
                      (BSP) and Special Operational Guidelines, the mechanism through which Program benefits are distributed at the
                      community level. Community-level consultations with IPs and their representative organizations (i.e., asambleas) will
                      occur after the ERPA signature, guided by a detailed consultation and communication protocol defining consultation
                      strategy and methods aligned with the SEP, IPP and BSP, documentation of agreements through written evidence to
                      document and register in a clear and concrete manner the agreement of the indigenous communities to participate in
                      the ERP and access the benefit sharing, and integration of feedback. CONAFOR’s 2025 Operational Rules provide
                      specific mechanisms to guarantee the participation of Indigenous communities in forest support. These include
                      priority in resource allocation, flexible documentation requirements through certifications issued by their traditional
                      authorities, and recognition of their own regulatory systems. They also ensure equitable and non-discriminatory
                      access to benefits, with reasonable accommodations such as allowing communities without banking infrastructure to
                      designate a person to receive resources on their behalf. These measures strengthen the inclusion of Indigenous
                      peoples in forest resource management. Regarding CONAFOR's approach to the gender dimension of the Indigenous
                      Population, it has been reframed under an intersectional approach with the goal of understanding how the project
                      contributes to eradicating the discrimination faced by Indigenous women, as well as specifying the participation and


                    Jan 07, 2026                                                                                                         Page 11 of 15
                              The World Bank
                              Mexico Biocarbon Emission Reduction Program (P180533)



                      actions targeted at Indigenous women. This has been integrated in the National Strategy for gender and Inclusion in
                      the Forestry Sector and specific measures will be operationalized through the IPP and the consultation and
                      communication protocol. Additional measures to improve engagement of Indigenous Peoples will involve translators
                      and interpreters in local indigenous languages to ensure clear understanding during engagement activities and
                      culturally appropriate access to the Program’s grievance mechanism. Information will be disseminated in various
                      ways: In person, through technical staff from state institutions for Indigenous affairs or with the support of municipal
                      governments through their Department of Indigenous Affairs or another agency that provides information to
                      Indigenous communities; by telephone with traditional authorities or with their interpreter if they don't speak
                      Spanish; general meetings will be held through the regions' Indigenous radio station. CONAFOR has identified specific
                      needs related to engagement with Indigenous peoples: Provide clear and precise project information, explain it
                      verbally, and provide infographics or written information; organize small meetings in open spaces; hold initial pre-
                      meeting with formal authorities to provide general information for sharing with the rest of the members; informative
                      assemblies with the possibility of holding others when relevant questions are identified; a specific methodology will
                      be presented in cases where there is internal conflict within the assembly, and it is suspended and reconvened; to
                      provide information to the majority and achieve broad participation, people should be approached through short
                      meetings held outside the ejido assembly; travel expenses for transportation to meeting points are required and
                      must be included in the Program budget. As mentioned, benefit distribution will follow demand-driven programs
                      under annual Special Operational Guidelines issued by CONAFOR. Participation in these programs is entirely
                      voluntary; communities will provide informed consent through written evidence by opting into the ERP benefit
                      distribution after receiving comprehensive information, in a culturally-appropriate manner, on the Program’s
                      objectives, benefits, and implications, and by signing standardized participation formats. Written support from the




Public Disclosure
                      local governance bodies at the community level, documented in the abovementioned written evidence, will also be a
                      requirement to participate in benefit distribution activities through the Special Operational Guidelines. While
                      community-level consultations will take place after the ERPA signature, the draft BSP has already been socialized with
                      key stakeholders, including the National Institute of Indigenous Peoples (INPI). Consultations with key organizations
                      representative of IPs in the jurisdiction will take place after ERPA signature; these will be identified in the IPP that will
                      be prepared for the Program. Ensuring effective participation and broad agreement of Indigenous Peoples requires
                      addressing structural barriers such as remoteness, limited connectivity, monolingualism, and discrimination, which
                      restrict their access to public programs, including those managed by CONAFOR. To address these constraints, the IPP,
                      together with the SEP and BSP, incorporates a differentiated approach to Indigenous Peoples within the jurisdiction
                      which will be operationalized through a consultation and communication protocol detailing the measures to be taken
                      to ensure the culturally appropriate engagement and inclusion of indigenous peoples in both underlying activities and
                      the benefit sharing, ranging from broad consultation to agreement with the ERP measures. The IPP will be prepared
                      and finalized by CONAFOR within 30 days after the date on whichever agreement (the ERPA or Grant Agreement)
                      becomes effective first. The protocol will be prepared and finalized within 60 days after the date on whichever
                      agreement (the ERPA or Grant Agreement) becomes effective first. For retroactive activities, the Environmental and
                      Social (E&S) audit will assess the extent to which CONAFOR’s activities have met ESS7 requirements and will identify
                      any gaps. The World Bank team’s preliminary assessment concluded that these underlying activities are likely to
                      comply with ESS7, as they were implemented under the Bank-supported project Strengthening Entrepreneurship in
                      Productive Forest Landscapes (P164661), which applied the Bank’s safeguards operational policies.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                           Relevant



                    Jan 07, 2026                                                                                                         Page 12 of 15
                              The World Bank
                              Mexico Biocarbon Emission Reduction Program (P180533)



                      This standard is relevant. Program activities are not expected to have significant negative impacts on cultural
                      heritage, whether in its tangible and intangible forms. However, due to the presence of indigenous population in the
                      jurisdictional area the ESMS and ESGPGs include provisions to ensure protection of cultural heritage. These include:
                      (i) chance finds guidelines and procedures with protective measures to be applied in case cultural heritage sites are
                      discovered; and, (ii) and cultural heritage protection measures aimed at avoiding or minimizing impacts on
                      community cultural heritage and intangible sites that may be directly affected by Program activities. Guidelines
                      applied to Program-financed activities will help the implementation of these measures. Compliance with these
                      requirements will be monitored and reported throughout the Program’s implementation.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                Not Currently Relevant

                      This standard is not currently relevant.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                       No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                       In Part




Public Disclosure
                       CONAFOR’s ESMS—applied to both the underlying activities of the ERP and the BSP—, as described under ESS1, will
                       comprise Mexico’s environmental and social legislation and its regulations, CONAFOR’s Operational Rules, institutional
                       manuals, and additional measures in the ESMF designed to address any gaps between CONAFOR’s current framework
                       and the requirements of the World Bank’s Environmental and Social Framework (ESF); hence, the ERP will partially use
                       the borrower framework to manage environmental and social risks and impacts. Forest conservation, restoration and
                       sustainable management activities, including social management, will be implemented under the legal, institutional
                       and policy framework, as well as CONAFOR’s Operational Rules, which are applied to its program and are legally
                       binding. These standards and guidelines have incorporated E&S management aspects and are evaluated and updated
                       annually considering national and regional priorities, and requirements of local communities. Operational Rules are
                       the basis for the Special Operational Guidelines that CONAFOR will apply specifically to the ERP.

                       An E&S due diligence of the Operational Rules and the legal and institutional framework has been carried to identify
                       gaps with the ESF, which have been covered in the ESMF contained in the ESMS through the E&S assessment, E&S
                       instruments (including the SEP, IPP and ESGPGs) and capacity building measures to ensure effective E&S management
                       of program activities, leveraging CONAFOR’s capacity in a manner consistent with the Bank's ESF and guidelines.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                              No
                       Not applicable




                    Jan 07, 2026                                                                                                  Page 13 of 15
                              The World Bank
                              Mexico Biocarbon Emission Reduction Program (P180533)



                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     1. Prior to Appraisal, CONAFOR will prepare and disclose the following instruments:

                     1.1 Draft Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) specifying that the ERP will apply an E&S systems
                     approach as per the Bank Directive on Managing E&S Risks and Impacts for the ERP under the FCPF and BioCarbon ISFL.

                     1.2 Advance draft of the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) with the program’s grievance mechanism. The advanced
                     draft of the SEP will be consulted at the community level prior to Appraisal, finalized and disclosed within 30 days of the
                     date of the Emissions Reduction Program Agreement and/or Grant Agreement signature, whichever happens first.

                     2. E&S instruments, mechanisms or processes required during implementation:

                     2.1 Environmental and Social Management System document (ESMS) describing the elements that are part of the
                     system approach as described under ESS1, including the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
                     with the environmental and social assessment, and mitigation measures to cover gaps consistent with World Bank ESS,
                     and propose actions to improve the design and/or implementation of the Program activities. The advanced draft will be
                     disclosed for consultation, updated based on feedback, finalized and re-disclosed after obtaining the World Bank's no
                     objection and prior to the signature of the Emissions Reduction Program Agreement or the Grant Agreement,
                     whichever happens first.



Public Disclosure
                     2.2. The Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) will be prepared and finalized by CONAFOR within 30 days after the date on
                     whichever agreement (the ERPA or Grant Agreement) becomes effective first.

                     2.3. The consultation and communication protocol will be prepared and finalized by CONAFOR within 60 days after the
                     date on whichever agreement (the ERPA or Grant Agreement) becomes effective first.

                     2.4. The Capacity Building Plan will be prepared and finalized within 90 days following the date on whichever
                     agreement (the ERPA or Grant Agreement) becomes effective first.

                     2.5. Environmental and Social Good Practice Guidelines (ESGPGs) on risk mitigation and implementation of good E&S
                     practices, prepared during the first 120 days after the ERPA or Grant Agreement have been signed (whichever happens
                     first) and new ones that might be prepared during implementation if required per program needs; these guidelines will
                     be incorporated into the ESMS.

                     2.6. Develop and implement a monitoring mechanism during Program implementation to track compliance with
                     environmental and social management requirements, no later than 120 days following the date on which the ESGPGs
                     are finalized according to point 2.5 above.

                     2.7 An E&S audit with parameters and Terms of Reference (ToR) to be agreed upon with the Bank for retroactive
                     emissions reduction.


                    Jan 07, 2026                                                                                                     Page 14 of 15
                               The World Bank
                               Mexico Biocarbon Emission Reduction Program (P180533)




                     2.8 Periodic performance reports, including grievance mechanism management, inter-institutional arrangements and
                     capacity building measures if necessary to strengthen compliance with the ESF.


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Katharina Siegmann                Title:          Senior Environmental Specialist

                      Email:                  ksiegmann@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects




Public Disclosure
                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                  Katharina Siegmann

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                         Fabiola Maria Lucia Mercado Jaldin

                     ADM Social Specialist:                                Juan Cambreleng Contreras




                    Jan 07, 2026                                                                                              Page 15 of 15
