Public Disclosure Authorized
                               The World Bank
                               Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project - Phase 2 (P180429)




Public Disclosure Authorized

                                                Project Information Document (PID)




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                               Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 24-May-2023 | Report No: PIDC35569




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                           Page 1 of 13
     The World Bank
     Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project - Phase 2 (P180429)


BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE

Country                                      Project ID                   Parent Project ID (if any)   Project Name
Brazil                                       P180429                                                   Bahia Sustainable Rural
                                                                                                       Development Project -
                                                                                                       Phase 2 (P180429)
Region                                       Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date         Practice Area (Lead)
LATIN AMERICA AND                            Mar 11, 2024                 Apr 30, 2024                 Agriculture and Food
CARIBBEAN
Financing Instrument                         Borrower(s)                  Implementing Agency
Investment Project Financing                 Government of the State of   CAR - Companhia de
                                             Bahia                        Desenvolvimento e Acao
                                                                          Regional

 Proposed Development Objective(s)

 To improve productivity, access to markets and climate change resilience of family farmers and access to water in
 selected rural areas..

 PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

SUMMARY-NewFin1

 Total Project Cost                                                                                                    150.00
 Total Financing                                                                                                       150.00
                         of which IBRD/IDA                                                                             100.00

 Financing Gap                                                                                                            0.00

 DETAILS   -NewFinEnh1




 World Bank Group Financing

   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                        100.00
 Non-World Bank Group Financing

   Counterpart Funding                                                                                                   50.00

      Borrower/Recipient                                                                                                 50.00




                                                                                                                     Page 2 of 13
         The World Bank
         Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project - Phase 2 (P180429)




    Environmental and Social Risk Classification                         Concept Review Decision
    Moderate                                                             Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to
                                                                         continue


    B. Introduction and Context

    Country Context

      1. Brazil’s recent economic and social progress has been put at risk by unfinished reforms and external shocks.
         Between 2000 and 2013, Brazil underwent swift economic and social development. Tight labor markets, high
         consumer demand, expanding credit supply, and high commodity prices as well as increased access to
         international capital markets contributed to an average annual growth rate of 4 percent. In addition, the
         Government’s social policies were successful in lifting almost 25 million people out of poverty. However, the lack
         of policy reforms focused on increasing productivity and improving economic competitiveness meant that
         productivity increases were insufficient to support growing household consumption and sustain economic
         growth1, 2. This led to a reduction in household debt and a contraction in consumption, a negative effect that was
         amplified by the end of the commodity supercycle. As a result, between 2014 and 2020, the annual growth rate
         dropped below 1 percent. The COVID-19 pandemic has made things worse, deepening the negative effect on the
         Brazilian economy and increasing the risk of unravelling the social progress made during the 2000s.

      2. The dual impacts of COVID-19 pandemic and the Russia’s invasion of Ukraine have taken a toll on the Brazilian
         economy and its people. Despite the country's efforts to rebound, the road to recovery remains long and
         challenging. Within a brief but tumultuous span of two years the COVID-19 pandemic and the Russia’s invasion of
         Ukraine unleashed a series of cascading crises in the Brazilian economy. As of April 2023, COVID-19 had taken
         more than 700,000 lives and infected more than 37 million people in Brazil. To combat the pandemic, Brazil
         implemented strict health measures that led to an economic collapse, causing a 3.9 percent decline in GDP in
         2020. In 2021, the economy was showing early signs of recovery with a 4.6 percent increase in GDP. But, in
         February 2022, the Russia’s invasion of Ukraine sent shockwaves throughout the global economy, and Brazil was
         not spared3. The ensuing crises brought high inflation rates4, increased unemployment, and put upward pressure
         on high interest rates, exacerbating the already fragile economic situation in Brazil. Rural households felt these
         national changes keenly, with many struggling to access basic food and clean water.

      3. Brazil's response to the COVID-19 crisis in 2020 was marked by a sizable fiscal stimulus package of USD158.5
         billion (10.6 percent of GDP) to support households and businesses. Emergency cash transfers worth USD64.5
         billion (37.0 percent of the stimulus package) were primarily directed at vulnerable households, while USD20.9

1
 International    Monetary     Fund.    (2015).     Brazil:    Staff  Report    for     the    2015      Article   IV    Consultation.
https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/scr/2015/cr15251.pdf.
2
 World      Bank.     (2016).    Brazil    Economic         Update,   Fall    2016:      Treading       Water.     Retrieved      from
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/25032/109858-BRI-P152101-OUO-9.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y
3
 Glauber, J. and D. Laborde. “How will Russia’s invasion of Ukraine affect global food security.” IFPRI Blog Post. February 28, 2022.
https://www.ifpri.org/blog/how-willrussias-invasion-ukraine-affect-global-food-security.
4
 In 2018 and 2019, it remained stable at 3.75% and 4.31%, respectively. In 2020, it increased slightly to 4.52%. In 2021, the inflation
rate jumped to 10.67%. Then, in 2022, the inflation rate went down to 5.01%.

                                                                                                                            Page 3 of 13
       The World Bank
       Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project - Phase 2 (P180429)


        billion was allocated to the health sector by December 2021. The Ministry of Citizenship (MoC) launched the
        Emergency Aid program (EA) that initially benefited 68.3 million people in 2020, it was gradually scaled down and
        eventually phased out. The EA program was followed by the reformulated Bolsa Família (BF) program, now known
        as Auxílio Brasil (AB). Despite the stimulus package reducing poverty in 2020, the phasing out of the EA, slow labor
        market recovery, and high inflation contributed to an increase in poverty rates in 2021.5, 6.

    4. In the wake of an unstable period for the Brazilian economy, the agriculture sector played a crucial role in the
       country's recovery. The agricultural sector in Brazil fared relatively well in comparison to other economic sectors
       during the COVID-19 pandemic. Between 1996 and 2021, for instance, average labor productivity growth in the
       agriculture sector reached nearly 6 percent while services and manufacturing, transport and construction were
       negative. In 2021, the agriculture sector contributed 21 percent of Brazil's GDP, with benefits felt along the entire
       value chain from production to processing, storage, marketing, and distribution. The sector employed 20 percent
       of the country's workforce, with 46 percent of employment opportunities located in rural areas. Brazil's agriculture
       sector was also responsible for 46 percent of all exports, generating trade surpluses of over USD1 trillion and
       contributing 91 percent of the US$380 billion in Brazil’s current foreign exchange reserves. As the destiny for 33
       percent of agriculture exports, comprising mainly of a mix of soybeans, beef, pork, and poultry meat, China is
       Brazil’s largest trading partner. The Eurozone is second, accounting for 16.2 percent of exports and purchases of
       soybeans, forest products, coffee, and fruit. Finally, the United States is the third largest trading partner,
       responsible for 7.4 percent of exports, taking a mix of forest products, coffee, sugar, and fruits.

    5. The agriculture sector in Brazil has made impressive strides in productivity at the national level, with an annual
       growth rate of 3.3 percent in total factor productivity (TFP) between 1975 and 2020. This growth was achieved
       through investments in agricultural research and development, agricultural extension and technical assistance,
       infrastructure development and trade liberalization. There is, however, still room for improvement7. Small-to-mid
       size farmers (20-200 hectares) and those in the Northeast of Brazil (NEB) have recorded the lowest TFP growth.
       This suggests that while the agriculture sector has been competitive overall, there are distinct regions and
       producer cohorts lagging behind. Increasing productivity in the lagging producer cohorts is a priority to provide
       access to sectoral growth and its associated co-benefits. Investing in research and development, implementing
       extension services, and improving access to credit and markets could increase agriculture TFP from 3 to 18
       percent8, 9. These investments would increase agricultural productivity, promote social inclusion and contribute
       to poverty reduction10. It would also allow farmers to adapt to and mitigate the effects of climate change.

    6. Furthermore, women who have difficulties accessing these water and sanitation services tend to be more
       affected than men as they perform three times more domestic and family care activities. Women are also
       affected when a family member falls ill due to inadequate access to water and sanitary sewage services because


5
 In 2020, the AE buffered the pandemic's socioeconomic impacts and helped Brazil reduce poverty to 13.1%. The exit strategy of the
  EA program increased the poverty rate to 18.7%. The slow recovery of the labor market did not compensate for the phasing out of
  the income support provided by the EA.
6
 World Bank. 2022. Macro Poverty Outlook. April 2022.
7
 Gasques, J. G. (2022). Precision farming technologies and total factor productivity in Brazil. Agricultural Economics, 53(1), 1-10.
8
 Bertoni, D., & Lipper, L. (2019). Farmer education and farmer-led extension: complementary investments to improve smallholder
  agricultural productivity. Food Security, 11(4), 827-839.
9
 Ragasa, C., Ulimwengu, J., & Randriamamonjy, J. (2022). Access to credit and total factor productivity in smallholder agriculture:
  Evidence from Latin America. Agricultural Economics, 53(2), 191-203.
10
   Cai, J., & Cao, X. (2022). Market access, farm size, and agricultural productivity: Evidence from smallholder maize farmers in
  Honduras. Food Policy, 106, 102238.

                                                                                                                         Page 4 of 13
        The World Bank
        Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project - Phase 2 (P180429)


         they are often the primary care givers. The complexity and high cost of managing water supply services in rural
         areas, however, has led to a lack of focus on this issue by state-run water companies. But, innovative decentralized
         solutions, which supplement traditional utility approaches, have been tested over the past two decades with some
         success by subnational governments, rural communities, and non-governmental organizations to expand access
         to safe drinking water in rural areas.11, 12, 13

     7. Dwindling supplies of fresh water due climate change pose a material risk to agricultural development and the
        delivery of water and sanitation services (WSS). Climate change-induced factors such as decreased precipitation,
        prolonged dry spells, and elevated temperatures are anticipated to intensify evaporation rates, leading to a
        reduction in the availability of surface water and groundwater. The agricultural sector in Brazil faces an average
        loss of approximately 1 percent of its annual gross production value because of extreme weather events14. The
        reduction of fresh water supply caused by climate change presents a significant and growing threat to the
        development of agriculture, the provision of water services and food security overall. In Brazil, the average
        temperature is projected to increase between 1.7°C and 5.3°C by the end of the century, making the country's
        biomes vulnerable.

     8. These changes are expected to increase the number of high-risk areas for agriculture development, including
        areas for production crops and livestock. The greatest climate risk is associated with the increased length and
        intensity of the dry season15. Furthermore, climate change is expected to increase the cost of supplying safe water
        in both low- and high-risk areas by an average of 3 and 18 percent, respectively16. The impacts of climate change
        are likely to be concentrated in the Midwest, North and Northeast, where the population already lives in harsh
        edaphoclimatic conditions. The Northeast of Brazil encompasses nine states, has a population of more than 50
        million, and covers some 1.6 million square kilometers. As extreme weather events like droughts and floods
        become more frequent and intense, climate resilience will become increasingly important to water providers 17
        and farmers.

 Sectoral and Institutional Context

     9. The State of Bahia covers an area of 567,400 km2, representing about 6.7 percent of Brazil's territory and more
        than one-third of the Northeast Region. With a total population of 14.9 million distributed over 417 municipalities
        Bahia is the 4th most populous state in Brazil, of whom 10.4 million are living in urban areas and 4.5 million in


11
  do Nascimento, N. M., Barbosa, E. P., & Lopes, F. F. (2016). Water supply in Brazilian rural areas: a review of public policies and
   decentralized solutions. Water International, 41(4), 539-553.
12
  Lima, R. C., Almeida, J. A., de Souza, L. E., & de Oliveira, V. H. (2020). Impact of rainwater harvesting on crop yield and rural livelihoods
   in the semiarid region of Brazil. Agricultural Water Management, 233, 106072.
13
  de Araújo, R. C., de Oliveira, F. M., & de Araújo, E. S. (2017). Integrated water resources management in Brazilian semi-arid:
   challenges and perspectives. Revista Brasileira de Recursos Hídricos, 22, e-21S02.
14
   Arias, D. et al. 2017. “Agricultural Market Insurance Development: Policy Note – Brazil.” Policy Note. Washington, DC: World Bank.
http://hdl.handle.net/10986/32203.
15
  Rattis, L., Brando, P. M., Macedo, M. N., Spera, S. A., Castanho, A. D., Marques, E. Q., ... & Coe, M. T. (2021). Climatic limit for
agriculture in Brazil. Nature Climate Change, 11(12), 1098-1104.
16
  Dalberg. 2020. Assessing the Climate Resilience of Safe Water Enterprises (SWEs). Final Report.88 pages.
http://safewater.enterprises/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/Dalberg-SWE-Climate-Resilience-Full-Report_.pdf
17
  Water system providers are institutions that are responsible for managing and maintaining the water treatment and distribution
systems that provide clean and safe drinking water to communities.

                                                                                                                                    Page 5 of 13
        The World Bank
        Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project - Phase 2 (P180429)


         rural areas. After seeing a significant increase between 2007 and 2019, mainly due to an increase in the minimum
         wage, direct income transfers, and growth in the industrial and agricultural sectors, Bahia's GDP reached US$58.7
         billion, ranking it 7th in Brazil. However, social indicators show that poverty and inequality remain significant
         issues. The state's Gini Coefficient, a measure of inequality, stands at 0.56, which is higher than the national
         average of 0.54, and approximately 40 percent of Bahia's population lives in poverty, with 10 percent living in
         extreme poverty. It is estimated that 38 percent of Bahian households were food insecure in 2020. The State also
         ranks poorly in the Municipal Human Development Index (MHDI).

     10. The agriculture sector in Bahia is composed mainly by small-scale family farmers. Family farms of less than 50
         hectares producing for both subsistence and commercial needs make up approximately 78 percent of the farms
         in Bahia. While State level data suggest that agricultural productivity growth is close to the national average at
         3.74 percent annually18, the agriculture sector face contrasting realities. One reality is found in the Cerrado and
         Sao Francisco region and features higher land quality with highly productive, commercially successful production
         systems that are well-integrated into local, regional and international markets (see annex 1). The other reality,
         which is common throughout large areas of the semiarid region, features subsistence and transitory agriculture
         systems on fragile ecosystems that are poorly integrated into markets. Farmers in this semiarid region have
         demonstrated the lowest productivity gains in Brazil19.

     11. Family farmers confronts multiple challenges that obstruct productivity and temper income growth. The
         multiple challenges faced by family farmers, in Bahia, include the following: (i) reduced bargaining power of
         farmers due to the low scale of production, (ii) inadequate access to financial markets to undertake medium-long
         term investments (credit and insurance), (iii) limited information and technical support for the adoption of modern
         agricultural technologies and good farming practices; (iv) limited access to business development services; and (v)
         limited access to productive assets. Often, these problems are a combination of market and government failures.
         Consequently, family farmers often lack competitiveness within the agricultural sector, hindering their ability to
         capitalize on the growing market potential driven by urbanization and evolving consumer preferences for food.
         Fostering the integration of family farmers into value chains through producers' organizations has the potential
         to create a more productive, sustainable and resilient agriculture sector, family farmers, in Bahia.

     12. Women and youth are the driving force behind the agriculture value chains. Recent studies clearly show that
         including women and youth in agriculture value chains leads to increased productivity and income for them and
         their families20. Success stories can be found in Guatemala, Colombia, and Rwanda, where integrating women and
         youth into coffee value chains resulted in significant increases in income and production21. Indeed, women's
         integration into the coffee value chain in Guatemala led to a 15 percent increase in income for women farmers,
         while youth involvement in coffee production in Rwanda led to a remarkable 22 percent increase in coffee
         production and a 27 percent increase in income. In Colombia, a recent study found that the women's


18
  Gasques, J. G., et al. 2018. Growth and Productivity of Brazilian Agriculture from 1975 to 2016. Conjuncture Chart No 38 – 1o Quarter
2018. Institute of Applied Economic Research (IPEA).
19
  Carvalho, N. B., de Moura Pires, M., & da Silva Gomes, A. (2017). Capital Humano E Tecnologia: análise da produtividade agrícola da
   Bahia. Campo-Território: 11(24), 265-288.
20
  FAO. (2018). Youth and agriculture: key challenges and concrete solutions. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
21
  Briones, M., & Reyes, T. (2017). Coffee certification and forest conservation in Ethiopia: how valuable are forest coffee certifications
   to local livelihoods and forest conservation? Forests, Trees and Livelihoods, 26(2), 119-131.

                                                                                                                               Page 6 of 13
        The World Bank
        Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project - Phase 2 (P180429)


         empowerment program had a positive effect on coffee production, with a 5 percent increase in coffee productivity
         among households where women participated in the program22. Finally, youth also have a unique role to play in
         the accessing information, as their familiarity with modern technology makes them ideal candidates to adopt and
         utilize new digital technologies in the agriculture sector.

     13. The gap in access to Water Supply and Sanitation (WSS) between rural and urban areas remains a major
         challenge. In Bahia, 2.8 million people (19 percent of the total population) do not have access to a treated water
         supply while 7.2 million (48 percent of the total population) lack access to sewage services. In rural areas, 1.6
         million people (36.8 percent of the rural population) continue to lack access to safe drinking water services and
         only 0.7 million (16.2 percent of the rural population) people have access to sewage system23. The new water and
         sanitation law may provide incentives for the private sector to invest in WSS in urban areas, which will go a long
         way to helping Bahia to achieve universal access in urban areas24. However, the situation in rural areas is
         compounded by the lack of sustainability of water infrastructure and water services which are transferred for
         management to municipalities which lack the capabilities to support the management of services25. Experiences
         from other states in Brazil, such as Ceará, and in other countries, demonstrate the need for the creation of a State
         Policy for Rural Water and Sanitation that creates the conditions for strengthening the provision of water services
         paying due attention to water services management and adaptation to climate change to ensure the resilience
         and sustainability of service provision.

     14. The institutional and policy framework for agriculture and water and sanitation services in the State of Bahia26.


         Agriculture

     15. In the State of Bahia, agriculture is supported by a range of institutions operating at different levels of
         government. Two key agencies are responsible for agricultural and rural development: the Secretariat for Regional
         Development (SDR) and the Secretariat for Agriculture, Livestock, Irrigation, Fisheries, and Aquaculture (SEAGRI).
         The SDR has a broad mandate to promote economic and social development across the State and its target
         audience includes small-scale farmers, rural entrepreneurs, and other actors in the agricultural sector. SEAGRI's
         target audience, on the other hand, are commercial farmers.

     16. The State Agency for Agriculture Health (AEDA) is responsible for ensuring the safety and quality of agricultural
         and livestock products in Bahia. Its main role is to inspect farms and food processing facilities to ensure
         compliance with health and safety standards. The Regional Development Agency (CAR) supports rural
         development by providing technical assistance, financing, and infrastructure support to small-scale farmers and


22
  Describe the results Pena, C. R., Figueroa, H., & Robles, M. (2018). Women's empowerment and coffee production: Evidence from a
   field experiment in rural Colombia. World Development, 110, 171-182.
23
  Sistema Nacional de Informações sobre Saneamento (SNIS),
24
  In 2020, the New Legal Framework for Basic Sanitation (Law No. 14.026) was approved, and it requires that all states must provide
   safe drinking water services to 99 percent of the population. Also, it requires access to sewage collection services to cover 90% of
   the population.
25
   CAR (2022). ‘Planejamento das novas Centrais de Associações Comunitárias a serem implantadas no estado da Bahia’. December
2022.
26
  https://www.perfiladministracaopublica.ba.gov.br/organograma.html.

                                                                                                                            Page 7 of 13
          The World Bank
          Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project - Phase 2 (P180429)


           rural entrepreneurs. The Bahia Agency for Technical Assistance and Rural Extension (BAHIATER) provides
           extension services to farmers and rural communities, offering advice and support on a range of issues related to
           agriculture and rural development.


       17. In addition to these agencies, the State of Bahia also has several research and development institutions that
           support agriculture and rural development. These include regional Universities and the Bahia State Research
           Foundation (FAPESB), which funds research projects and supports innovation in agriculture and related sectors.
           The Agency for Agribusiness Development (SUDEAGRO) also supports research and development activities, with
           a particular focus on promoting sustainable and socially inclusive development in the agriculture sector. Finally,
           the Bahia Fishery (BAHIAPESCA) is responsible for supporting and regulating the state's fisheries and aquaculture
           industries, with a mandate to promote sustainable development and protect the State's aquatic resources.

       18. Key policy instruments in Brazil's agricultural sector. The main policy instruments employed in Brazil include: (i)
           rural credit, (ii) risk management programs, (iii) minimum and reference prices, (iv) agricultural land zoning with
           environmental compliance, and (v) agricultural innovation. Credit at preferential interest rates is the main
           agricultural policy instrument provided to large, medium, and small-scale family farms. For instance, for the
           2021/22 harvest, total credit allocation was BRL 251.2 billion (USD 46.6 billion). This instrument is developed and
           implemented through collaboration between the Central Bank, the Treasury, the Secretariat of Economic Policy
           (Ministry of the Economy), the Ministry of Agriculture (MAPA) and the Ministry of Agrarian Development and
           Family Farming (MDA). The National Rural Credit System (SNCR) primarily allocates rural credit, offering
           preferential interest rates and distinct conditions for small farmers (PRONAF), medium-sized farmers (PRONAMP),
           and commercial farms27.

           Water and Sanitation

       19. Bahia has a comprehensive institutional arrangement for water and sanitation management. The main agency
           responsible for water and sanitation is the Secretariat of Infrastructure and Water Resources (SIHS), which is
           responsible for planning, implementing, and regulating water and sanitation policies. Within SIHS, there is a Water
           Resources Directorate responsible for coordinating, preparing studies, programs and projects, aiming at the
           formulation, execution and follow-up of the State Water Safety Plan and the State Policy for Safety of Dams. The
           Water and Sanitation Directorate is responsible for planning, implementing, and regulating water and sanitation
           policies and projects. The Environment and Water Resources Institute – INEMA, under the Secretariat of
           Environment, is responsible for managing water resources, including water allocation, water quality monitoring,
           and dam safety regulation.

       20. The Bahia Water and Sanitation Company (EMBASA) and Water Engineering and Sanitation Company (CERB)
           are both public water and sanitation companies owned by the State of Bahia. EMBASA is responsible for
           providing services in urban and selected rural areas, while CERB is focused only on rural areas. EMBASA manages
           and operates the water and sanitation systems, including treatment plants and distribution networks, and is
           responsible for planning and implementing new projects. CERB, on the other hand, is responsible for the



27
     The National Rural Credit System (NRCS) is based on compulsory quotas of bank deposits dedicated to rural credit.

                                                                                                                         Page 8 of 13
     The World Bank
     Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project - Phase 2 (P180429)


      development of water sources and the construction of water supply and sanitation infrastructure in rural areas.
      Overall, EMBASA is the larger and more comprehensive of the two, while CERB has a more specific focus on the
      provision of infrastructure for water and sanitation in rural areas. The management and operation of water supply
      systems in rural areas is carried out by the municipalities themselves, by EMBASA at a less extent, or by the Central
      of Associations, management model expanded with the Bank support, based on close participation by the
      communities and technical support from EMBASA and CERB. Both companies work to ensure compliance with
      environmental regulations, promote water conservation and efficient use, and provide reliable and affordable
      services to their customers.

  21. The Regulatory Agency for Water and Sanitation Services of Bahia (AGERSA) is an autonomous agency
      responsible for regulating water and sanitation services in the State. AGERSA's main responsibilities include
      setting tariffs and regulating the water quality and sanitation services provided by EMBASA and other service
      providers. Municipalities also play a role in water and sanitation management, particularly in providing local water
      and sanitation services. The Municipalities are responsible for regulating and managing local water and sanitation
      services, in partnership with EMBASA and other agencies, to ensure that the needs of local communities are met.
      The agencies mentioned above should work together to ensure that water and sanitation services are provided in
      an efficient, sustainable, and equitable manner; however, there remain big challenges to be addressed to secure
      water services in rural areas.

  22. In Brazil, key policy instruments in the water and sanitation (WSS) sector include the new Sanitation Law (Law
      14.206). This law reformed the regulatory framework for water and sanitation in the country. The National Water
      Agency (ANA) now has an expanded role, encompassing not only water resource management but also the
      establishment of reference standards for WSS and the oversight of their implementation by subnational
      governments. The new legal framework also introduced increased opportunities for privatization and private
      investment, aimed at infrastructure development and the expansion of sanitation services nationwide (universal
      provision). This shift is significant as the previous regulatory framework allowed for local regulation of WSS
      without federal direction or supervision, resulting in fragmented, inconsistent, and imbalanced rules that led to
      inefficiencies and regulatory risks. The new Law is expected to establish a more stable regulatory environment.

  23. Regarding Bahia State, the SHIS is currently preparing and/or updating the following plans: (i) State Plan for
      Water Supply and Sanitation (Plano Estadual de Agua de Saneamento Básico, PESB); (ii) Water Security State Plan
      (Plano Estadual de Seguranca Hídrica, PESH), which aims to update the water balance, detailing the necessary
      interventions to ensure water supply (construction of dams, water mains, water supply and treatment systems),
      under the prevailing conditions of climate change; (iii) Regional Water and Sanitation Plans (Planos Regionais de
      Saneamento Básico, PRSB), which will be the planning tools that will present the investment need in the short,
      mid and longer terms to attain the universal access to water and sanitation services.

Relationship to CPF

  24. The project is fully aligned with the World Bank Group’s (WBG) Brazil Country Partnership Framework (CPF -
      Report No. 113259-BR) for Brazil for the Period FY18-FY23 as revised by its Performance and Learning Review
      (PLR - Report No. 143636-BR). The project directly contributes to the third focus area of the CPF: Inclusive and
      Sustainable Development. Under this focus area, the project seeks to contribute to the socioeconomic
      development of the rural poor and vulnerable groups through investments in productivity enhancing and climate-

                                                                                                                 Page 9 of 13
        The World Bank
        Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project - Phase 2 (P180429)


         resilient agricultural technologies, good farming practices, and increasing market access through producers’
         organization. Also, the project seeks to increase access to water supply and sanitation services in low-income
         communities, with a focus on the Northeast region; enhance the sustainability and resilience of water supply and
         sanitation systems through better governance, planning, and management; and promote the adoption of
         innovative technologies and practices to improve water supply and sanitation services. The project will also
         contribute to Bahia’s efforts to improve food security, as set out in the Bahia Without Hunger program (Bahia sem
         Fome), which promotes food and nutritional security through investments to strength small-scale farmers.


     25. The project will contribute to Brazil’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) and National Adaptation Plan
         (NAP). In the latest NDC update completed in 2022 building on the original of 2015, Brazil confirmed its
         commitment to reduce emissions in 2025 by 37 percent compared with 2005, committed to reduce its emissions
         in 2030 by 50 percent compared with 2005 and set a long-term objective to achieve climate neutrality by 2050.
         Brazil’s NDC, referencing the second cycle of the National Adaptation Plan (NAP) from 2021, makes note of
         adaptation strategies in the agricultural sector as a mean of ensuring food security. By supporting small-scale
         family farmers in their adoption of climate-smart agriculture technologies and farming practices that enhance
         productivity and increase resiliency to climate shocks, the project is fully aligned with these climate change
         policies. Also, the proposed project is aligned with the following commitments: (i) increase the percentage of
         households with access to treated drinking water from 83.3 percent in 2010 to 100 percent by 2030; (ii) implement
         climate change adaptation actions in water and sanitation by 2030; and (iii) reduce water losses in the supply
         system by 20 percent by 2030.


 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

     26. To increase adoption of agricultural technologies aiming to improve agricultural productivity and resilience of
         family farmers to climate change shocks while enhancing access to markets and expanding access to resilient28
         water services in selected rural areas.

 Key Results (From PCN)

     27. Adoption of agriculture technologies:

             •    Farmers (members of producer organizations supported by the project) adopting agricultural technologies
                  and good farming practices aiming to improve productivity (number - disaggregated by women, youth
                  and traditional communities).

             •    Farmers (members of producer organizations supported by the project) adopting agricultural technologies
                  and good farming practices aiming to improve climate change resilience (disaggregated by women, youth
                  and traditional communities).




28
    Resilient water services entail: (i) a minimum number of hours per day of water service even during the most critical periods of the
year, (ii) an institutional management model in place with backup support arrangements for operation and maintenance (O&M), and
(iii) financial arrangements that cover at least operation and management costs.

                                                                                                                            Page 10 of 13
        The World Bank
        Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project - Phase 2 (P180429)


     28. Enhance market access:

             •    Increase in gross value of sales by family farmers participating in approved subprojects (Percentage -
                  disaggregated by women, youth and traditional communities);

     29. Improved access to water:

             •    Water access will be measured as the number of people provided with access to resilient29 water services
                  through piped household water connections (Number).

 D. Concept Description

     30. One strategy employed to tackle the various challenges described above is the promotion of Productive Alliances
         (PA), which aim to strengthen the connections between producers, buyers, and the public sector within
         agricultural value chains. The PA approach involves three key actors: (i) producer organizations, (ii) buyers, and
         (iii) the public sector. These actors are linked through a business plan that outlines the capital and service
         requirements of the producers and proposes enhancements to improve their production capacities and skills, thus
         strengthening their connection to the market. The implementation of the business plan typically involves a
         subproject supported by three main inputs or activities: productive investments (assets), technical assistance for
         primary production, processing and marketing, and business development services. These inputs are funded
         through grants provided by the project, which are matched by the beneficiary producers.

     31. The PA approach combines insights from experimental research, including randomized controlled trials, focused
         on identifying the major barriers to the adoption of agricultural technologies and best farming practices, with
         recent literature on the participation of family farmers in agricultural value chains30. The PA approach primarily
         addresses constraints related to (i) liquidity, (ii) information gaps, (iii) risk aversion, (iv) transaction costs
         associated with market access, and (v) the subpar quality of agricultural products produced by family farmers. By
         facilitating the participation of family farmers in value chains that connect their agricultural production with the
         increasing urban demand for high-quality food products, the PA approach offers a pathway for improving their
         economic prospects31. The component 1 of the project will finance both the pre-investments needed to develop
         business plans (subcomponent 1.1) and the implementation of the proposed investments (subcomponent 1.2).
         The component will address the diverse needs of producer organizations at various levels of organization through
         different grant windows, aiming to foster social inclusion.

     32. The strategy for managing water supply issues in rural areas is centered around the Community Associations for
         Water Management, known as "Centrais de Associações." This management approach emphasizes community-
         driven and locally managed water systems, moving away from the reliance on centralized systems typically
         overseen by municipalities. By involving local communities in the planning, implementation, and maintenance of
         water services, this strategy aims to enhance ownership, sustainability, and effectiveness. Empowering

29
   See definition in footnote on PDO above.
30
   Barrett, Christopher B., Thomas Reardon, Johan Swinnen, and David Zilberman. "Agri-food value chain revolutions in low-and
middle-income countries." Journal of Economic Literature 60, no. 4 (2022): 1316-1377.
31
   Gollin, Douglas, and Lilli Teresa Probst. "Food and agriculture: shifting landscapes for policy." Oxford Review of Economic Policy 31,
no. 1 (2015): 8-25.

                                                                                                                             Page 11 of 13
          The World Bank
          Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project - Phase 2 (P180429)


           communities to take control of their water supply ensures long-term access to clean water and promotes the
           overall well-being and development of rural populations. Developed in the early 2000s, this approach has gained
           increased attention in recent years, particularly in cases where water systems were transferred to municipalities
           but failed to achieve sustainability. The previous project financed by the World Bank relied on the management
           model of "Centrais de Associações" and the results demonstrated benefits such as reduced administration and
           maintenance costs, improved water quality monitoring, decreased water losses, and enhanced association
           accountability32. The component 2 will finance both the pre-investments needed to develop “Centrais de
           Associações” (subcomponent 2.1) and the implementation of the proposed investments (subcomponent 2.2).



    Legal Operational Policies                                                          Triggered?
    Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                         No
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60                                                  No

     Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
    .
.
    CONTACT POINT


    World Bank
     Eirivelthon Santos Lima, Luis Alfonso Alvestegui Justiniano
     Senior Agriculture Economist


    Borrower/Client/Recipient
     Government of the State of Bahia
     Jeronimo Rodrigues
     Governor
     governador@governadoria.ba.gov.br

    Implementing Agencies

     CAR - Companhia de Desenvolvimento e Acao Regional
     Fernando Cabral
     Coordinator
     fernandocabral@car.ba.gov.br




32
  CAR/CERB (2022). ‘Avaliação Comparativa dos Impactos à População Atendidas por SSAA Operados pelas Centrais e Prefeituras’.
December 2022.

                                                                                                                  Page 12 of 13
     The World Bank
     Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project - Phase 2 (P180429)


FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects



APPROVAL

Task Team Leader(s):                     Eirivelthon Santos Lima, Luis Alfonso Alvestegui Justiniano

Approved By
APPROVALTBL
Practice Manager/Manager:

Country Director:                      Sophie Naudeau                            12-Jun-2023




                                                                                                       Page 13 of 13
