Public Disclosure Authorized
                                         The World Bank
                                         Cameroon Second Fiscal Sustainability, Inclusive and Sustainable Growth Development Policy Financing
                                         (P180017)



                                  @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprdpfcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                      Program Information Document (PID)


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                     Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 04-Dec-2024 | Report No: PIDDA00053




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Dec 04, 2024                                                                                                     Page 1 of 8
          The World Bank
          Cameroon Second Fiscal Sustainability, Inclusive and Sustainable Growth Development Policy Financing
          (P180017)


   @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprdpfbasicinformation#doctemplate
   BASIC INFORMATION


   A. Basic Project Data

   Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                  Operation Name
                                                                Cameroon Second Fiscal Sustainability, Inclusive and
   Cameroon                       P180017
                                                                Sustainable Growth Development Policy Financing
   Region                         Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)           Financing Instrument
   WESTERN AND CENTRAL                                          Macroeconomics, Trade          Development Policy
                                  21-Jan-2025
   AFRICA                                                       and Investment                 Financing (DPF)
   Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
   Republic of Cameroon           Republic of Cameroon

  Proposed Development Objective(s)
   The development objective is to (i) improve fiscal sustainability, governance, and public sector management; (ii)
   strengthen human capital and women’s economic empowerment; and (iii) lay the foundations for sustainable
   infrastructure development.

   @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
   Financing (US$, Millions)


   Maximizing Finance for Development

   Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                    Yes
   Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?              Yes

   SUMMARY
     Total Financing                                                                                               200.00

   DETAILS
     Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                              200.00
        World Bank Lending                                                                                         200.00

   @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprdecision#doctemplate
   Decision
   The review did authorize the preparation to continue


Dec 04, 2024                                                                                                           Page 2 of 8
          The World Bank
          Cameroon Second Fiscal Sustainability, Inclusive and Sustainable Growth Development Policy Financing
          (P180017)




   Explanation




   B. Introduction and Context
   Country Context
 Despite marked vulnerabilities, Cameroon economy showed resilience and is recovering from COVID-19 pandemics,
 commodity price volatility and inflationary surge. Per capita growth has averaged only 1 percent annually over the last
 decade, implying a narrow progress in poverty reduction. Poverty rates have stagnated since 2001, with Around 23 percent
 of the population lived with less than US$2.15 per day (2017 PPP) [extreme poverty threshold] in 2023. Low human capital
 development limits Cameroon's potential for inclusive growth. Despite being categorized as a lower middle-income
 country (LMIC), Cameroon's health and education indicators are closer to those of low-income countries, marked by
 significant regional and rural-urban disparities. The country's Human Capital Index stands at 0.4, below the average of
 Sub-Saharan Africa and LMICs. Stagnating poverty has been compounded by substantial fragilities from: (i) conflicts which
 affect 9 out of 10 regions, implying increased violence, displaced people, and disrupted economic activities and social
 services, (ii) inertia and uncertainties surrounding the 2025 general elections, (iii) and climate change. Cameroon remains
 highly vulnerable to the impact of climate change, threatening the economy's prospects of sustained growth and the
 livelihoods of millions of people who depend on the land. The 2022 Climate Change and Development Report (CCDR)
 identifies four main sectors of the economy as highly vulnerable to the effects of climate change: agro-forestry, transport,
 energy, and urban development. Improved service delivery through decentralization, as supported by DPF2, is essential
 to strengthening the social contract and addressing the sources of conflict and fragility, as suggested by the conclusions
 of the 2019 Grand National Dialogue.

 The macroeconomic policy framework is adequate for the purpose of the proposed operation. The growth outlook has
 improved (4.2 percent annually on average), anchored in a continued recovery of domestic activities, in particular the
 services sector and projected increased of public investment in infrastructure. Both fiscal and monetary policies remain
 credible. Cameroon’s membership of CEMAC and the regional monitoring framework provide additional comfort,
 especially as the BEAC stands ready to tighten monetary policy if inflation increases further or regional foreign exchange
 reserves come under pressure. BEAC has responded to rising inflation with monetary tightening in line with its mandates,
 while maintaining a fixed peg against the Euro. The Government remains committed to fiscal consolidation, as reflected
 in revenue mobilization measures in the 2024 finance bill and the second increase in February 2024 in retail fuel prices to
 reduce fuel subsidies. The financial sector remains stable, but vulnerabilities remain in the banking sector. Public debt is
 sustainable owing to expected moderate growth in 2024-2027 and continued fiscal consolidation.

 This development policy financing operation is the first in a proposed programmatic series of three, with a reform
 agenda that promotes inclusive and robust growth while strengthening Cameroon’s resilience to climate change. The
 series is organized around three pillars aligned with the government's reform program and the recently approved 2025-
 2029 CPF. This program document proposes an International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) loan of $
 US 200 million to the Republic of Cameroon. The development objective is to (i) improve fiscal sustainability, governance,
 and public sector management; (ii) strengthen human capital and women’s economic empowerment; and (iii) lay the


Dec 04, 2024                                                                                                         Page 3 of 8
          The World Bank
          Cameroon Second Fiscal Sustainability, Inclusive and Sustainable Growth Development Policy Financing
          (P180017)


 foundations for sustainable infrastructure development. The pillars are priorities in the SND30, build on World Bank core
 analytics, and complement investment projects in key sectors (public sector governance, social protection, digital
 economy, education, health, agriculture, and transport).

  Relationship to CPF
 The proposed operation is aligned with the WBG’s strategic priorities including the World Bank Evolution Roadmap and
 the ongoing Country Partnership Framework (CPF) 2025–2029. The proposed DPF operation contributes to Cameroon's
 CPF objectives: (i) improving service delivery for human capital development (PAs #1, #5, #6, #7); (ii) strengthening
 infrastructure governance (PA #8); and (iii) increasing efficiency and accountability in the management of public resources
 (PAs #2 #3 and #4), (iv) raising productivity of selected agricultural products (PA #8).

  C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

  The program development objective is to (i) improve fiscal sustainability, governance, and public sector management;
  (ii) strengthen human capital and women’s economic empowerment; and (iii) lay the foundations for sustainable
  infrastructure development.

   Key Results
 The main results expected from this Development Policy Operation (DPO) encompass improved domestic revenue
 mobilization and public financial management as well as inclusive and sustainable growth. The first pillar includes four
 prior actions aimed at improving public sector management by (i) accelerating the ongoing decentralization process, with
 a focus on transparent and equitable fiscal arrangements, to increase the share of transfers to regions and municipalities
 in the national budget from 1 percent in 2019 (under the DGD) to 10 percent in 2025; (ii) strengthening the governance
 and accountability of SOEs, to have at least 50 percent of SOEs reporting financial data no later than two months after the
 legal deadline for approval of accounts by their General Assembly ; (iii) improving revenue mobilization to increase non-
 oil revenue from 11.7 of GDP in 2020 to 14.4 percent of GDP in 2026; and (iv) improving Treasury management in order
 to have the rate of cash payments made by the Treasury decreasing from 22.4 percent in 2020 to 15 percent in 2025. Pillar
 2 includes four policy areas aimed at: (i) promoting socioeconomic inclusion, by addressing gender gaps, improving
 women’s human capital, and expanding their employment and income-generating opportunities (ii) increasing access to
 education, by having more state-paid teachers in public primary school, (iii) ensuring better identification of vulnerable
 groups and increase the number of households included in the social registry from zero in 2022 to 300,000 by 2026, and
 (iv) improving access to services by introducing digitalization in the legal and regulatory framework of civil registration
 (CR), with a goal to increase the share of the population eligible to receive birth certificates from CR centers outside their
 places of birth from 0 (2020) to 75 percent (2026). Pillar 3 includes two policy areas that will help Cameroon lay the
 foundation for sustainable and high-quality infrastructure.

  D. Project Description
 The proposed operation consists of 8 prior actions, each based on a thorough analysis of challenges in their respective
 areas. They were identified through close collaboration with the authorities and extensive consultations with
 development partners and civil society. The first pillar includes four prior actions aimed at improving public sector
 management. The prior actions support measures focused on: (i) accelerating the ongoing decentralization process, with


Dec 04, 2024                                                                                                           Page 4 of 8
          The World Bank
          Cameroon Second Fiscal Sustainability, Inclusive and Sustainable Growth Development Policy Financing
          (P180017)


 a focus on transparent and equitable fiscal arrangements; (ii) strengthening the governance and accountability of SOEs;
 (iii) improving revenue mobilization; and (iv) improving Treasury management and public sector efficiency. These reforms,
 notably those related to decentralization, have been identified in the Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) Update (2022)
 and the Joint World Bank/IMF regional policy paper (2021) as important pathways for enhancing sustainable and inclusive
 growth in Cameroon.

 Pillar 2 includes 3 policy actions aimed at promoting socioeconomic inclusion, increasing access to education, ensuring
 better identification of vulnerable groups, and improving mechanisms for household to mitigate shocks. Improving
 efficiency and transparency of resource allocation and the flow of funds in the education sector and strengthening
 management and planning are short-term priorities to boost learning outcomes and sustain. Meanwhile, building inclusive
 and shock-responsive delivery systems to facilitate targeting and enrollment in social programs and the provision of
 services will help households manage shocks and invest in human capital. Lastly, improving national identification will
 increase access to services, especially among women and other vulnerable groups, and modernizing civil registration and
 identity ecosystems will allow more inclusive access to public and private services.

 Pillar 3 consists of one prior action that will help Cameroon lay the foundation for sustainable infrastructure, in line
 with the CCDR's recommendations and other existing analytical works. Investment in water management systems could
 provide the necessary means to target sustainable agricultural intensification and the resilience of agricultural production
 systems (CCDR 2022). Sustainable water management would help Cameroon adapt to climate change by protecting
 ecosystems. While water management is essential to adapt to climate change by increasing the availability of water for
 agriculture and industry, it also directly affects energy savings, which can reduce GHG emissions.

  E. Implementation
  Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
 The Ministry of Economics, Planning and Regional Development (MINEPAT) remains responsible for the overall
 implementation of the proposed operation. The inter-ministerial committee in charge of monitoring the structural
 reforms will continue to coordinate actions under the second operation of the DPF series and report progress to all
 relevant stakeholders. The results framework includes indicators for which data are mostly available, and the close
 involvement of World Bank sectoral teams through investment project financing and technical assistance will help ensure
 regular monitoring of the operation. Most program indicators are already regularly estimated by relevant government
 agencies, reflected in administrative data releases, and included in ministries’ sector plans and budget programs.
 Performance on other indicators will be monitored and reported through the multi-sectoral steering committee, which
 will help coordinate DPF team data requests across the various sectors involved in the operation.

  F. Poverty and Social Impacts, and Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects

  Poverty and Social Impacts
 The reforms supported by this operation are expected to have a wide-ranging positive impact on poverty reduction and
 social development in Cameroon. Increasing resources for CTDs (Prior Action #1) can boost access to basic public services
 by eliminating the mismatch between region-level needs and resource allocation, which in turn could help reduce
 Cameroon’s wide spatial inequalities. Prior Action #4 aims to contribute to the effective delivery of public services through
 improved Treasury management. Promoting and propagating electronic payments will be critical to reduce corruption and


Dec 04, 2024                                                                                                          Page 5 of 8
          The World Bank
          Cameroon Second Fiscal Sustainability, Inclusive and Sustainable Growth Development Policy Financing
          (P180017)


 ensure efficient use of public resources. Moreover, improving the management of SOEs (Prior Action #2) will free up
 resources that would otherwise be used to subsidize underperforming SOEs. The expansion of the taxpayer database and
 enhanced control of taxpayer compliance (Prior Action #3) can further increase domestic revenue mobilization, promoting
 further poverty reduction if new resources are directed toward pro-poor programs and policies.

 Reforms under Pillars 2 and 3 have the potential to support livelihoods and human capital development, crucial for
 poverty reduction. By improving the distribution of teachers and reducing education-related spatial disparities in teacher-
 to-pupil ratios (Prior Action #5), particularly in public schools where many children from low-income households are
 enrolled, these measures aim to enhance educational quality and accessibility for disadvantaged groups. Prior Action #6
 seeks to strengthen the crisis response capacity of the Social Safety Net system, enhancing its ability to effectively target
 pro-poor programs and provide timely support to vulnerable populations during emergencies. Additionally, expanding
 access to identification documents and civil registration (Prior Action #7) can facilitate access to public services and
 economic opportunities, particularly benefiting marginalized groups. Prior Action #8 targets efforts to enhance water
 resources management by boosting irrigation and supporting Water Users’ Associations. Access to clean water remains a
 significant challenge in Cameroon, particularly in rural areas where 54 percent of the population lacked access to clean
 water in 2018, much lower than 94 percent in urban areas. This disparity contributes to waterborne diseases that
 disproportionately affect poor households, affecting their health, human capital, and productivity. Improving water
 availability for households engaged in farming can reduce waterborne diseases, enhance agricultural productivity, and
 decrease the time spent by women and children fetching water, thereby bolstering the income prospects of rural
 communities.

   Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects
 It is assessed that Prior Actions #1, 4, 7 and 8 have positive impacts on Cameroon's environment. Given the country's
 vulnerability to climate and disaster risks, including droughts, flooding, and landslides, enhancing resilience is a priority.
 Prior Action #8, focusing on water resources management and promoting resilient agriculture practices, is expected to
 positively impact the environment. The transfer of decision-making power to CTDs under Prior Action #1 is anticipated to
 empower local initiatives, potentially benefitting environmental protection efforts. With a significant portion of women
 engaged in agriculture, enhancing their access to education through Prior Action #5 and Policy Area 6 may foster
 innovation in sustainable farming practices, contributing to environmental resilience. Prior Actions #4 and #7, which
 involve moving from paper-based to digital systems, significantly reduces the consumption of paper, which in turn
 conserves trees and reduces deforestation. Digital payments also reduce the need for physical transportation of
 documents and cash, leading to fewer vehicle emissions associated with the transportation of paper documents and cash.
 Digital systems can also optimize resource allocation and reduce inefficiencies, leading to less waste and more sustainable
 resource management practices.

  G. Risks and Mitigation
 The overall risks associated with this operation are substantial but manageable. Political and governance risk categories
 are rated high. Political and governance risks are heightened by Cameroon’s sociopolitical crisis in the Northwest and
 Southwest, Boko-Haram attacks, herder-farmer disputes in the North, and upcoming elections in October 2025 that might
 reduce the pace of the reforms. The authorities have taken essential steps to curb the adverse social impacts of shocks by
 extending social safety net programs and providing targeted subsidies for fertilizers to improve crop yields. PAs under this
 DPF aims at improving decentralization, social inclusion and digitalization of CR systems and will contribute to address the

Dec 04, 2024                                                                                                           Page 6 of 8
          The World Bank
          Cameroon Second Fiscal Sustainability, Inclusive and Sustainable Growth Development Policy Financing
          (P180017)


 drivers of fragility and conflict and reinforce the social contract. Macroeconomic risks stem from Cameroon’s reliance on
 oil and raw materials exports, as well as imports of key goods like fuel and rice. These dependencies heighten vulnerability
 to external shocks, impacting fiscal stability. Low global commodity prices could cut export earnings and government
 revenue, potentially forcing reductions in capital and social spending. While these risks cannot be fully mitigated, fiscal
 controls and tax reforms—including reduced fuel subsidies—partially address them. Additionally, new tax and customs
 measures under the national budget, supported by the IMF’s ECF-EFF program, anchor prudent policies to help manage
 these risks. Institutional capacity risks are rated as substantial, as there are often lengthy delays between program decision
 and execution, as executive power is highly centralized at the Presidency which delays the decision-making process. To
 mitigate these risks, the team engages with high-level authorities and keeps them regularly informed on the program’s
 developments. Fiduciary risk is deemed substantial, since Cameroon's PFM system still suffers from various shortcomings,
 especially in terms of implementing the new budget and procurement reforms. With support from the WB PforR (IMPACT),
 the IMF, the WBG, and other donors, the government continues to implement several PFM reforms under a
 comprehensive PFM reform action plan for 2024-2026.

   @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
   CONTACT POINT

   World Bank
     Samba Ba
     Senior Economist

   Borrower/Client/Recipient
    Republic of Cameroon
    Alamine Ousmane Mey
    Minister of Economy, Planning and Regional Development
    cabinet_minepat@yahoo.com

   Implementing Agencies
    Republic of Cameroon
    Cyrille Edou
    Director General of Budget
    cyrill.edoualoo@yahoo.com

   FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

   The World Bank
   1818 H Street, NW
   Washington, D.C. 20433
   Telephone: (202) 473-1000
   Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects



Dec 04, 2024                                                                                                           Page 7 of 8
          The World Bank
          Cameroon Second Fiscal Sustainability, Inclusive and Sustainable Growth Development Policy Financing
          (P180017)


   @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
   APPROVAL


   Task Team Leader(s):                      Samba Ba

   Approved By

   Practice Manager/Manager:                 Sandeep Mahajan                        12-Nov-2024

   Country Director:                         Cheick Fantamady Kante                 04-Dec-2024




Dec 04, 2024                                                                                                     Page 8 of 8
