Public Disclosure Authorized
                               Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
                               Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
                               CONAFOR, 2025




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                         ADVANCED DRAFT OF THE
                                        BENEFIT-SHARING PLAN FOR
                                           MEXICO'S EMISSION


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                          REDUCTIONS PROGRAM




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                          September 2025




                                                                                           0


                                                                                           Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025




Content
1. Introduction ..................................................................................................................................... 3
2. Background and Objective .............................................................................................................. 5
3. Applicable Legal Framework for Benefit-Sharing........................................................................... 6
4. Financial Architecture for Benefit-Sharing ..................................................................................... 8
5. Benefit-Sharing ................................................................................................................................ 9
   5.1 Types of Benefits ........................................................................................................................ 9
   5.2 Benefit-Sharing Mechanism ..................................................................................................... 11
            5.2.1 Transfer of resources derived from results-based payment ....................................... 11
            5.2.2 Categories of Potential Beneficiaries ........................................................................... 14
            5.2.3 Program Activities Related to Benefit-Sharing ............................................................ 15
            5.2.4 General Criteria for Benefit-Sharing ............................................................................ 16
6. Methodology for the Participatory Process to Define Benefit-Sharing....................................... 19
    6.1 Background of the Participatory Process for Defining Benefit-Sharing within the ERP ....... 19
    6.2 Context of the Participatory Process for Defining Benefit-Sharing ....................................... 21
    6.3 Key Stakeholders for the Participatory Process ..................................................................... 21
    6.4 Phases of Implementation of the Participatory Process for Defining Benefit-Sharing......... 24
7. Monitoring Provisions for the Implementation of the Benefit-Sharing Plan .............................. 37
Annex 2: List of Identified Stakeholders in the Territory .................................................................. 45
Annex 3: Proposed Facilitation Guide for the Participatory Process of the BSP .............................. 51
Bibliography ........................................................................................................................................ 63




                                                                                                                                                      1


                                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


Acronyms and Abbreviations
   BSP                    Benefit-Sharing Plan
   CEDAW                  Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women
   CONAFOR                National Forestry Commission
   CONANP                 National Commission of Natural Protected Areas
   CPEUM                  Political Constitution of the United Mexican States
                          National Strategy for Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation
   ENAREDD+
                          (ENAREDD+)
   ER                     Emission reductions
   ERP                    Emission Reductions Program
   ERPA                   Emission Reductions Payment Agreement
   ERPD                   Emission Reductions Program Document
   ESCP                   Environmental and Social Commitment Plan
   ESF                    World Bank Environmental and Social Framework
   ESMF                   Environmental and Social Management Framework
   ESMS                   Environmental and Social Management System
   ESS                    World Bank Environmental and Social Standards
   FFM                    Mexican Forest Fund
   GHG                    Greenhouse Gases
   IMJUVE                 Mexican Institute of Youth
   INECC                  National Institute of Ecology and Climate Change
   INEGI                  National Institute of Statistics and Geography
   INPI                   National Institute of Indigenous Peoples
   ISFL                   Initiative for Sustainable Forest Landscapes
   JSDDP                  Jurisdiction-Specific Demand-Driven Program
   LGCC                   General Climate Change Law
   LGDFS                  General Sustainable Forest Development Law
   LULUCF                 Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry Sector
   MRV                    Measurement, Reporting, and Verification
   RAN                    National Agrarian Registry
   REDD+                  Reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation
   SADER                  Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
   SEDATU                 Ministry of Agrarian, Territorial and Urban Development
   SEMARNAT               Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources
   SEP                    Stakeholder Engagement Plan
   UNFCCC                 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
   WB                     World Bank




                                                                                                               2


                                                                                                               Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


1.    Introduction

The BioCarbon Fund Initiative for Sustainable Forest Landscapes (ISFL), managed by the World Bank
(WB), promotes and rewards greenhouse gases (GHG) emission reductions (ER) and carbon
sequestration through improved land management. This includes strategies for reducing emissions
from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD+), climate-smart agriculture, improved land-use
planning, and comprehensive policies that support sustainable, equitable, inclusive, and productive
landscapes, generating positive environmental, social, and economic impacts.

Mexico intends to implement an Emission Reductions Program (ERP) under the ISFL framework,
aiming to reduce emissions in the Land Use, Land-Use Change, and Forestry (LULUCF) sector across
the states of Coahuila, Chihuahua, Durango, and Nuevo León. The jurisdiction selection considered
that these four states cover 58.6 million hectares, representing nearly 30% of Mexico’s total land
area, with a forest cover of 50.2 million hectares1 where deforestation and forest degradation
processes are occurring. Additionally, these states have a combined population of 14,575,958 people
(11.5% of the national total), with 888,015 (6.1%) residing in forested areas and approximately 1.58%
(around 230,000 people) identifying as Indigenous.2,3

This program represents an opportunity to design a public policy intervention with an integrated
territorial management approach that directly benefits the people who live in and depend on forest
ecosystems. Implemented by the National Forestry Commission (CONAFOR), the successful
execution of the ERP in this jurisdiction could enable access to financial resources through results-
based payments, provided that emission reductions are verified in accordance with the specific
criteria of the ISFL.

In this context, the Benefit-Sharing Plan (BSP) of the ERP establishes the mechanisms to allocate
results-based payments to the jurisdiction where emission reductions are generated. It is important
to highlight that the implementation of the ERP does not automatically guarantee the availability of
financial resources for the BSP, as both monetary and non-monetary benefits will depend on the
program’s effectiveness and the successful verification of emission reductions.




1   Comisión Nacional Forestal, ERPD, 2024. Online consultation: https://www.biocarbonfund-isfl.org/system/files/2024-
09/ISFLMexicoERPD_20230830-VF-senttoscs_atenci%C3%B3n%20CONAFOR_v4_0.pdf
2 Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Geografía (INEGI). Population and Housing Census,                     2020. Online consultation:
https://www.inegi.org.mx/programas/ccpv/2020/
3 Estimate conducted considering localities with fewer than 2,500 inhabitants, located within lands that support forest vegetation and

within a maximum radius of 500 meters from forested areas, based on the Land Use and Vegetation Map, Series VII (INEGI, 2018) and data
from the 2020 Population and Housing Census (INEGI). These figures refer to the population aged five and older who speak an Indigenous
language. Meanwhile, the Atlas of Indigenous Peoples published by the National Institute of Indigenous Peoples (INPI), based on 2015
data, indicates that 2.24% of the population in those states self-identified as Indigenous, regardless of whether they are originally from
those territories or not—approximately 325,500 people. Online consultation: https://atlas.inpi.gob.mx/distribucion-por-entidad-
federativa/


                                                                                                                                        3


                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


To ensure its success, the ERP and BSP are based on a participatory process that actively involves key
stakeholders from the forest and rural sectors, including ejidos,4 local communities, Indigenous and
Afro-Mexican peoples, women, youth, rural inhabitants with and without formal land tenure, civil
society organizations and government actors, among others.

The BSP seeks to reduce structural barriers that hinder the equitable participation of historically
marginalized groups—such as women, youth, and Indigenous peoples—in the use, management,
conservation, and sustainable utilization of forest resources. These barriers often prevent these
groups from accessing the benefits of public policies and programs, or from participating
meaningfully in community decision-making, despite their deep-rooted presence in forest territories
and their vital contributions to sustainable development. For instance, only 27% of individuals with
agrarian rights in Mexico are women, and their participation in ejido and community governance
bodies is even more limited: women hold just 21% of representative roles and only 12% of ejido
presidencies.5

To advance this objective, the BSP promotes equitable benefit sharing through a Jurisdiction-Specific
Demand-Driven Program (JSDDP) that strengthens inclusive forest governance. This program not only
applies clear inclusion criteria for priority and vulnerable groups—regardless of land tenure status—
but also establishes differentiated incentives designed to foster equity, encourage active
participation, and ensure that historically marginalized groups can fully engage in decision-making
and access the benefits of forest-related programs.

The JSDDP is an instrument used by CONAFOR, in addition to the general Operating Rules, for the
implementation of targeted programs focused on forest management in specific areas. For benefit
sharing under the ERP, the JSDDP will be developed based on participatory and consultative
processes. It will define the criteria and procedures for identifying eligible individuals and groups, the
types of support concepts and affirmative actions available, and the mechanisms for monitoring,
evaluation, oversight, and transparency in the allocation and implementation of such measures.

Given that resources linked to the BSP will be limited, the Jurisdiction-Specific Demand-Driven
Program will aim to strengthen the emission reductions intervention model within the jurisdiction. It
will place particular emphasis on the inclusion of vulnerable groups that face barriers to accessing
sustainable forest development programs. In this regard, the BSP is designed as an incentive-based
framework for emission reductions, incorporating a redistributive approach that promotes diversity,
equity, and inclusion. This approach considers several factors: the expressed needs of the


4 An ejido is an association of rural farmers who hold collective ownership of common lands granted by the State. It represents a form of

collective land tenure recognized by the Political Constitution of the United Mexican States and the Agrarian Law, which together provide
the legal foundation and regulatory framework for ejido governance. This framework establishes collective decision-making structures,
including the Ejido Assembly—the highest authority within the ejido—the Ejido Commissariat, which is responsible for executing,
representing, and administering the Assembly’s decisions, and the Supervisory Council, which oversees compliance and internal
accountability within the ejido.
5 Gender-disaggregated statistics from the National Agrarian Registry, 2016-2025. Online consultation:

http://www.ran.gob.mx/ran/index.php/sistemas-de-consulta/estadistica-agraria/estadistica-con-perspectiva-de-genero


                                                                                                                                       4


                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


jurisdiction’s territories; the demand for participation demonstrated through applications submitted
after the publication of the Jurisdiction-Specific Demand-Driven Program; compliance with the
eligibility criteria established in the Program; and respect for the results of stakeholder consultations
conducted through the BSP’s participatory process. It is important to clarify that results-based
payments under the ERP are not intended to replace public investment but rather to serve as a
complementary mechanism to support integrated landscape management.

The BSP has developed a clear, participatory, and transparent methodology to benefit-sharing
through consultation processes with stakeholders in the jurisdiction, as detailed in Section 6 and
Annex 3. The consultation process will take place after the signing of the Emission Reductions
Payment Agreement (ERPA) and will adhere to the ERP’s Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP). This
methodology aligns with the World Bank’s Environmental and Social Framework (ESF). Additionally,
the BSP proposal complies with Mexico’s international commitments, constitutional provisions, and
secondary legislation, as detailed in Section 3 of this document.

Finally, it is important to note that this version of the BSP has been updated from the version
presented in the Emission Reductions Program Document (ERPD). These adjustments result from the
work of a multidisciplinary team responsible for defining the benefit-sharing mechanism and
analyzing the technical requirements for its implementation. Accordingly, the differences between
versions reflect the evolution of the document, advancements in mechanism design, and the
necessary conditions for the successful implementation of the ERP.6

2.    Background and Objective

In 2017, Mexico published the National Strategy for Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and
Forest Degradation (ENAREDD+), with a vision for 2017–2030. This strategy was developed through
a broad and comprehensive public participation and consultation process led by CONAFOR
(CONAFOR, 2017).

ENAREDD+ adopted an integrated land management model, recognizing that the drivers of
deforestation and forest degradation originate both within and outside forestry activities. In this
regard, it proposed the coordination of public policies, programs, and actions to address the causal
factors exerting pressure on forest ecosystems (CONAFOR, 2017).

Consequently, ENAREDD+ established a guiding principle on benefit-sharing, stipulating that in the
event of access to results-based payments derived from avoided emissions, the Federal Government
would receive such payments. However, it recognizes that the right to receive benefits from these

6 In comparison to the initial version, adjustments were made to the mechanism of benefit distribution, with a stronger emphasis on the

participatory process and methodology for identifying and prioritizing local interests and needs to be integrated into the Jurisdiction-
Specific Demand Driven Program. The revised approach also highlights the importance of establishing a benefit-sharing mechanism that
enables the meaningful participation of historically excluded or vulnerable populations within the ERP jurisdiction. This reinforces the
integration of a diversity, equity, and inclusion perspective throughout the overall design of the JSDDP.


                                                                                                                                      5


                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


payments belongs to the landowners and residents of the regions where efforts are made to halt
deforestation and forest degradation. This must be carried out under the mechanisms established
for that purpose, ensuring their right to full and effective participation in the design and
implementation of benefit-sharing mechanisms that they agree upon.

For this reason, the BSP adopts this directive and establishes the mechanism for channeling both
monetary and non-monetary benefits among individuals and beneficiary groups who have
undertaken or are capable of undertaking activities to reduce deforestation and forest degradation,
as well as contribute to emission reductions.

At the same time, the BSP is defined as: "The document that details the benefit-sharing agreements
described in the Emission Reductions Program, the stakeholder consultation processes, and how the
program entity will communicate, implement, and oversee the benefit-sharing process" (BioCarbon
Fund, 2020).

Its design was carried out through a participatory and transparent process to ensure that incentives
are used equitably, inclusively, efficiently, and effectively. Additionally, it considers the
implementation approach outlined in the ERP, which establishes measures aimed at reducing
emissions in the forest sector within the program’s jurisdiction. The BSP is also based on the
applicable national legal framework; the institutional capacities for its implementation, as well as for
MRV; the experience gained from implementing operating rules and other special guidelines of
programs managed by CONAFOR;7 an appropriate financial management mechanism through the
FFM; and compliance with social and environmental safeguards of the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the World Bank's ESF.

3.    Applicable Legal Framework for Benefit-Sharing

The legal and programmatic framework for forest management and rural development in Mexico is
solid and provides fundamental principles for implementing the BSP. It includes the Political
Constitution of the United Mexican States (CPEUM), national laws such as the General Law on Climate
Change (LGCC) and the General Law on Sustainable Forest Development (LGDFS), as well as various
international agreements to which the country is a signatory. This legal framework guides the design
and implementation of the BSP under a human rights-based approach, gender perspective, social
inclusion, and respect for Indigenous, Afro-Mexican, and local communities.

The CPEUM establishes the principles that govern the management of natural resources and ensure
the protection of the rights of Indigenous peoples, local communities, and vulnerable groups. Article


7 The design of the Jurisdiction-Specific Demand-Driven Program for the benefit distribution of the BSP, as defined later, will take into

account the experience gained from the operating rules of CONAFOR's programs, as well as other special guidelines, such as those of the
Environmental Compensation Program for Land-Use Change in Forest Areas, and the Early Actions REDD+ Guidelines.


                                                                                                                                       6


                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


1 obligates the State to respect, protect, and guarantee human rights, applying the pro-persona
principle, which means that, in case of doubt, the most favorable interpretation for individuals should
be chosen when applying legal norms.

Article 2 recognizes Mexico as a multicultural country and protects the rights of Indigenous and Afro-
Mexican peoples to self-determination, access to and enjoyment of natural resources, and to be
consulted to obtain their consent on measures that may affect them. It also guarantees the effective
participation of Indigenous and Afro-Mexican women in the development processes of their
communities.

Article 4 ensures the right to substantive equality and a life free from violence, as well as the right to
a healthy environment and the State’s obligation to prevent and sanction environmental damage.
Article 27 regulates the ownership and use of land and natural resources, recognizing the legal
personality and rights of ejidos and communities. Finally, Article 133 establishes that international
treaties ratified by Mexico are the Supreme Law, meaning they must be considered within the BSP
framework to ensure the broadest protection of human rights.

Accordingly, Mexico is a party to various international agreements that reinforce its legal framework
in human rights, Indigenous peoples' rights, and environmental management. The most relevant
agreements for the BSP include the International Labour Organization (ILO) Convention 169 on
Indigenous and Tribal Peoples, which guarantees these communities the right to consultation and
participation in decisions affecting them; the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) and the
Nagoya Protocol, which reinforce the protection of ecosystems and the fair and equitable distribution
of benefits derived from biodiversity use; the UNFCCC and the Paris Agreement, which establish
commitments for emission reductions and the protection of the rights of communities affected by
climate change; and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women
(CEDAW), which establishes the State’s duty to ensure gender equality and the participation of
women in decision-making processes.

Additionally, the BSP's legal framework is supported by national laws that regulate sustainable forest
development and climate action, ensuring equity in benefit distribution. The LGDFS recognizes in
Article 5 the ownership of forest resources by ejidos, communities, Indigenous peoples, and Afro-
Mexicans, among others. Article 8 guarantees environmental and social safeguards, promoting
access to justice, prior consultation, free, prior, and informed consent, and equitable benefit
distribution. Article 138 Bis grants SEMARNAT the authority to establish international agreements on
emission reductions in the forest sector and ensures that benefits are distributed in a participatory
and inclusive manner.

Regarding the LGCC, Article 81 defines the funding sources for emission reductions, including public
resources and market mechanisms. Article 82 prioritizes mitigation and climate adaptation in

                                                                                                        7


                                                                                                        Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


vulnerable communities and areas with high deforestation rates, while Article 92 regulates economic
mechanisms to ensure that the benefits of climate change mitigation are distributed fairly and
equitably.

Likewise, CONAFOR's Operating Rules are essential for BSP implementation, as they establish criteria
for the allocation and execution of resources in programs related to emission reductions.
Additionally, the Federal Budget and Fiscal Responsibility Law ensures transparency and equity in the
use of resources allocated to these programs.

This legal framework not only provides a solid legal foundation for the BSP but also ensures a human
rights-based approach, gender equity, and climate justice. Its effective implementation will enable
the fair distribution of benefits derived from emission reductions in the forest sector, prioritizing the
inclusion of Indigenous and Afro-Mexican peoples, local communities, women, youth, and other
vulnerable groups.

4.    Financial Architecture for Benefit-Sharing

The implementation of the ISFL requires solid, stable, and efficient financial mechanisms that enable
the distribution of benefits derived from resources associated with results-based payments, which
originate from verified emission reductions linked to the implementation of the ERP during the
reference period agreed upon with the World Bank. For this reason, the FFM has been designated as
the instrument through which CONAFOR will receive, manage, and transfer the resources.

The FFM, created in 2003 and defined in the General Law on Sustainable Forest Development
(LGDFS), serves as an instrument to promote conservation, as well as the enhancement, sustainable
use, and restoration of forest resources and their associated ecosystems, while also being able to use
private banking services to ensure efficiency. The LGDFS stipulates that the Mexican Forest Fund
(FFM) shall operate through a Joint Committee, which serves as its decision-making, advisory,
supervisory, oversight, evaluation, and monitoring body. This committee includes balanced and
proportional representation from the federal public sector, as well as from private sector and social
organizations of forest producers, comprising eight principal members and their respective
alternates.

The seats allocated to the federal public sector must be held by Mexican nationals with at least a
managerial-level position—three seats assigned to CONAFOR and one to SEMARNAT. The
representatives from private organizations (two seats) and the social sector (two seats) must also be
Mexican nationals and are selected from among the organizations that form part of the National
Forestry Council (CONAF). Additionally, the Joint Committee includes a representative of CONAFOR’s
Internal Control Body, who holds speaking rights but no voting power. This structure provides a solid
governance framework for the operation of the Fund, contributing to greater certainty and trust in
its management.

                                                                                                       8


                                                                                                       Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


The Fund is also designed to facilitate the transparent, equitable, and fair receipt and transfer of both
national and international resources, guided by clear allocation rules. Furthermore, it has the
capacity to establish dedicated subaccounts, enabling the efficient identification, management, and
distribution of earmarked resources from results-based payments derived from ERP implementation.

In accordance with the above, and in the event of receiving these resources, their distribution within
the jurisdiction of the ERP will be carried out through the Jurisdiction-Specific Demand-Driven
Program issued by CONAFOR. It is important to note that participation in the call for applications
derived from the JSDDP will be voluntary, allowing for the distribution of up to 80% of results-based
payments8 to support BSP Activities within the ERP framework.9 This process will be carried out as
stipulated in this BSP, in the JSDDP, and the results of the participatory process for defining benefit
distribution,10 which will emerge from inclusive stakeholder consultations within the jurisdiction’s
territory.

The implementation of the participatory consultation process, as well as the monitoring and
oversight of the BSP, will be supported by CONAFOR through institutional, technical, and financial
resources. CONAFOR has established territorial capacities through its management, administrative,
and technical personnel, both at the central level and across its State Representation Offices.
These activities will be carried out within the framework of resources allocated through the Federal
Expenditure Budget, particularly via the Sustainable Forest Development for Well-being Program,
which is the source of funding for the ERP’s Initial Activities.

It is important to emphasize that benefit sharing through the Jurisdiction-Specific Demand Driven
Program is conditional upon the effective generation of verified emissions reductions. If this
condition is not met and no results-based payments are received, benefit distribution within the ERP
jurisdiction will not take place.

5.    Benefit-Sharing

      5.1 Types of Benefits

The implementation of the Emission Reduction Program may generate two types of benefits, which
will be considered in the Jurisdiction-Specific Demand-Driven Program for their distribution within
the ERP jurisdiction and in the corresponding call for applications to be issued by CONAFOR:

8 The remaining 20% is expected to be allocated to operational, transaction, management, and institutional support costs, as explained

later.
9 As detailed in Section 5.2.3, the ERP envisions Initial Activities linked to resources that CONAFOR will implement, in the first instance,

through the operating rules of the Sustainable Forest Development for Well-being Program. It also includes BSP Activities funded through
results-based payments from emissions reductions, which will be defined through participatory consultation processes with ERP
stakeholders. These BSP Activities will serve to consolidate and strengthen the ERP’s intervention model, while also enabling the
integration of an equity and inclusion perspective throughout its implementation.
10 BSP Activities, based on the participatory process for defining benefit distribution, will include affirmative actions as well as initiatives

proposed by communities and ejidos that have been identified as priorities for the integrated and inclusive management of their territory.


                                                                                                                                              9


                                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025




     a) Carbon-Related Benefits. These are derived from the mitigation of GHG emissions and
        correspond to results-based payments obtained from the emissions reduced through the
        implementation of the ERP, which are measured, reported, and verified. They must generate
        direct incentives for individuals and beneficiary groups to reduce emissions and promote
        inclusive actions associated with these efforts, while also being objectively, systematically,
        and transparently monitored.

          The distribution of benefits within the ERP jurisdiction will depend on consultation processes
          that determine the needs, priorities, and mechanisms for such distribution. Benefits may be
          monetary or non-monetary, and in both cases, the conditions for access will be defined by
          the Jurisdiction-Specific Demand-Driven Program issued by CONAFOR for this purpose.

              i.     Monetary Benefits: These are benefits that can be quantified in terms of financial
                     resources and correspond to the transfer of funds to individuals and beneficiary
                     groups who directly participate in activities aimed at emission reductions.
             ii.     Non-Monetary Benefits: These benefits are not provided in the form of direct
                     payments to individuals and beneficiary groups but rather through services and
                     resources that support emission reduction efforts. They may include affirmative
                     actions, capacity-building, technology transfer, technical assistance, seed and
                     seedling supply, inputs, equipment, infrastructure, or the development of alternative
                     livelihoods, among others. These forms of support are also financed through results-
                     based payments from emission reductions and aim to strengthen sustainable
                     activities within the territory.

     b) Non-Carbon Benefits or Co-Benefits. These are monetary or non-monetary benefits that are
        not directly linked to GHG mitigation but are generated as a result of or in connection with
        the implementation and operation of the ERP. These benefits will be monitored through the
        establishment of indicators related to the implementation of the ERP.

It is important to emphasize that the benefits outlined above and linked to the BSP also prioritize the
inclusion of historically excluded groups or those who have lacked access to support from forest
development programs. Therefore, the full identification of potential beneficiaries, the mechanism,
and the timelines for benefit distribution will be determined through the participatory process and
stakeholder consultations, applying a framework of diversity, equity, and inclusion. These benefits
aim to promote affirmative actions and inclusive models that, within the scope of emission reduction
efforts and as a complementary measure, contribute to closing inequality gaps.




                                                                                                       10


                                                                                                        Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


      5.2 Benefit-Sharing Mechanism

As established, the BSP proposes the design and implementation of a Jurisdiction-Specific Demand-
Driven Program for the distribution of carbon-related benefits. This program will be mandatory for
CONAFOR public officials involved in the ERP and for third parties who voluntarily participate in the
program.

The Jurisdiction-Specific Demand-Driven Program will include a general objective and specific
objectives, eligibility criteria, requirements, operational procedures, amounts and types of support,
resource allocation mechanisms, evaluation and monitoring mechanisms, rights and obligations of
the parties, transparency and accountability mechanisms, validity period, and other necessary
elements to ensure the efficient and transparent distribution of benefits.

The distribution of benefits, through the Jurisdiction-Specific Demand-Driven Program, will take
place only after a results-based payment has been made and the FFM has received the resources
from the World Bank. The financial mechanism established within the FFM ensures traceability of
resources, allowing for the direct allocation of benefit distribution to individuals and beneficiary
groups11 within the ERP jurisdiction, through one of its subaccounts, while avoiding transaction costs.
CONAFOR will be responsible for administering and managing these resources through the
Jurisdiction-Specific Demand-Driven Program, while state governments will act as facilitators and will
not have direct control over the resources from the potential results-based payment.

           5.2.1 Transfer of resources derived from results-based payment

The financial mechanism for transferring resources from the World Bank to the FFM will include at
least the following operations:

     1. If SEMARNAT and the World Bank sign the ERPA, this agreement will establish the volume of
        reduced emissions agreed upon for a specified period, based on the Reference Level, which
        serves as the baseline for measuring changes in GHG emissions and assessing performance.
     2. CONAFOR implements the initial activities outlined in the ERP in the states of Durango,
        Chihuahua, Coahuila, and Nuevo León, using CONAFOR’s budgetary resources and, where
        applicable, those from state governments.
     3. Simultaneously with step 2, the participatory process methodology will be implemented to
        define the benefit-sharing distribution, ensuring the right to consultation for stakeholders
        within the ERP jurisdiction. Additionally, this process will reinforce differentiated attention
        for vulnerable populations or those historically excluded from such processes, including


11 In this case, within the participatory process of the BSP, collective benefits may be established to generate positive impacts for the entire

community and improve the quality of life of individuals who may not be able to directly participate in ERP activities. These may include
children, the elderly, people with disabilities, women, youth, and individuals without legal land tenure, among others.


                                                                                                                                            11


                                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


         Indigenous and Afro-Mexican populations, women, youth, and individuals without land
         tenure, among others.
     4. The priorities, needs, and modalities for benefit-sharing distribution will be defined through
         consultation. These will consider potential BSP Activities, ensuring full compliance with social
         and environmental safeguards,12 as well as adherence to the World Bank’s ESF.
     5. CONAFOR monitors GHG emission reductions within the ERP jurisdiction.
     6. CONAFOR prepares an emission reduction monitoring report,13 which -when applicable- will
         include information related to the implementation of the BSP, and submits it to the World
         Bank.
     7. Based on CONAFOR’s report, the World Bank hires an independent third party to verify
         emission reductions. Additionally, the WB ensures compliance with the Environmental and
         Social Framework in accordance with established procedures.
     8. If emission reductions are successfully verified, CONAFOR requests the results-based
         payment from the World Bank, based on the data generated through the MRV system for
         the corresponding period.
     9. The corresponding results-based payment is transferred from the World Bank to the FFM.
     10. The FFM receives the payment in its main account, which is then deposited into a specific
         subaccount established for the ERP. This subaccount will be administered by CONAFOR, and
         from there, benefit-sharing will be distributed—both monetary and non-monetary—within
         the ERP jurisdiction, in accordance with the Jurisdiction-Specific Demand-Driven Program
         issued by CONAFOR, ensuring full traceability of resources.
     11. Resources will be allocated and earmarked as follows: a) 20% for institutional management
         and support, and b) 80% for distribution within the ERP jurisdiction to final beneficiaries
         participating in emission reduction activities, following the criteria established in the
         Jurisdiction-Specific Demand-Driven Program.
     12. CONAFOR develops and publishes the Jurisdiction-Specific Demand-Driven Program, based
         on the participatory process for defining benefit-sharing, to allocate support14 for BSP
         Activities aimed at strengthening the ERP, ensuring an inclusive approach. The JSDDP will be
         published once a results-based payment from verified emission reductions has been received
         within the jurisdiction.

It is important to note, as identified in the previous points, that the implementation of the ERP and
the BSP involves a series of costs related to its operation, technical support, monitoring, and

12 The safeguards referred to are those framed within the REDD+ national strategy, understood as principles, conditions, or social and

environmental criteria aimed at addressing potential negative impacts and effectively promoting the multiple benefits of REDD+. In Mexico,
a Safeguards Information System (SIS) has been established to integrate relevant information and monitor compliance with these
safeguards: https://sis.cnf.gob.mx/
13 The reporting periods will be defined in the ERPA.
14
   The activities considered for results-based payments must be complementary and agreed upon through the participatory process for
defining benefit distribution with stakeholders. These activities must be distinct from the "initial activities," which are those currently
offered under the Sustainable Forest Development for Well-Being Program and other CONAFOR programs and subsidies that are
implemented annually in the territory.


                                                                                                                                       12


                                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


reporting, all of which are necessary for the proper execution of the program. CONAFOR has allocated
up to 20% of the total payments received from the World Bank to address these expenses.

These resources will cover institutional and technical support operational costs, including the hiring
of technical personnel, MRV specialists, and environmental, social, and gender experts to provide
support both at CONAFOR’s Central Offices and its State Representation Offices in Chihuahua,
Coahuila, Durango, and Nuevo León. It is worth mentioning that CONAFOR has its own resources to
operate its programs, allowing the institution to make an initial investment to launch the ERP.15 Thus,
the final beneficiaries and groups within the ERP jurisdiction will be able to access up to 80% of the
funds obtained from verified emission reductions.

Therefore, gross benefits correspond to the total payments Mexico will receive for monitored,
reported, and verified emissions over the ERP's agreed period. Net benefits refer to the amount that
will be distributed as monetary and non-monetary benefits within the jurisdiction, after deducting
operational costs. This process is illustrated in Figure 1.

                                           Figure 1. Benefit-Sharing Mechanism *




15 Additionally, CONAFOR has resources to operate the Sustainable Forest Development for Well-Being Program, which come from the

funds approved in the Federal Expenditure Budget for the corresponding fiscal year. The initial operational expenses will be covered by
the budget allocated to this program and to CONAFOR. These funds may be used for consulting services, technical assistance, and travel
expenses related to promotion, reception, monitoring, control, and supervision, as well as for statistical, geographical, and IT services,
studies, evaluations, research, and basic services required for the operation of citizen service windows.
*
  In each monitoring report, the estimated volume of verified emission reductions (ER) to be included in the security reserve mechanism
will be determined.


                                                                                                                                      13


                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025




           5.2.2 Categories of Potential Beneficiaries

The following categories of potential beneficiary individuals and groups residing in forest areas16 have
been identified for benefit allocation under the BSP. These categories will be validated through the
participatory process for defining benefit distribution, in alignment with the actions undertaken and
projected in the SEP:

     a) Legal owners or possessors, or their associations, referring to legal entities or individuals with
        private or communal land ownership (ejidos, communities, and small landowners).17
     b) Indigenous and Afro-Mexican peoples and communities (including ejidos and communities
        that self-identify and are recognized as such).
     c) Legal usufructuaries, referring to individuals or groups recognized by ejido and communal
        assemblies or holding agreements with them, as well as tenants of private properties.
     d) Settlers (avecindados), defined as Mexican nationals of legal age who have resided for at
        least one year within ejido lands and have been officially recognized as such by the ejido
        assembly or the competent agrarian tribunal.
     e) Users, referring to those without formal property titles (who neither hold legal land tenure
        nor are recognized as legal usufructuaries), residing in ejido and communal lands and facing
        barriers to rights access or exclusion, despite their participation in sustainable forest

16 Forest areas are understood as: forest lands, preferentially forest lands, or temporarily forest lands.
17 Ejidatarias, comuneras, posesionarias, and avecindadas are understood as individuals who hold at least one parcel certificate that

identifies them as such (RAN, 2021).



                                                                                                                                 14


                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


          development processes. This category may include women or women’s producer groups,
          youth, Indigenous and Afro-Mexican individuals and groups, persons with disabilities,
          LGBTIQ+ individuals, and other vulnerable populations residing in communal or ejido lands.

As indicated in previous sections, the benefits they may receive will be monetary and non-monetary,
provided that such allocations are determined through transparent and participatory consultation
processes for defining benefit distribution. These benefits will be framed within the definition of BSP
Activities, to be included in the Jurisdiction-Specific Demand-Driven Program issued by CONAFOR.

          5.2.3 Program Activities Related to Benefit-Sharing

     a) Initial Activities

These are actions carried out during the implementation of the ERP using fiscal resources allocated
through the Operating Rules of CONAFOR as part of the Sustainable Forest Development for Well-
being Program. They are categorized into five components:

     1)   Forest Management and Value Chains
     2)   Commercial and Agroforestry Plantations
     3)   Forest Restoration of Micro-Watersheds and Strategic Regions
     4)   Environmental Services
     5)   Forest Protection

These activities will mark the beginning of the ERP implementation through a broad range of actions
aimed at emission reductions. The success of their execution will be crucial in securing the first
results-based payment. If obtained, this payment will enable the launch of BSP Activities through
benefit distribution, in accordance with the Jurisdiction-Specific Demand-Driven Program issued by
CONAFOR for this purpose.

     b) BSP Activities

These will be actions financed with potential results-based payments from the ERP, following the
implementation of Initial Activities, and will be defined through the participatory process for
determining benefit distribution.

These actions will primarily fulfill two objectives. The first is to strengthen the ERP intervention and
implementation model by consolidating emission reduction activities under a perspective of
diversity, equity, and inclusion. The second is to promote the reduction of inequality gaps within the
ERP jurisdiction by including activities that support historically excluded groups participating in
sustainable forest development and emission reduction efforts. These may include affirmative
actions, such as the allocation of resources or the provision of services to support caregiving


                                                                                                     15


                                                                                                      Official Use Only
         Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
         Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
         CONAFOR, 2025


         responsibilities that facilitate women's participation, or the development of inclusive and collective
         projects aimed at improving the livelihoods of vulnerable populations, among others.

         BSP Activities will be offered exclusively within the ERP jurisdiction through the Jurisdiction-Specific
         Demand-Driven Program, which will incorporate the outcomes of the participatory process and
         stakeholder consultation for defining benefit distribution. This Program will be activated once the
         World Bank transfers resources to the FFM and CONAFOR is able to manage and operate these
         resources in accordance with the BSP.18

         The definition of BSP Activities must be reviewed, modified, and adjusted within the Jurisdiction-
         Specific Demand-Driven Program based on stakeholder feedback during ERP implementation and in
         alignment with the BSP.




                                                         Figure 2. ERP Implementation Period

                                        Year 2                      Year 3                           Year 4                         Year 5
Year 1                                                                                  MRV                                                              MRV
                                                                                     (Years 1 - 2)                                                    (Years 3 - 4)


ERP Implementation                  ERP Implementation                  ERP Implementation            ERP Implementation             ERP Implementation

                                                                                                      Results-based Payments
                                                                                                      (Years 1 - 2)                                                      The
                                                                                                                                                                       Results-
                                                                                                                                                                        based
                                                                                                                                                                      Payments
                                                                                                                                                                        cycle
                                                                                                                                                                       restarts
Activities                          Activities                      Activities                       Activities                     Activities

•     Initial                       •      Initial                  •      Initial                   •     Initial                  •     Initial
                                                                                                     •     BSP



             Beneficiaries                       Beneficiaries                   Beneficiaries                Beneficiaries                      Beneficiaries




                Note: Figure 2 is a demonstrative exercise. The final definition of the timelines/cycles for MRV, as well as for results-based payments
                and benefit-sharing distribution, will be subject to the provisions established in the ERPA.


                      5.2.4 General Criteria for Benefit-Sharing


         18 The number of projects to be implemented will depend on demand and the budget ceiling of the resources received in the FFM for each

         cycle during the implementation period. This process is expected to occur every two years, as MRV reports are tentatively planned to be
         conducted on a biennial basis.


                                                                                                                                                        16


                                                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


Benefit-Sharing process must adhere to the social and environmental safeguards established by the
LGDFS, as well as the general principles of the World Bank’s ESF,19 ensuring compliance with a focus
on the following standards:

     •     ESS 7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional Local
           Communities. Aims to ensure full respect for the human rights, dignity, aspirations, identity,
           culture, and livelihoods of Indigenous and Afro-Mexican peoples.
     •     ESS 10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure. Recognizes the importance
           and obligation of guaranteeing full and effective participation of stakeholders through open,
           inclusive, transparent communication with a gender and youth perspective, ensuring timely
           attention to complaints and grievances. This must be done within a framework that respects
           cultural and linguistic identities, ensuring access to information and participation.

Although the focus is placed on ESS 7 and ESS 10 of the World Bank’s Environmental and Social
Framework, the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) linked to the ERP and BSP also
includes measures and actions related to the following standards: ESS 1. Assessment and
Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts; ESS 2. Labor and Working Conditions;
ESS 3. Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management; ESS 4. Community Health and
Safety; ESS 5. Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use, and Involuntary Resettlement; ESS 6.
Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources; and ESS 8.
Cultural Heritage. These measures and actions can be reviewed in the ERP’s Environmental and Social
Management Framework/System (ESMF/ESMS).

Furthermore, as previously established, the performance of emission reductions (measured in tCO₂e)
under the ERP must be considered to qualify for results-based payments. This performance will be
measured by CONAFOR’s MRV system through periodic reports based on the established baseline.
These reports will be conducted at a jurisdictional scale, covering the states of Chihuahua, Coahuila,
Durango, and Nuevo León (collectively understood as the ERP jurisdiction).

The Jurisdiction-Specific Demand-Driven Program will establish the framework for benefit
distribution, including prioritization factors and affirmative action measures to promote the inclusion


19 The Environmental and Social Standards (ESS) are a set of ten mandatory standards that apply to all projects financed by the World Bank,

aiming to identify and manage potential environmental and social risks arising from their implementation. In the specific case of the ERP,
framed within the ISFL, most of these standards present low or no risk. However, it is crucial to consider them, as they encompass key
aspects such as occupational safety, child labor, land tenure, displacement due to productive activities, cultural heritage protection,
biodiversity conservation, sustainable resource management, pollution risk prevention, pesticide use and waste management, respect for
Indigenous Peoples' rights, and stakeholder engagement and consultation processes. The application of these standards must be
mainstreamed across all instruments developed under the program and is supported by various plans and systems required by the World
Bank, such as the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), the Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS), and the
Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), among others. This set of documents includes the environmental and social commitments associated
with the implementation of the ERP; the identification of risks and impacts, together with the corresponding mitigation measures; the
identification of stakeholders; and the description of processes, designated responsibilities, and flowcharts related to CONAFOR’s Citizen
Attention Mechanism, established to ensure the timely handling of complaints and grievances throughout the implementation of the ERP
and its BSP.


                                                                                                                                       17


                                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


and participation of vulnerable groups, those facing barriers to accessing support programs, or
groups historically excluded from sustainable forest development initiatives. These groups include
women, youth, Indigenous and Afro-Mexican communities, persons with disabilities, LGBTIQ+
individuals, the elderly, and others. To this end, CONAFOR’s extensive experience in defining
eligibility and prioritization guidelines will be leveraged, drawing from those established in the
Sustainable Forest Development for Well-being Program. These criteria will be incorporated, refined,
and expanded based on the considerations and results of the participatory process and consultations
conducted to define benefit distribution under the ERP.

Additionally, the Jurisdiction-Specific Demand-Driven Program will specify that benefit distribution
will be based on the overall performance of the jurisdiction in reducing emissions. Consequently,
benefits will be allocated based on applications submitted by eligible individuals and beneficiary
groups across the jurisdiction. Allocations will only be approved if the eligibility criteria established
in the Jurisdiction-Specific Demand-Driven Program are met and within the limits of the available
funds from results-based payments.

Although the specific elements of the eligibility criteria will be defined and detailed following the
participatory process to determine benefit sharing, the general framework is outlined below:



Eligibility Criteria

     •    Be a Mexican national, either as an individual or a legal entity, who meets at least one of the
          following conditions:
        I.         Own or legitimately hold forest lands, including those classified as preferably or
                   temporarily forest.
       II.         Be engaged in forest-related activities for the purposes of protection, conservation,
                   restoration, production, sustainable use, processing, industrialization, or
                   commercialization of forest products.
      III.         Without owning or legitimately holding land, participate in actions related to
                   sustainable forest development in accordance with the applicable legal framework,
                   CONAFOR’s mandate, and the provisions established in the Jurisdiction-Specific
                   Demand Driven Program to be issued under the ERP and its BSP.
     • Comply, in a timely and proper manner, with the requirements and provisions set forth in
          the Jurisdiction-Specific Demand Driven Program under the ERP and its BSP.
     • Conduct activities on forest lands, or lands classified as preferably or temporarily forest, that
          are consistent with national regulatory frameworks and the Environmental and Social
          Management System (ESMS), and that promote sustainability and generate positive social
          and environmental impacts.
     • Not be listed among sanctioned or non-compliant beneficiaries as published by CONAFOR.

                                                                                                      18


                                                                                                       Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


In accordance with the national legal framework, benefit sharing under the ERP and its BSP must be
carried out without discrimination against applicants. All applicants must comply with the provisions
established in the Jurisdiction-Specific Demand Driven Program issued by CONAFOR, thereby
promoting equitable access for individuals and groups of beneficiaries within the jurisdiction.

It is also important to highlight that benefit sharing will be carried out based on jurisdiction-wide
applications submitted after the publication of the Jurisdiction-Specific Demand Driven Program, as
explained at the beginning of this section, and will be subject to the availability of results-based
payment resources. Finally, the Jurisdiction-Specific Demand Driven Program will include eligibility
prioritization criteria, which will be validated and derived from the participatory consultation process
for defining benefit sharing, to promote the participation of vulnerable groups and those facing
barriers to accessing support programs.

6.    Methodology for the Participatory Process to Define Benefit-Sharing

The development of the benefit distribution will be based on a methodology aimed at reducing
barriers that hinder the effective inclusion of stakeholders involved in the local implementation of
the ERP. To achieve this, consultation and participation processes will be carried out within
appropriate and sufficient timeframes, ensuring broad outreach to the various actors involved while
adapting to sociocultural and territorial needs and contexts. Respect for human rights and
accessibility will be promoted at all times, along with the mainstreaming of a gender perspective and
a differentiated attention approach to guarantee the integration of young people, women,
Indigenous and Afro-Mexican populations, as well as other stakeholder groups who may face barriers
or exclusion from participation.

      6.1 Background of the Participatory Process for Defining Benefit-Sharing within the ERP

The development of the ERP involved a participatory planning process in the states of Chihuahua,
Coahuila, Durango, and Nuevo León. Its purpose was to engage various stakeholders in the design
and implementation of the Program, considering the local context and the main drivers of
deforestation and forest ecosystem degradation. To achieve this, two types of workshops were
conducted:

     a) Socialization Workshops (May 23 to June 16, 2022)

During this phase, eight workshops were held in different localities across the four states,20 with the
participation of 384 people, primarily ejido members, producers (forestry, agricultural, and livestock),


20 For the state of Chihuahua, the workshops were held in Chihuahua and Guachochi; for Coahuila, in Cuatrociénegas and Saltillo; for

Durango, in Santiago Papasquiaro and El Salto, Pueblo Nuevo; and for Nuevo León, in Galeana and Monterrey. Participants in the
workshops included 87 women (23%) and 286 men (77%), as well as 9 individuals who identified as Indigenous (2%).


                                                                                                                                19


                                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
    Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
    Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
    CONAFOR, 2025


    and public officials from different levels of government. Additionally, representatives from civil
    society organizations and the academic sector, including researchers and students, attended. The
    results of these workshops included:

               •       Presenting the challenges of climate change and the importance of the AFOLU sector.
               •       Analyzing the causes of deforestation and forest degradation at regional and local levels.
               •       Identifying potential emission reduction actions in each state related to the productive
                       activities or development areas of the participants, as well as the possible risks and
                       benefits associated with their implementation.

         b) Results Feedback and Validation Workshops (July 18 to July 29, 2022)

    This second phase involved 265 participants,21 including those who had attended the socialization
    workshops and additional stakeholders who, for various reasons, had not participated in the first
    stage. These workshops aimed to present and validate the results, as well as to prioritize the actions
    identified during the socialization phase. The results of these workshops included:

               •       Reviewing the results of the socialization workshops.
               •       Adjusting the proposed activities to combat deforestation and forest degradation.
               •       Establishing a prioritization system for these activities based on their impact and
                       feasibility in reducing emissions, as well as their relevance to the characteristics and
                       needs of ejidos, communities, and participants’ areas of action.

    The sixteen workshops conducted during the socialization and results feedback/validation phases
    helped build a foundation of inputs to be considered for BSP Activities and serve as a guiding basis
    for the consultation processes in defining benefit distribution. From these workshops, the following
    key activities were identified and grouped as strategies to address deforestation and forest
    degradation:

         Table 1. Potential BSP Activities Identified During the Socialization and Feedback/Validation
                                     Workshops for the Design of the ERP

                                                                    Identified Activities
Zone                                                                                                                         Nuevo
                       Chihuahua                         Coahuila                         Durango
                                                                                                                              León
                                                    •     Fire Protection (Fire       •    Payment for                 •     Payment for
                   •     Community Forest
Forest                                                    Management)                      Environmental                     Environmental
                         Management
                                                    •     Forest Pest Protection           Services                          Services


    21 The workshops were held in the same locations as the socialization phase. They had the participation of 67 women (25%) and 198 men

    (75%), as well as 10 individuals who identified as Indigenous (4%).


                                                                                                                                     20


                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
       Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
       Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
       CONAFOR, 2025


                     •    Fire Protection         •   Payment for                •   Community Forest       •   Watershed Forest
                          (Fire                       Environmental                  Management                 Restoration (Soil
                          Management)                 Services                   •   Watershed Forest           and Water
                     •    Forest Pest             •   Watershed Forest               Restoration (Soil          Conservation)
                          Protection                  Restoration (Soil and          and Water
                     •    Payment for                 Water Conservation)            Conservation)
                          Environmental
                          Services
                                                  •   Rural Landscape
                     •    Agroforestry
                                                      Restoration and
                          Systems                                                •   Agroforestry           •   Agroforestry
                                                      Productive Conversion
Transition           •    Regenerative                                               Systems                    Systems
                                                  •   Agroforestry Systems
                          Grazing                                                •   Land Use Planning      •   Land Use Planning
                                                  •   Regenerative Grazing
                     •    Land Use Planning
                                                  •   Land Use Planning
                                                                                 •   Improvement of
                                                                                     Livestock
                                                                                     Management and
                                                  •   Improvement of
                                                                                     Diets, and Practices
                     •    Improvement of              Livestock
                                                                                     for Manure
                          Agricultural                Management and
                                                                                     Management             •   Improvement of
                          Production                  Diets, and Practices
                                                                                 •   Improvement of             Agricultural
                          Systems                     for Manure
                                                                                     Agricultural               Production Systems
                     •    Enhancement of              Management
                                                                                     Production Systems     •   Enhancement of
Agricultural              Fertilizer Use          •   Enhancement of
                                                                                 •   Enhancement of             Fertilizer Use
                          Practices and               Fertilizer Use Practices
                                                                                     Fertilizer Use             Practices and
                          Transition to               and Transition to
                                                                                     Practices and              Transition to
                          Biofertilizers              Biofertilizers
                                                                                     Transition to              Biofertilizers
                     •    Conservation            •   Improvement of
                                                                                     Biofertilizers
                          Tillage                     Agricultural
                                                                                 •   Reintegration of
                                                      Production Systems
                                                                                     Agricultural
                                                                                     Residues into the
                                                                                     Soil


               6.2 Context of the Participatory Process for Defining Benefit-Sharing

       It should be noted that, following the signing of the ERPA, the participatory methodology for
       designing the benefit distribution will be developed with stakeholders in the territory. This will take
       place in parallel with the implementation of the ERP’s Initial Activities. This process will include ejidos,
       communities, Indigenous and Afro-Mexican peoples, women, youth, small landowners, landholders,
       and rural inhabitants, among other populations connected to the ERP’s implementation within its
       jurisdiction. In this way, the BSP Activities to be included in the Jurisdiction-Specific Demand-Driven
       Program will be defined, through which potential resources from the first results-based payments,
       and any subsequent ones, will be distributed.

               6.3 Key Stakeholders for the Participatory Process

       The stakeholders involved in ERP implementation play a fundamental role in the participatory
       methodology for defining benefit distribution. Their contributions will enable the process to be


                                                                                                                        21


                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


meaningful and inclusive, ensuring that their participation is recognized as a necessary and essential
element for the representation, acknowledgment, and integration of the various groups within the
jurisdiction. Special emphasis will be placed on those who have been historically excluded or have
faced barriers to access initiatives related to sustainable forest development. Consequently, this will
enhance the effectiveness of the actions implemented within the ERP framework.

In this regard, it is essential to identify key stakeholders who can serve as local allies and assist in the
participatory process for defining benefit distribution. These actors will contribute to the
dissemination, socialization, and communication of information within the territory. Since they are
locally recognized, they will encourage participation through their networks of trust and spheres of
influence. For this reason, it is recommended that CONAFOR’s State Representation Offices be
responsible for identifying, supporting, and leading this process with key stakeholders and interested
parties. Additionally, local coordination with other relevant institutions in the territory is essential,
including SEMARNAT, SADER, SEDATU, INPI, IMJUVE, the Ministry of Welfare, the Ministry of
Women, state and municipal agencies, and other locally relevant entities.

The following characteristics can help identify key stakeholders in the territory:

     •     Have knowledge, management experience, and expertise related to the territory that may
           be relevant for ERP implementation.
     •     Are locally recognized in their respective fields of action or influence.
     •     Understand the social, political, productive, forestry, and/or cultural context at the local
           level.
     •     Are familiar with communication channels and institutional connections relevant to the
           territory’s context.
     •     Speak the local language, and particularly in Indigenous communities, have knowledge of
           Indigenous languages and customs, making them potential translators and spokespersons.
     •     Are sensitized to working with a gender perspective and an inclusive approach, particularly
           with youth, women, and Indigenous and Afro-Mexican populations.
     •     Have knowledge of ongoing projects in the territory and of potential projects that could be
           implemented under the ERP.

                             Table 2. Key Stakeholders for the Participatory Process22

                                     •     Federal level:
                                              - Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources
 Public Actors                                     (SEMARNAT)
                                              - Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (SADER)
                                              - National Forestry Commission (CONAFOR)

22 Annex 2 presents a detailed list of key actors; however, this list is illustrative rather than exhaustive. The full version can also be

found in the ERP’s Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP).


                                                                                                                                      22


                                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


                                               -    National Institute of Indigenous Peoples (INPI)
                                               -    Ministry of Women
                                               -    Ministry of Welfare
                                               -    Ministry of Agrarian, Territorial, and Urban Development
                                                    (SEDATU)
                                               - National Commission of Natural Protected Areas
                                                    (CONANP)
                                               - National Institute of Ecology and Climate Change (INECC)
                                    •      State-Level:
                                           - Secretariat of Environment of Coahuila
                                           - Secretariat of Rural Development of Chihuahua
                                           - Secretariat of Natural Resources and Environment of Durango
                                           - Secretariat of Agricultural Development of Nuevo León
                                           - State Forestry Councils
                                    •      Municipal Governments
                                    •      Local and community authorities
                                    •      Ejidal authorities
                                    •      Indigenous and Afro-Mexican communities and peoples
                                    •      Non-governmental civil society organizations (NGOs)
                                    •      Residents of forest areas (legal landowners or possessors; legal
                                           usufructuaries; possessors; settlers; users; associations and groups
                                           of the aforementioned categories, etc.)
                                    •      Women's and youth groups
 Local Actors                       •      LGBTIQ+ individuals
                                    •      People living with disabilities
                                    •      Opinion leaders
                                    •      Local and community forest and agro-food promoters
                                    •      Producers and associations from the forestry, agricultural, livestock,
                                           and forestry sectors
                                    •      Private sector
                                    •      Forestry and agro-food technical advisors
                                    •      Academia and technical schools
                                    •      Traditional authorities
 Traditional
                                    •      Councils of elders
 Community Actors
                                    •      Traditional leaders

Capacity-building for key stakeholders is essential to ensure that they are equipped to
effectively disseminate information in an accessible, linguistically, and culturally appropriate
manner. This will enable stakeholders to fully understand the operation of the ERP and its BSP,




                                                                                                               23


                                                                                                                Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


preventing misunderstandings, errors, or communication gaps in the agreement-building
processes, as well as the creation of unrealistic expectations.

Based on the initial identification of key actors for the participatory process in defining benefit
distribution, the next step will be issuing the call for participation and initiating the different
phases of this process.

      6.4 Phases of Implementation of the Participatory Process for Defining Benefit-Sharing

The participatory process for defining benefit distribution acknowledges different levels of
participation, ranging from access to information to decision-making. To ensure effective
participation, it is essential to provide clear and accessible information, create spaces for the free
and respectful expression of opinions, and establish dialogue mechanisms that facilitate the
construction of agreements.

Additionally, the adopted methodology follows an inclusive approach that integrates a gender
perspective. It takes into account the different ways in which women and men interact with forest
resources and participate in local and community decision-making processes, aiming to close gaps
and ensure that women's needs and perspectives are incorporated. At the same time, it seeks to
raise awareness among all stakeholders about the importance of equity in all aspects of benefit
distribution.

Moreover, as established in previous sections, the process includes a differentiated attention
approach, recognizing that certain groups have historically faced barriers to access and participation.
Specific measures will be implemented to guarantee the inclusion of women, Indigenous and Afro-
Mexican populations, youth, individuals without legal land tenure, and other identified stakeholders,
while respecting their cultural and linguistic diversity and their unique organizational structures.

Practically, this means selecting locations, dates, and times that are convenient and accessible for
consultation processes. It will also require specific considerations for meetings, such as ensuring
spaces that allow for the attendance of children or providing conditions for childcare. Additionally,
interpreters may be required to facilitate translation from Spanish into Indigenous languages to
ensure fluent communication and mutual understanding -these interpreters could be local
individuals from the interested parties within the jurisdiction-, among other possible
accommodations.

Based on this inclusive and participatory approach, the following phases of the process have been
defined, ensuring that each stage contributes to building legitimate and representative agreements
for benefit distribution at the local level:

                 Figure 3. Phases of the Participatory Process for Defining Benefit-Sharing

                                                                                                    24


                                                                                                     Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025




  Table 3. General Recommendations for Public Calls and Phases of the Participatory Process for
                                 Defining Benefit-Sharing

       A) Regarding Public Calls and participant profiles

       •    Identify the profile of key stakeholders for conducting Public Calls and phases of the
            participatory process, determining who will be involved and their characteristics and
            needs.
       •    Identify appropriate media, platforms, and spaces for disseminating and socializing the
            workshops in ejidos and communities to design and implement a local strategy.
            Conventional means of calling for applications can be used, but traditional and/or local
            methods should also be included (e.g., loudspeaker announcements, community radio
            stations, dissemination in community gathering spaces, etc.).
       •    Encourage dissemination and socialization through allies and representatives of ejidos,
            communities, productive organizations, and other groups in the territory previously
            identified.
       •    Issue broad Public Calls that align with local, linguistic, and cultural contexts to promote
            the participation of all stakeholders, including women, youth, Indigenous and Afro-
            Mexican people, LGBTQ+ individuals, and any other relevant groups who live in or use
            forest areas in the implementation of the ERP.
       •    Invite participants from the ERP’s socialization and validation workshops, as well as those
            involved in each phase of the participatory process for defining benefit distribution, since
            they are expected to be informed and familiar with the program. However, the
            participation of anyone interested in the topic should also be encouraged.
       •    Public Calls should be made well in advance, considering community schedules related to
            harvest seasons, festivities, daily activities, and caregiving responsibilities.
       •    For Indigenous populations, Public Calls should consider the cultural and linguistic
            relevance of the territory, ensuring the presence of interpreters to support the
            participatory and translation process (including other phases of the process). Coordination
            with the National Institute of Indigenous Peoples (INPI) or local allies should be established


                                                                                                        25


                                                                                                         Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


            for this purpose. Indigenous governance structures and customary practices must always
            be respected.
       •    Consider organized groups present in the territory, such as ranchers’ associations,
            farmers, foresters, women’s groups, among others.
       •    Include civil society, academia, and other relevant actors in the territory, particularly in
            specific feedback workshops, to strengthen transparency and validate the methodology
            and participatory process for defining benefit distribution.
       •    The use of information technologies and social networks for Public Calls should be
            considered and tailored to the target audience (e.g., youth, women, Indigenous groups,
            etc.). Additionally, the accessibility of these technologies in forest landscapes within the
            jurisdiction of the ERP must be taken into account.
       •    Disseminate information on the Citizen Attention Mechanism (Grievance Mechanism)
            from the outset of the Public Calls for participation, ensuring it is fully accessible and
            available to all stakeholders.

       B) Regarding the implementation of the phases of the participatory consultation process

       •    Promote a differentiated attention approach to foster the inclusion of women, youth,
            Indigenous and Afro-Mexican populations, persons with disabilities, individuals without
            land tenure, and other groups facing barriers to participation in the phases of the process
            and the workshops.
       •    Identify key messages and information in a simple, accessible, inclusive, and culturally
            appropriate language, recognizing the diversity of needs and perspectives.
       •    Prepare communication materials and media tailored to the needs of each phase and
            workshop, respecting the linguistic, cultural, and contextual characteristics of
            stakeholders. Some examples include:
              - Informative broadcasts via community loudspeakers, local radio stations, or INPI
                   Indigenous radio stations.
              - Community newspapers or bulletins.
              - Posters.
              - Brochures.
              - Informational sheets.
              - Infographics.
              - Speech scripts for distribution among stakeholders.
              - Audio or text messages for distribution on social media (Facebook, WhatsApp, etc.).
              - Videos and/or animations.
              - Other locally relevant methods.
       •    Plan sessions by developing a didactic and logistical strategy, using facilitation guides as
            support material.


                                                                                                      26


                                                                                                       Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


       •    Ensure that, workshops and/or in-person activities, take place in easily accessible locations
            (with available transportation routes), with proper ventilation, restrooms with potable
            water for participants and facilitators, internet access, and electricity. It is also important
            to include adequate breaks in the activities and, when possible, offer refreshments or
            meals aligned with the local diet (in some cases, remunerated support from local allies
            may be sought for this purpose).
       •    Ensure that, for virtual workshops and/or activities, adequate conditions are in place for
            their implementation. This includes scheduling them at appropriate times for connectivity,
            providing accessible and culturally appropriate instructions, and, when possible,
            facilitating resources to support participation.
       •    Foster trust, respect, and horizontal dialogue in facilitation, ensuring an inclusive approach
            and gender perspective, where all contributions are valued and heard, regardless of age,
            identity, gender, land tenure status, etc.
       •    Use accessible, jargon-free language during sessions, employing everyday examples to
            explain key topics. Cultural and linguistic relevance in facilitation is essential, as is the use
            of inclusive and non-sexist language.
       •    Present key information about the ERP and its BSP to stakeholders, regardless of the
            participatory process phase. Priority should be given to ensuring general understanding of
            its significance, functioning, benefits, implications, and impacts. A timeline summarizing
            the ERP’s operation and benefit-sharing process can be used as a visual aid.
       •    Reinforce, during all workshops, communication about the Citizen Attention Mechanism
            (Grievance Mechanism), ensuring it remains accessible and available to all participants.
       •    Seek to establish alliances through facilitation and execution of each phase to support and
            strengthen ERP implementation in the territory.
       •    Avoid creating confusion, generating false expectations, or prematurely promising
            benefits before knowing the results of ERP implementation. It is crucial to remember that
            benefit distribution will only be possible due to verified emission reductions and the
            derived results-based payments. In this regard, the objectives, goals, and agreements
            emerging from the participatory process must be realistic, measurable, and achievable.
       •    Define agreements and progress throughout the participatory process for defining benefit
            distribution in a participatory manner, ensuring participant understanding and validation.
       •    When capturing audiovisual material, ensure participant authorization for image use in
            activities across different process phases. A verbal explanation should be provided about
            the purpose of the authorization and intended use of the audiovisual material before
            requesting consent.
       •    Ensure proper handling of personal data collected during the different phases of the
            participatory process for defining benefit distribution, communicating it to participants
            and ensuring its protection, confidentiality, and exclusive use for the purposes established
            in the BSP, in compliance with applicable legal frameworks.


                                                                                                           27


                                                                                                            Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


       •     Consider using a camera to document workshops and digitally store the materials
             generated as a result.
       •     Define, when applicable, mechanisms for monitoring and follow-up on agreements at the
             territorial level.
       •     Systematize agreements and relevant information from each phase and workshop.



           Public Calls for the Participatory Process (Cross-cutting to All Phases):

           The main purpose of the calls is to promote the participation of stakeholders in consultation
           processes, as community support is essential for the effectiveness and efficiency of the
           actions outlined in the ERP for emission reductions and benefit distribution, following
           potential results-based payments, under principles of equity and inclusion.

           The stakeholders to be considered in the call may include civil society, technical and academic
           experts, private sector representatives, and actors from federal, state, and municipal
           governments, among others. However, it should primarily be directed toward residents,
           landowners, rights holders, and users of forest landscapes within the ERP jurisdiction, which
           will enable:

                •     A deeper understanding of the issues the ERP seeks to address through its Initial and
                      BSP Activities, acknowledging the diversity of perspectives, interests, and opinions.
                •     The identification of all available public policy options and the existing institutional
                      framework that facilitate ERP implementation, assessing their respective costs and
                      benefits, as well as their impact on benefit distribution.
                •     The achievement of a proper balance between conflicting or opposing interests to
                      reach agreements among stakeholders.
                •     The identification of potential unintended effects and previously overlooked
                      weaknesses that may limit the achievement of objectives.

           The experience from the ERP’s socialization and feedback/validation workshops, as well as
           other projects developed by CONAFOR, will be considered for the calls. These experiences
           have helped identify platforms that facilitate participation and a map of other key actors who
           could contribute to the development and definition of benefit distribution. Additionally, it is
           important to mention that, throughout the participatory process for defining benefit
           distribution, at least four Public Calls will be issued in accordance with the states comprising
           the jurisdiction and the different phases.23

23 Phases: Approach and Information; Dissemination and Socialization; Design and Definition of Local Priorities; Validation and Agreements;

Implementation and Monitoring.


                                                                                                                                       28


                                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025




          Phase 1: Approach and Information with Key Stakeholder Representatives

          The objective of this phase is to disseminate the participatory methodology and provide key
          stakeholder actors with the necessary information on the importance, operation,
          implications, benefits, and impacts of ERP implementation. It also seeks to promote their
          engagement as program allies and establish that benefit distribution will only occur if
          emission reductions are achieved for results-based payments. This must be done
          beforehand, clearly and effectively, to ensure well-informed decision-making.

          As part of the local dissemination and socialization strategy, and to encourage participation
          and information sharing that will contribute to the definition of benefit distribution, as well
          as its BSP Activities and necessary affirmative actions, some tools will be considered, such as:

                     Interviews: Conducting semi-structured interviews to focus on the information
                     needed from key informants.

                     Questionnaires: Designing and applying questionnaires that allow stakeholders to
                     participate and provide information and suggestions to be incorporated into the
                     proposals for benefit distribution. These questionnaires may be available online and
                     disseminated through digital media starting from the first phase of the participatory
                     process. It is essential to involve and sensitize key local actors who can distribute the
                     questionnaire in areas without internet access or where ERP outreach has been
                     insufficient, either in print or digitalized through applications such as KoboToolbox,
                     which enables the creation of forms and offline data collection in the field, as well as
                     traditional tools like Google Forms or Microsoft Forms.

                     It is crucial that the questionnaire is designed to be concise, accessible, inclusive, and
                     non-sexist, using clear language that addresses the most relevant questions to
                     generate the necessary inputs for the subsequent definition of benefit distribution
                     priorities and needs. Additionally, the resulting information should be continuously
                     integrated and analyzed throughout the first three phases. A website may also be
                     created to share results, providing access to materials, infographics, questionnaires,
                     and contact channels for addressing questions, complaints, and suggestions
                     throughout the participatory process.

                     Informational and Awareness Meetings: These workshops aim to introduce and
                     provide key jurisdictional actors with necessary information about the importance,
                     operation, benefits, implications, and impacts of the ERP. These workshops, which
                     may be conducted in-person or virtually, and in formal or informal settings, must
                     provide clear and effective information to participants to ensure informed decision-


                                                                                                            29


                                                                                                             Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


                     making on benefit distribution at the local level. It is also necessary to define in these
                     meetings that such distribution will only be possible if emission reductions enable
                     results-based payments, as a result of the ERP’s Initial Actions outlined in CONAFOR’s
                     Sustainable Forest Development for Well-being Program.

          It is essential to ensure, during the implementation of these tools (interviews,
          questionnaires, and meetings), the representation of women and other vulnerable groups
          such as youth, Indigenous and Afro-Mexicans peoples, among others.

          Phase 2. Dissemination and Socialization

          This phase will involve a deeper and broader dissemination of information, aiming to engage
          all stakeholders and encourage the participation of individuals, communities, ejidos, and
          other key actors in both the dissemination and socialization of the ERP and the subsequent
          participatory process for defining benefit distribution. In addition to the general
          recommendations, this phase will include:

                •    Identifying the appropriate media, platforms, and spaces for dissemination and
                     socialization within ejidos and communities to design a local strategy.
                •    Encouraging dissemination and socialization through previously identified allies and
                     representatives. This means that, following Phase 1, they will play a fundamental role
                     in communicating and explaining the previously shared information to their
                     community, ejido, organization, or group, as well as in sharing evidence of these
                     processes.

          It is important to note that during this phase, interviews, surveys, and informational and
          awareness-raising workshops initiated in Phase 1 will continue.

          Phase 3. Design and Definition of Local Priorities

          This phase involves participatory construction and definition of benefit-sharing at the local
          level. In line with a broad consultation process, it will consider the information generated in
          previous phases to foster dialogue and the exchange of ideas, with the objective of shaping
          agreements based on stakeholder contributions.

          During this phase, participatory workshops to define benefit sharing will be conducted, either
          in person or virtually, alongside the continued implementation of interviews and
          questionnaires. In line with previous recommendations, the workshops should take into
          consideration the following:

                •    Reinviting participants from the ERP socialization and validation workshops, as well
                     as those who participated in Phases 1 and 2 of the participatory process for defining
                     benefit distribution. These individuals are expected to be familiar with the process

                                                                                                            30


                                                                                                             Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


                      and to have been informed and sensitized regarding the ERP. However, efforts
                      should still be made to ensure the participation of anyone interested in the topic.
                • Preparing materials and communication tools that are appropriate and adapted to
                      the needs of the workshops, incorporating information gathered in previous phases,
                      with an emphasis on proposed BSP Activities and affirmative actions.
                • Presenting, using pre-defined and designed materials, the information gathered in
                      previous phases, with an emphasis on proposed BSP Activities and affirmative
                      actions, for collective discussion and presentation. A territorial map of the
                      jurisdiction is recommended to visually guide participants regarding the planned
                      activities and potential implementation areas.
                • Participatively defining priorities, needs, and agreements for benefit distribution,
                      which may include both monetary and non-monetary benefits, and which will be
                      considered as BSP Activities and affirmative actions to be integrated into the
                      Jurisdiction-Specific Demand-Driven Program. This process will involve identifying
                      the following elements:
                   I.      Identification of socio-environmental opportunities and challenges related to
                           the ERP
                          a) Socio-environmental challenges
                          b) Location of the socio-environmental challenges
                          c) Stakeholders associated with these challenges
                          d) Timeline or duration of the challenges
                          e) Proposed corrective measures to address the challenges
                  II.      Identification of potential beneficiaries under the BSP
                          a) Possible individuals and groups eligible for ERP benefit sharing
                          b) Characteristics of potential beneficiaries
                          c) Activities carried out by potential beneficiaries in forest areas
                          d) Conditions that would enable participation and access to benefits under the
                               BSP
                          e) Possible requirements for accessing benefit sharing mechanisms
                 III.      Prioritization of benefits
                          a) Proposed BSP Activities
                          b) Types of benefits (monetary and non-monetary)
                          c) Proposed affirmative actions
                          d) Identification of co-benefits associated with benefit sharing
                     • Defining the appropriate control and monitoring mechanisms at the territorial
                           level.

          Phase 4. Validation and Agreements on Benefit-Sharing




                                                                                                      31


                                                                                                       Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


          In this phase, the contributions from stakeholders during the previous phases of the
          participatory process for defining benefit distribution are compiled into a document that
          systematizes them. This document, along with the implementation mechanism, must be
          shared with all stakeholders (including those who may not have participated in previous
          participatory process activities).

          During this phase, final inputs to the document may be incorporated by creating a space for
          feedback on the BSP and on the results of the previous phases of the participatory process
          for defining benefit sharing.

          Local-level validation of agreements will be carried out through participatory workshops,
          encouraging the involvement of key stakeholders as well as any individuals interested in
          participating in ERP and BSP activities. To this end, general recommendations—as well as
          those from earlier phases—should be followed, with particular attention to the following
          points:

                •    Avoid creating confusion, generating false expectations, or prematurely promising
                     the receipt of benefits before the results of ERP implementation are known. It is
                     important to remember that benefit distribution will only be possible through
                     verified emission reductions and the corresponding results-based payments.
                •    Validate the outcomes of the previous phases of the participatory process for
                     defining benefit sharing and facilitate agreement-building among workshop
                     participants. This involves reviewing the information generated during Phase 3,
                     specifically revisiting the identification of: I. Socio-environmental opportunities and
                     challenges related to the ERP; II. Potential individuals and groups of beneficiaries
                     under the BSP; III. Prioritization of benefits. At this stage, the proposals put forward
                     by participants should be reviewed and collectively validated through a participatory
                     process, including:
                         a) BSP Activities
                         b) Types of benefits (monetary and non-monetary)
                         c) Individuals or groups of beneficiaries
                         d) Affirmative actions
                         e) Eligibility requirements
                         f) Associated co-benefits
                         g) Prioritization criteria
                •    Confirm the appropriate control and monitoring mechanisms at the territorial level.
                •    Formalize the validation of the ERP benefit-sharing agreements through the
                     preparation of workshop minutes, to be signed and approved by the participants.
                •    Conduct the final systematization of validated agreements and results.

          Phase 5. Implementation and Monitoring of the Benefit-Sharing Plan


                                                                                                          32


                                                                                                           Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


          This stage involves monitoring and tracking the BSP Activities and affirmative actions
          proposed during the participatory process for defining benefit distribution for ERP
          implementation. This entails controlling and evaluating the BSP, which, if necessary, may lead
          to modifications or adjustments to the BSP Activities and affirmative actions.

          This phase should include:

                •    Reviewing the activities proposed during implementation.
                •    Revisiting the agreements on benefit distribution at the local level, identifying
                     control and monitoring mechanisms.
                •    Analyzing, monitoring, and reviewing the entities responsible for ERP
                     implementation.
                •    Holding regular meetings to assess BSP progress and make decisions on its direction
                     and long-term sustainability.
                •    Disseminating emission reports through accessible and culturally appropriate
                     mechanisms, providing updates on emission reductions results and the effectiveness
                     of Initial Activities and, later, BSP Activities.

          The objective of this phase is to establish mechanisms for monitoring and follow-up once the
          ERP is implemented and the Benefit Sharing Plan (BSP) is put into operation. All actions
          subject to potential change should be identified in order to enable a process of adaptability
          and continuous improvement, always in close collaboration with stakeholders. In this regard,
          the phase is ongoing, and CONAFOR must create virtual or in-person spaces to address
          questions, complaints, and suggestions from beneficiaries, as well as to carry out periodic
          evaluations of benefit-sharing implementation—ensuring continuity of the participatory
          process throughout the entire life cycle of the ERP.
          As part of the continuous improvement approach, the evaluation and adaptation of the BSP
          will be facilitated through existing local and national forest governance structures in
          coordination with CONAFOR. These structures, composed of representatives from
          communities, ejidos, Indigenous Peoples, productive sectors, government, and academia,
          aim to ensure broad stakeholder representation across the territory. Key among them is the
          National Forestry Council (CONAF), its Technical Committee on Climate Change and Forests,
          as well as the State Forestry Councils in the states that make up the ERP jurisdiction.
          Decisions regarding adjustments to the BSP, when applicable, will be based on evidence
          generated through monitoring, thereby promoting a participatory, territorially grounded
          model that ensures the relevance, equity, and effectiveness of benefit sharing.

The following section provides a summary of the actions undertaken to promote stakeholder
participation in the ERP and its BSP, as well as the outreach carried out through national and local
forest governance platforms prior to the signing of the ERPA (Table 4). In addition, a timeline is


                                                                                                     33


                                                                                                      Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


presented outlining the projected activities for the participatory process to define benefit sharing
within the ERP jurisdiction, following the signing of the ERPA (Table 5).

It is important to clarify that this timeline is subject to change, depending on CONAFOR’s institutional
timelines and the activation of the ERPA. Nevertheless, it serves as a reference to support inclusive
and informed decision-making at the local level—ensuring that the priorities and interests of women,
youth, Indigenous and Afro-Mexican peoples, and other relevant stakeholders are reflected in the
proper implementation of the Program and its benefit-sharing arrangements, if a results-based
payment is issued, as described in previous sections.

    Table 4. Participatory and Socialization Process for the ERP Prior to the Signing of the ERPA

                                Action                                         Dates


      ERP socialization workshops in the jurisdiction                May 23 to June 16, 2022

 ERP results feedback and validation workshops in the
                                                                        July 18 to 29, 2022
                      jurisdiction
 Presentation of the ERP before the National Forestry
                                                                         February 27, 2025
                   Council (CONAF)
   Presentation of the ERP and BSP Draft before the
Climate Change and Forests Committee of the National                      March 28, 2025
                    Forestry Council
    Presentation of the ERP before the State Forestry
                                                                           April 8, 2025
                   Council of Durango
Presentation of the ERP and BSP Draft before key staff
                                                                           April 16, 2025
              of SEMARNAT and INECC
    Presentation of the ERP before the State Forestry
                                                                           April 24, 2025
                 Council of Nuevo León
    Presentation of the ERP before the State Forestry
                                                                           April 25, 2025
                  Council of Chihuahua
Presentation of the BSP Draft before the State Forestry
                                                                            May 8, 2025
                Council of Nuevo León
Presentation of the ERP and BSP Draft before the State
                                                                           May 28, 2025
             Forestry Council of Coahuila
Presentation of the BSP Draft before the State Forestry
                                                                           May 30, 2025
                 Council of Chihuahua



                                                                                                     34


                                                                                                      Official Use Only
 Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
 Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
 CONAFOR, 2025


 Presentation of the BSP Draft before the State Forestry
                                                                                                        Pending
                   Council of Durango
       Presentation of the ERP and BSP Draft to the
     Undersecretary for Sustainable Development and                                                   June 2, 2025
             Circular Economy of SEMARNAT

         Approval of the Advanced Draft of the BSP                                                      Pending


                         Signing of the ERPA                                                            Pending

                                      Note: Table 4 contains information that is subject to update.

          Table 5. Timeline for the BSP Participatory Process Following the Signing of the ERPA

                                                           Months
           Activities                                                                                         Outputs
                                        1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9                             10
                                                                                                 Design and delivery of four
                                                                                                   training workshops for
                                                                                                CONAFOR staff (one per State
Training of personnel for
                                                                                                 Representation Office in the
the participatory process
                                                                                                       ERP jurisdiction)

                                                                                                 Didactic training materials
Identification             of                                                                       Detailed mapping of
representatives of key                                                                         stakeholder representatives to
stakeholders in the territory                                                                   be contacted in the territory
                                                                                               Four Public Calls (one per state
Preparation of the Public                                                                            in the jurisdiction)
Calls for participation and
outreach materials                                                                             Audiovisual materials for Public
                                                                                                       Calls outreach
Dissemination        and
                                                                                                      Audiovisual materials for
operation of the Citizen
                                                                                                       mechanism outreach
Attention Mechanism
                                                                                               Evidence of outreach materials
                                                                                                   sent to key stakeholder
Dissemination of the Public                                                                           representatives
Calls for the participatory
process                                                                                         Evidence of dissemination in
                                                                                               relevant stakeholder spaces in
                                                                                                      the jurisdiction




                                                                                                                                  35


                                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
 Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
 Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
 CONAFOR, 2025


                                                                                                         Facilitation guide

                                                                                                         Workshop forms
Preparation of materials
and logistics for stakeholder
                                                                                                    Audiovisual and didactic
participatory workshops
                                                                                                    materials for workshops

                                                                                                        Logistics plans
                                                                                                      Questionnaire design
Design and preparation of
interviews              and                                                                     Online form for questionnaire
questionnaires linked to the                                                                             application
participatory process
                                                                                              Semi-structured interview guide
                                                                                                 Questionnaire response
Implementation                   of
                                                                                                         database
interviews                      and
questionnaires
                                                                                                    Interviews analysis
                                                                                                Photographic documentation
Implementation          of
participatory workshops
                                                                                                      Workshops minutes
                                                                                                   Final report on workshop
                                                                                                           outcomes
Systematization        of
participatory   workshops                                                                          Matrix of BSP Activities,
results                                                                                            affirmative actions, and
                                                                                                  potential individual/group
                                                                                                         beneficiaries
Systematization                  of
                                                                                                Report on questionnaires and
questionnaires                  and
                                                                                                     interviews results
interviews results
                                                                                                    Executive summary for
Dissemination of results
                                                                                                   community dissemination
from            workshops,
questionnaires,       and
                                                                                                  Audiovisual materials for
interviews
                                                                                                    community outreach
                                                                                                  Document with proposed
Adjustments to the BSP
                                                                                              adjustments to the BSP draft for
Advanced Draft final version
                                                                                                          validation
                                                                                               Final BSP ready for publication
Approval and publication of
the final Benefit Sharing
                                                                                                  BSP executive summary for
Plan
                                                                                                  community dissemination

           Note: This timeline is subject to adjustment based on the signing of the ERPA and CONAFOR’s institutional timelines.




                                                                                                                                  36


                                                                                                                                  Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025




7.    Monitoring Provisions for the Implementation of the Benefit-Sharing Plan

During the implementation of the ERP, CONAFOR will be the institution responsible for the operation,
monitoring, and overall supervision of the program. As a solid institution with extensive capacities,
monitoring will utilize existing mechanisms such as:24

     •     The National Forestry Information System, which records, integrates, organizes, updates, and
           disseminates forestry information.
     •     The National Forest Monitoring System, which provides information on the status and trends
           of forest resources.
     •     The Safeguards Information System, which provides information on how social and
           environmental safeguards are addressed and respected, including compliance with the
           World Bank’s Environmental and Social Framework and its ten standards.
     •     The Citizen Attention Mechanism (linked to CONAFOR’s Internal Control Body, the Liaison
           Unit of the National Institute for Transparency, Access to Information, and Personal Data
           Protection, and CONAFOR’s Citizen Attention Monitoring Area) to provide responses and
           solutions to citizen information requests, as well as to receive inquiries, complaints,
           grievances, claims, and suggestions.
     •     The monitoring of payments through CONAFOR’s Integrated Support Information System
           (SIIAC) for the registration, selection, approval, and signing of agreements, as well as the
           Payment Management System (SIDPA) to track and control payments to individuals and
           beneficiary groups within CONAFOR’s programs. Both systems can disaggregate their
           information by community, ejido, and private rural landowners. They also allow for
           disaggregated information by gender, Indigenous population, and the number of
           beneficiaries within a forest community. It is important to note that the SIIAC and SIDPA
           systems will be used to monitor the Initial Activities of the ERP, which will be framed within
           the Operating Rules of the Sustainable Forest Development for Well-being Program. These
           operating rules include processes for the selection and evaluation of activities, the signing of
           agreements, and the registration of beneficiaries. These, along with the SIIAC and SIDPA
           systems, will be utilized for the design, monitoring, and follow-up of the Jurisdiction-Specific
           Demand-Driven Program and its BSP Activities related to the distribution of benefits from
           results-based payments.




24 The mechanisms described in this section will enable adequate monitoring and follow-up of the BSP, which should be understood as

part of the Emissions Reduction Program, together with the Project Appraisal Document (PAD), which includes indicators to monitor
benefit sharing. In addition, the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) includes another set of indicators related to the participatory process
for benefit distribution under the ERP. These indicators will remain consistent with the Program’s Monitoring and Evaluation system and
with the reporting commitments to the World Bank, thus ensuring periodic and verifiable follow-up.


                                                                                                                                       37


                                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


Annex 1. List of International Agreements and Treaties, Federal and State Laws Related to Benefit
Distribution


 List of international agreements, conventions, and treaties to which Mexico is a signatory and
 that serve as the basis for forest-related regulations.

       ▪    Declaration of the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment (Stockholm,
            Sweden, June 16, 1972).
       ▪    Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW;
            New York, United States, December 18, 1979; Ratification: March 23, 1981).
       ▪    Convention on the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage (Paris, France,
            November 16, 1972; Acceptance: February 23, 1984).
       ▪    Convention on Biological Diversity (Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, June 5, 1992; Ratification: March
            11, 1993).
       ▪    United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (New York, United States, May
            9, 1992; Ratification: March 11, 1993).
       ▪    Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (Kyoto,
            Japan, December 11, 1997; Ratification: September 7, 2000).
       ▪    Convention No. 169 of the International Labour Organization on Indigenous and Tribal
            Peoples in Independent Countries (Geneva, Switzerland, June 27, 1989; Ratification:
            September 5, 1990).
       ▪    Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg, South Africa,
            September 4, 2002).
       ▪    Inter-American Convention on the Prevention, Punishment, and Eradication of Violence
            Against Women (Belém do Pará, Brazil, June 9, 1994; Ratification: November 12, 1998).
       ▪    At COP 15 in Copenhagen in 2009, the goal of keeping global warming below 2°C was
            validated, and developed countries committed to long-term financing for developing
            countries to achieve this objective.
       ▪    The Cancun Agreements (COP16, 2010) resulted in a series of concrete and legally binding
            measures to establish a greenhouse gases emission reduction program. Additionally, they
            created financial mechanisms such as a Green Climate Fund and included commitments to
            raise emission reduction targets.
       ▪    Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of
            Benefits Arising from their Utilization to the Convention on Biological Diversity (Nagoya,
            Japan, October 29, 2010; Ratification: May 16, 2012).
       ▪    The Paris Agreement on Climate Change (COP21, 2016) established actions that came into
            effect in 2020 for the reduction of greenhouse gases emissions.




                                                                                                       38


                                                                                                        Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


 List of federal laws, codes, and regulations that constitute the applicable regulatory framework
 for the Benefit-Sharing Plan in Mexico

       ▪    Constitution of the United Mexican States (Querétaro, Mexico, February 5, 1917; Last
            amendment: January 17, 2025).
       ▪    General Law of Ecological Balance and Environmental Protection (Official Gazette of the
            Federation, January 28, 1988; Last amendment: April 1, 2024).
       ▪    General Sustainable Forest Development Law (Official Gazette of the Federation, June 5,
            2018; Last amendment: April 1, 2024).
       ▪    General Wildlife Law (Official Gazette of the Federation, July 3, 2000; Last amendment:
            May 20, 2021).
       ▪    General Climate Change Law (Official Gazette of the Federation, June 6, 2012; Last
            amendment: April 1, 2024).
       ▪    Sustainable Rural Development Law (Official Gazette of the Federation, December 7, 2001;
            Last amendment: June 7, 2024).
       ▪    Agrarian Law (Official Gazette of the Federation, February 26, 1992; Last amendment:
            April 1, 2024).
       ▪    Law of the National Institute of Indigenous Peoples (Official Gazette of the Federation,
            December 4, 2018; Last amendment: December 29, 2023).
       ▪    General Law for Equality between Women and Men (Official Gazette of the Federation,
            August 2, 2006; Last amendment: December 16, 2024).
       ▪    General Law on Women's Access to a Life Free of Violence (Official Gazette of the
            Federation, February 1, 2007; Last amendment: December 16, 2024).
       ▪    General Civil Protection Law (Official Gazette of the Federation, June 6, 2012; Last
            amendment: December 21, 2023).
       ▪    Planning Law (Official Gazette of the Federation, January 5, 1983; Last amendment: May
            8, 2023).
       ▪    Federal Law on Parastatal Entities (Official Gazette of the Federation, May 14, 1986; Last
            amendment: May 8, 2023).
       ▪    Federal Budget and Fiscal Responsibility Law (Official Gazette of the Federation, March 30,
            2006; Last amendment: April 30, 2024).
       ▪    Federal Administrative Procedure Law (Official Gazette of the Federation, August 4, 1994;
            Last amendment: May 18, 2018).
       ▪    Federal Contentious Administrative Procedure Law (Official Gazette of the Federation,
            December 1, 2005; Last amendment: May 21, 2024).
       ▪    General Law of the National Anticorruption System (Official Gazette of the Federation, July
            18, 2016; Last amendment: May 20, 2021).
       ▪    General Law of Administrative Responsibilities (Official Gazette of the Federation, July 18,
            2016; Last amendment: January 2, 2025).



                                                                                                      39


                                                                                                       Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


 List of federal laws, codes, and regulations that constitute the applicable regulatory framework
 for the Benefit-Sharing Plan in Mexico
      ▪ Organic Law of the Federal Court of Administrative Justice (Official Gazette of the
          Federation, July 18, 2016; Last amendment: January 26, 2024).
      ▪ Federal Law on Transparency and Access to Public Information (Official Gazette of the
          Federation, May 9, 2016; Last amendment: April 1, 2024).
      ▪ Organic Law of the Federal Public Administration (Official Gazette of the Federation,
          December 29, 1976; Last amendment: November 28, 2024).
      ▪ Federal Law to Prevent and Eliminate Discrimination (Official Gazette of the Federation,
          June 11, 2003; Last amendment: April 1, 2024).
      ▪ Federal Civil Code (Official Gazette of the Federation, May 26, 1928; Last amendment:
          January 17, 2024).
      ▪ National Code of Civil and Family Procedures (Official Gazette of the Federation, June 7,
          2023; Last amendment: December 16, 2024).
      ▪ Federal Fiscal Code (Official Gazette of the Federation, December 31, 1981; Last
          amendment: November 12, 2021).
      ▪ Internal Regulations of the Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources (Official
          Gazette of the Federation, July 27, 2022).
      ▪ Regulations of the General Law of Ecological Balance and Environmental Protection on
          Environmental Impact Assessment (Official Gazette of the Federation, May 30, 2000; Last
          amendment: October 3, 2014).
      ▪ Regulations of the General Law of Ecological Balance and Environmental Protection on
          Protected Natural Areas (Official Gazette of the Federation, November 30, 2000; Last
          amendment: May 21, 2014).
      ▪ Regulations of the General Law of Ecological Balance and Environmental Protection on
          Ecological Land Use Planning (Official Gazette of the Federation, August 8, 2003; Last
          amendment: October 31, 2014).
      ▪ Regulations of the General Law of Ecological Balance and Environmental Protection on Air
          Pollution Prevention and Control (Official Gazette of the Federation, November 25, 1988;
          Last amendment: October 31, 2014).
      ▪ Regulations of the General Sustainable Forest Development Law (Official Gazette of the
          Federation, December 9, 2020).
      ▪ Regulations of the General Wildlife Law (Official Gazette of the Federation, November 30,
          2006; Last amendment: May 9, 2014).
      ▪ Regulations of the Agrarian Law on Rural Property Planning (Official Gazette of the
          Federation, November 28, 2012).
      ▪ Regulations of the Law on Public Sector Procurement, Leasing, and Services (Official
          Gazette of the Federation, July 28, 2010; Last amendment: February 14, 2024).




                                                                                                40


                                                                                                 Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


 List of federal laws, codes, and regulations that constitute the applicable regulatory framework
 for the Benefit-Sharing Plan in Mexico
      ▪ Regulations of the Federal Law on Parastatal Entities (Official Gazette of the Federation,
          January 26, 1990; Last amendment: November 23, 2010).


      State                                        State Regulatory Framework
                          •    Political Constitution of the Free and Sovereign State of Durango
                          •    Sustainable Forest Development Law of the State of Durango
                          •    Regulation on Transparency and Access to Public Information of the
                               Honorable Congress of the State of Durango
                          •    Law Establishing the Catalogue of Indigenous Peoples and Communities of
                               the State of Durango
                          •    Law Creating the Institute for the Evaluation of Public Policies of the State
                               of Durango
                          •    General Law on Indigenous Peoples and Communities of the State of
                               Durango
                          •    General Urban Development Law for the State of Durango
                          •    General Cadastre Law of the State of Durango
                          •    Livestock Law for the State of Durango
   Durango                •    State Law on Mining Development and Promotion of Durango
                          •    Law of the Local Anti-Corruption System of the State of Durango
                          •    Law of the State Institute for Women
                          •    Transparency and Access to Public Information Law of the State of
                               Durango
                          •    Budget, Accounting, and Public Spending Law of the State
                          •    Planning Law of the State of Durango
                          •    Citizen Participation Law for the State of Durango
                          •    Youth Law of the State of Durango
                          •    Law of the State Human Rights Commission of Durango
                          •    Sustainable Environmental Management Law for the State of Durango
                          •    Economic Promotion Law for the State of Durango
                          •    Sustainable Rural Development Law for the State of Durango
                          •    Indigenous Consultation Law for the State and Municipalities of Durango
                          •    Climate Change Law of the State of Durango
   Coahuila               •    Political Constitution of the State of Coahuila de Zaragoza
      de                  •    Charter of Economic, Social, Cultural, and Environmental Rights of
   Zaragoza                    Coahuila de Zaragoza
                          •    Law on Access to Public Information for the State of Coahuila de Zaragoza


                                                                                                               41


                                                                                                               Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


      State                                      State Regulatory Framework
                          •    Law on Human Settlements, Territorial Planning, and Urban Development
                               of the State of Coahuila de Zaragoza
                          •    Economic Development Law of the State of Coahuila de Zaragoza
                          •    Law on Parastatal Entities of the State of Coahuila de Zaragoza
                          •    Law on the Promotion of Civil Society Organizations' Activities in the State
                               of Coahuila de Zaragoza
                          •    Livestock Law for the State of Coahuila de Zaragoza
                          •    Public Finance Law for the State of Coahuila de Zaragoza
                          •    Equality Law between Women and Men in the State of Coahuila de
                               Zaragoza
                          •    Law of the Human Rights Commission of the State of Coahuila de Zaragoza
                          •    Law on the Agency for Rural Development of Coahuila
                          •    Citizen Participation Law for the State of Coahuila de Zaragoza
                          •    Development Planning Law of the State of Coahuila de Zaragoza
                          •    Civil Protection Law for the State of Coahuila de Zaragoza
                          •    Accountability and Superior Audit Law of the State of Coahuila de Zaragoza
                          •    Environmental Responsibility Law of the State of Coahuila de Zaragoza
                          •    Wildlife Law for the State of Coahuila de Zaragoza
                          •    Ecological Balance and Environmental Protection Law of the State of
                               Coahuila
                          •    Anti-Corruption System Law of the State of Coahuila de Zaragoza
                          •    Law on the Statistical and Geographic Information System of the State of
                               Coahuila de Zaragoza
                          •    Law for the Development and Inclusion of Persons with Disabilities of the
                               State of Coahuila de Zaragoza
                          •    Comprehensive Youth Development Law of the State of Coahuila de
                               Zaragoza
                          •    Social Development Law of the State of Coahuila de Zaragoza
                          •    Law for the Promotion and Development of Fruit Growing in the State of
                               Coahuila
                          •    Law for the Promotion and Development of the Viticulture Activity of the
                               State of Coahuila de Zaragoza
                          •    Law for Adaptation and Mitigation of the Effects of Climate Change in the
                               State of Coahuila de Zaragoza
                          •    Law for the Inclusion and Guarantee of the Rights of Persons with Autism
                               Spectrum Condition of the State of Coahuila de Zaragoza




                                                                                                              42


                                                                                                              Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


      State                                     State Regulatory Framework
                          •    Law to Promote Equality and Prevent Discrimination in the State of
                               Coahuila de Zaragoza
                          •    Law Creating the Environmental Protection Prosecutor's Office of the
                               State of Coahuila
                          •    Law Establishing the Bases and General Guidelines for the Reception of
                               Federal Contributions and the Creation, Distribution, Application, and
                               Monitoring of State Social Development Funds in Coahuila
                          •    Law Regulating the Division of Rural Communities in the State of Coahuila
                          •    Regulatory Law of the Expenditure Budget of the State of Coahuila de
                               Zaragoza
                          ▪    Political Constitution of the Free and Sovereign State of Chihuahua
                          ▪    Equality Law between Women and Men of the State of Chihuahua
                          ▪    Public Finance Law of the State of Chihuahua
                          ▪    Livestock Law of the State of Chihuahua
                          ▪    Law for the Promotion of Competitiveness of Micro, Small, and Medium
                               Enterprises of the State of Chihuahua
                          ▪    Law for the Promotion and Participation of Civil Society Organizations,
  Chihuahua                    Associations, and Networks of the State of Chihuahua
                          ▪    Integral Sustainable Rural Development Law for the State of Chihuahua
                          ▪    Economic Development and Promotion Law for the State of Chihuahua
                          ▪    Law of the State Human Rights Commission
                          ▪    Personal Data Protection Law of the State of Chihuahua
                          ▪    Law for the Regularization of Agricultural Settlements and Common Agro-
                               Livestock Areas under State Jurisdiction
                          ▪    Climate Change Law of the State of Chihuahua
                          ▪    Political Constitution of the Free and Sovereign State of Nuevo León
                          ▪    Organic Law of Public Administration for the State of Nuevo León
                          ▪    Environmental Law of the State of Nuevo León
                          ▪    Law for the Protection of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
                          ▪    Law on Women's Access to a Life Free of Violence
                          ▪    Law on Superior Auditing of the State of Nuevo León
     Nuevo
                          ▪    Law on Transparency and Access to Public Information of the State of
      León
                               Nuevo León
                          ▪    Law to Prevent and Eliminate Discrimination in the State of Nuevo León
                          ▪    Law of the State Institute for Women
                          ▪    Agricultural Sharecropping Law of the State of Nuevo León
                          ▪    Youth Law for the State of Nuevo León
                          ▪    Expenditures Law of the State of Nuevo León


                                                                                                           43


                                                                                                           Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


      State                                      State Regulatory Framework
                          ▪    Administrative Responsibilities Law of the State of Nuevo León
                          ▪    Public Finance Law of the State of Nuevo León
                          ▪    Climate Change Law of the State of Nuevo León
                          ▪    Sustainable Forest Development Law of the State of Nuevo León
                          ▪    Strategic Planning Law of the State of Nuevo León
                          ▪    Human Settlements, Territorial Planning, and Urban Development Law for
                               the State of Nuevo León
                          ▪    Equality between Women and Men Law of the State of Nuevo León
                          ▪    State Planning Law
                          ▪    Law of the Corporation for Agricultural Development of Nuevo León
                          ▪    Law for the Promotion of Agricultural Activities of the State of Nuevo León
                          ▪    Integral Sustainable Rural Development Law of the State of Nuevo León
                          ▪    Livestock Law of the State of Nuevo León




                                                                                                             44


                                                                                                             Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


Annex 2: List of Identified Stakeholders in the Territory (indicative and non-limiting)

      Type of actor                       Chihuahua                         Coahuila                          Durango                        Nuevo León
                                • Ejidos and communities
                                • Landholders
                                • Inhabitants of forest areas (legal landowners or possessors; legal usufructuaries; resident members of ejidos or communities;
                                  land users; and associations or groups from any of the above categories)
 Potential                      • Indigenous and Afro-Mexican communities and peoples
 participants and               • Women
 beneficiaries of the           • Youth
 ERP and its BSP                • People living with disabilities
                                • LGBTIQ+ individuals
                                • People without legal land tenure



                                • Unión de Productores           • Unión Ganadera Regional        • Confederación de               • Unión Forestal del Estado
                                  Forestales de Chihuahua,         de Coahuila (UGRC)               Productores Forestales.          Nuevo León
                                  A.C                            • Proyecto ganadero Carnes       • Asociación de Industriales     • Asociación de productores
                                • Silvicultores Unidos De          de Múzquiz S.P.R.                Forestales, A.C.                 forestales industriales
                                  Occidente De Chihuahua                                          • Unión Norte de                 • Asociación de Silvicultores
                                  A.C.                                                              Engordadores de Ganado,          del Centro-Sur
                                • Unión de Madereros de                                             A.C.                           • Unión Ganadea Regional
                                  Parral                                                          • Unión Ganadera Regional de       de Nuevo León, A.C.
 Product associations
                                • Asociación Regional de                                            Durango (Durango sur)          • Asociación de Silvicultores
                                  Silvicultores de Guadalupe y                                      Unión Ganadera Regional          del Norte de Nuevo León,
                                  Calvo, A.C.                                                       del Norte de Durango             A.C.
                                • Unión Ganadera Regional                                         • Asociación Ganadera Local      • Asociación Ganadera
                                  de Chihuahua (UGRCH)                                              de Durango                       Parras NL
                                • Asociación Ganadera Local                                       • Grupo industrial Sezaric       • Unión Ganadera Regional
                                  de Ganaderos Diversificados                                       (empresa de los ejidos y         de Nuevo León, A.C.
                                • Asociación Chihuahuense                                           comunidades del noroeste         (UGRNL)
                                  de Ganado de Registro, A.C.                                       del estado)



                                                                                                                                                                    45


                                                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


      Type of actor                        Chihuahua                       Coahuila                           Durango                     Nuevo León
                                                                                                  • Unión de ejidos y             • Consejo Estatal
                                                                                                    comunidades de producción       Agropecuario de Nuevo
                                                                                                    forestal y agropecuaria del     León (CEA-NL)
                                                                                                    noroeste del estado de
                                                                                                    Durango (UNECOFAEZ)
                                                                                                  • Unión de ejidos de Pueblo
                                                                                                    Nuevo
 Associations of                • Asociación Mexicana de Profesionales Forestales, A.C.
 Forestry                       • Colegio de Prestadores de Servicios Técnicos Forestales, A.C.
 Professionals                  • Certified technical advisors
                                • Centro de Desarrollo          • Universidad Autónoma            • Universidad Autónoma          • Facultad de Ciencias
                                  Tecnológico Forestal Parral,     Agraria Antonio Narro            Chapingo (URUZA)                Forestales, UANL
                                  S.C.                          • Centro de Educación y           • Instituto Tecnológico de      • Instituto Tecnológico de
                                • Centro de Investigación          Capacitación Forestal de la      MTY                             Estudios Superiores de
                                  para los Recursos Naturales      CONAFOR “Ing. José Ángel       • CIIDIR-IPN                      Monterrey (ITESM)
                                • Facultad de Ciencias             de la Cruz Campa”              • Instituto de Silvicultura e   • Instituto de Ecología
                                  Agrotecnológicas de la        • Centro de Investigación           Industria de la Madera,       • Universidad “Benito
 Academia and                     Universidad Autónoma de          Regional Norte Centro            UJED                            Juárez G.”, sede: Anáhuac.
 Research Centers                 Chihuahua-UACH                • Instituto Nacional de           • Facultad de Ciencias          • Universidad Tecnológica
                                • Instituto de Ecología            Investigaciones Forestales y     Forestales, UJED                de Linares
                                • Universidades Tecnológicas,      Agropecuarias (INIFAP-         • Instituto Tecnológico de
                                  sedes; Guachochi,                CIRNOC)                          Durango
                                  Namiquipa                                                       • Instituto Tecnológico
                                • Universidades “Benito                                             Forestal
                                  Juárez G.”, sedes:                                              • Instituto Tecnológico
                                  Guadalupe y Calvo, Urique                                         Agropecuario
                                                                                                  • Universidades “Benito
                                                                                                    Juárez G. “, sedes:
                                                                                                    Cuencame, Tepehuanes
                                • Espacios Naturales y           • Desarrollo Sustentable A.C.    • Desarrollo Sustentable A.C.   • Ducks Unlimited de
 Civil Society
                                  Desarrollo Sustentable A.C.      (ENDESU)                         (ENDESU)                        México (DUMAC)
 Organizations
                                  (ENDESU)                       • Pro Natura Noreste             • Pro Natura Noreste            • Reforestamos México A. C.
                                • Pro Natura Noreste


                                                                                                                                                                  46


                                                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


      Type of actor                       Chihuahua                           Coahuila                       Durango                         Nuevo León
                                • Fondo Mexicano para la           • Fondo Mexicano para la
                                  Conservación de la                 Conservación de la
                                  Naturaleza A.C. (FMCN)             Naturaleza A.C. (FMCN)
                                • Naturalia                        • Reforestamos México A.C.
                                • Alianza Sierra Madre A.C.
                                  (ASMAC)
                                • Fondo Mundial para la
                                  Naturaleza en México
                                  (WWF)
                                • Unión Ganadera regional de • Ganaderos Productores de            • Ganaderos Productores de        • Sigma Alimentos, S.A. de
                                  Chihuahua.                         Leche Pura, S.A. P.I., Alpura   Leche Pura, S.A. P.I., Alpura     C.V.
                                • Leche Zaragoza,                  • El Agro Parque "Integradora • El Agro Parque "Integradora       • Asociación de
                                  Pasteurizadora de los              SuKarne Lucero"                 SuKarne Lucero"                   Engordadores de Ganado
                                  productores de leche, S.A.       • Grupo Lala S.A. de C.V.       • Grupo Lala S.A. de C.V.           Bovino del Noreste
                                  de C.V.                          • Ganadería Revuelta, Rancho • Chilchota Alimentos S.A. de          (AEGBN)
                                • ILAS México, Filial de Reny        Santa Anita                     C.V.                            • Desarrollo de Engordas
                                  Picot                                                            • Ganadería Revuelta, Rancho        Estabuladas S. A. de C.V.
 Private Sector
                                • Grupo Bafar (Cárnicos y                                            Santa Anita                     • SuKarne Agroindustrial
                                  Lácteos)                                                                                             S.A. de C.V.
                                • Bafar Agroindustrial
                                  (Granos y forrajes)
                                • Chilchota Alimentos S.A. de
                                  C.V.
                                • Grupo Lala S.A. de C.V.
                                • Ganaderos Productores de
                                  Leche Pura, S.A. P.I., Alpura
                                • Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources (SEMARNAT)
                                • National Forestry Commission (CONAFOR – State Representation Offices)
                                • Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (SADER)
 Federal Institutions
                                • Ministry of Welfare
                                • Ministry of Agrarian, Territorial and Urban Development (SEDATU)
                                • Ministry of Tourism (SECTUR)
                                • Federal Attorney for Environmental Protection (PROFEPA)


                                                                                                                                                                    47


                                                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


      Type of actor                      Chihuahua                          Coahuila                      Durango                        Nuevo León
                               • National Agrarian Registry (RAN)
                               • National Commission of Natural Protected Areas (CONANP)
                               • Ministry of Women
                               • National Institute of Indigenous Peoples (INPI)
                               • National Water Commission (CONAGUA)
                               • National Council to Prevent Discrimination (CONAPRED)
                               Chihuahua                        Coahuila                       Durango                           Nuevo León

 State Representation          Av. Universidad No. 3705, 3er    Calle Pasaje Siglo XXI #203,   Calle Mango No. 107 Unidad      General Jerónimo Treviño
 Offices - CONAFOR             Piso, Col. Magisterial, C.P.     Col. El Sauz, C.P. 25294,      Recreativa, Parque Sahuatoba    No. 409, Edificio Bisa 5to.
                               31200, Chihuahua.                Saltillo.                      C.P. 34045, Durango.            Piso, Col. Centro, Despachos
                                                                                                                               del 504 al 511, C.P. 64000,
                                                                                                                               Monterrey.
                                • National Forestry Council (CONAF), Technical Committee on Climate Change and Forests (CT-CCyB)

                                • State Forestry Council        • State Forestry Council       • State Forestry Council          • State Forestry Council
                                • State Human Rights            • Secretariat of Social        • State Committee for the         • State Commission on
                                  Commission                      Inclusion and Development      Implementation of the 2030        Environment and
                                • State of Chihuahua            • Rural Development              Agenda                            Sustainable Development
                                  Intersecretarial Commission     Commission of the Congress   • Secretariat of Social Welfare     of Nuevo León
                                  on Climate Change               of Coahuila                  • State Human Rights              • State Council for
                                • Chihuahua Safeguards          • Health, Environment,           Commission                        Sustainable Rural
 Social Participation
                                  Committee                       Natural Resources, and                                           Development
 Platforms
                                • Secretariat of Indigenous       Water Commission of the                                        • Secretariat of Equality and
                                  Peoples and Communities         Congress of Coahuila                                             Inclusion
                                                                • Human Rights Defense                                           • State Human Rights
                                                                  Commission of the Congress                                       Commission
                                                                  of Coahuila
                                                                • Commission for the Care of
                                                                  Vulnerable Groups of the
                                                                  State of Coahuila
                                                                • State Human Rights
                                                                  Commission


                                                                                                                                                                  48


                                                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


      Type of actor                       Chihuahua                           Coahuila                           Durango                         Nuevo León
                                • Department of Forest            • Climate Change Office of         • Secretariat of Natural           • Secretariat of the
                                  Development of the                the Secretariat of the             Resources and Environment          Environment
                                  Secretariat of Rural              Environment                      • Secretariat of Social            • Secretariat of Regional
                                  Development                     • Secretariat of Rural               Welfare, Undersecretariat          and Agricultural
                                • Secretariat of Urban              Development of the State of        of Social Development              Development
                                  Development and Ecology           Coahuila                         • State Institute for Women        • Secretariat of Equality and
 State Level                    • Women’s Institute of the        • Secretariat of Inclusion and     • Youth Institute                    Inclusion,
 Government                       Secretariat of Human and          Social Development,                                                   Undersecretariat of Social
 Institutions                     Community Development             Undersecretariat of                                                   Inclusion and Support for
                                • Secretariat of Social             Inclusion                                                             Vulnerable Groups
                                  Development                     • Institute of Ecology                                                • Secretariat of Citizen
                                • State Commission for            • Center for Justice and                                                Participation
                                  Indigenous Peoples                Empowerment for Women                                               • State Institute for Women
                                                                  • Institute of Women                                                    (IEM)
                                                                                                                                        • Parks and Wildlife of
                                                                                                                                          Nuevo León
                               38 eligible municipalities. 426    26 eligible municipalities. 522    31 eligible municipalities. 517    21 eligible municipalities.
                               ejidos and/or communities:         ejidos and/or communities:         ejidos and/or communities:         478 ejidos and/or
                                                                                                                                        communities:
                               1. Bachiniva                      1. Abasolo                         1. Canatlan
                               2. Balleza                        2. Acuña                           2. Canelas                         1. Aramberri
                               3. Batopilas                      3. Arteaga                         3. Coneto de Comonfort             2. Cadereyta Jiménez
                               4. Bocoyna                        4. Candela                         4. Cuencame                        3. China
 Municipal                     5. Camargo                        5. Castaños                        5. Durango                         4. Doctor arroyo
 Governments                   6. Carichi                        6. Cuatro Ciénegas                 6. General Simón Bolívar           5. Galeana
                               7. Casas grandes                  7. Escobedo                        7. Guadalupe Victoria              6. García
                               8. Chihuahua                      8. Francisco i. Madero             8. Guanacevi                       7. General Terán
                               9. Chinipas                       9. Frontera                        9. Lerdo                           8. Gral. Zaragoza
                               10. Cuauhtémoc                    10. General cepeda                 10. Mapimi                         9. Hualahuises
                               11. Cusihuiriachi                 11. Lamadrid                       11. Mezquital                      10. Iturbide
                               12. Dr. Belisario Domínguez       12. Matamoros                      12. Nazas                          11. Juárez
                               13. Gómez Farías                  13. Monclova                       13. Nombre de Dios                 12. Linares
                               14. Gran Morelos                  14. Múzquiz                        14. Nuevo Ideal                    13. Los ramones



                                                                                                                                                                         49


                                                                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


      Type of actor                        Chihuahua                     Coahuila              Durango                   Nuevo León
                               15. Guachochi                15. Nadadores           15. Ocampo                 14. Mier y noriega
                               16. Guadalupe y calvo        16. Ocampo              16. El Oro                 15. Mina
                               17. Guazapares               17. Parras              17. Otaez                  16. Montemorelos
                               18. Guerrero                 18. Ramos Arizpe        18. Panuco de Coronado     17. Monterrey
                               19. Ignacio Zaragoza         19. Sacramento          19. Peñon blanco           18. Pesquería
                               20. Jiménez                  20. Saltillo            20. Poanas                 19. Rayones
                               21. Madera                   21. San buenaventura    21. Pueblo nuevo           20. Santa Catarina
                               22. Maguarichi               22. San Pedro           22. Rodeo                  21. Santiago
                               23. Manuel Benavides         23. San Buenaventura    23. San Bernardo
                               24. Matachi                  24. Sierra mojada       24. San Dimas
                               25. Morelos                  25. Torreón             25. San Juan del Rio
                               26. Moris                    26. Viesca              26. Santiago Papasquiaro
                               27. Namiquipa                                        27. Súchil
                               28. Nonoava                                          28. Tamazula
                               29. Ocampo                                           29. Tepehuanes
                               30. Riva palacio                                     30. Topia
                               31. Rosario                                          31. Vicente guerrero
                               32. San Francisco de Borja
                               33. San francisco del oro
                               34. Santa Isabel
                               35. Temosachic
                               36. El Tule
                               37. Urique
                               38. Uruachi




                                                                                                                                       50


                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


Annex 3: Proposed Facilitation Guide for the Participatory Process of the ERP Benefit-Sharing Plan


   Participatory Workshops for the Definition of the Benefit-Sharing of the Emission Reductions
           Program (ERP) in the states of Chihuahua, Coahuila, Durango, and Nuevo León



         General Information (To be completed by the person responsible for each workshop)

 Responsible Institution:
 Locality/Municipality/State:                        Venue:
 Date:                                     Time:                     Duration:
 Facilitators:
 Modality: In person/Virtual                         Estimated number of participants: 50


Participation platform: Stakeholders of the ERP in the states of Chihuahua, Coahuila, Durango, and
Nuevo León.

Participants profile: Key actors from the ERP jurisdiction; residents of forest areas, representatives
and members of ejidos, communities, and the forestry, agricultural, and livestock sectors, among
other stakeholders involved in implementing the initial ERP activities.

Context:

Mexico intends to implement an Emission Reductions Program (ERP) under the framework of the
BioCarbon Fund’s Initiative for Sustainable Forest Landscapes (ISFL), managed by the World Bank,
with the objective of reducing emissions. This program represents an opportunity to design a public
policy intervention with an integrated territorial management approach that directly benefits the
people who live in and depend on forest ecosystems.

Implemented by the National Forestry Commission (CONAFOR), the successful execution of the ERP
in this jurisdiction could enable access to financial resources through results-based payments,
provided that emission reductions are verified in accordance with the specific criteria of the ISFL.

In this context, the Benefit-Sharing Plan (BSP) of the ERP establishes the mechanisms to allocate
results-based payments to the jurisdiction where emission reductions are generated. To ensure its
success, the ERP and BSP are based on a participatory process that actively involves key stakeholders
from the forest and rural sectors, including ejidos, local communities, Indigenous and Afro-Mexican
peoples, women, youth, rural inhabitants with and without formal land tenure, civil society
organizations and government actors, among others.




                                                                                                   51
                                                                                                    Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


The BSP seeks to reduce structural barriers that hinder the equitable participation of historically
marginalized groups—such as women, youth, and Indigenous peoples—in the use, management,
conservation, and sustainable utilization of forest resources. To advance this objective, the BSP
promotes equitable benefit sharing through a Jurisdiction-Specific Demand-Driven Program (JSDDP)
that strengthens inclusive forest governance.

This program not only applies clear inclusion criteria for priority and vulnerable groups—regardless
of land tenure status—but also establishes differentiated incentives designed to foster equity,
encourage active participation, and ensure that historically marginalized groups can fully engage in
decision-making and access the benefits of forest-related programs.

The JSDDP will be developed based on participatory and consultative processes. It will define the
criteria and procedures for identifying eligible individuals and groups, the types of support concepts
and affirmative actions available, and the mechanisms for monitoring, evaluation, oversight, and
transparency in the allocation and implementation of such measures.

Objective of the participatory workshops:

To design, consult, agree upon, and validate the BSP with ERP stakeholders through a participatory
process within the jurisdiction. This process should include the provision of prior, clear, and
accessible information to ensure free and informed decision-making. Four phases are identified for
this process: 1. Approach and information, 2. Dissemination and socialization, 3. Design and
definition of local priorities, 4. Validation and agreements.

General Recommendations:

  General Recommendations for Public Calls and Phases of the Participatory Process for Defining
                                      Benefit-Sharing

       A) Regarding Public Calls and participant profiles

       •    Identify the profile of key stakeholders for conducting Public Calls and phases of the
            participatory process, determining who will be involved and their characteristics and
            needs.
       •    Identify appropriate media, platforms, and spaces for disseminating and socializing the
            workshops in ejidos and communities to design and implement a local strategy.
            Conventional means of calling for applications can be used, but traditional and/or local
            methods should also be included (e.g., loudspeaker announcements, community radio
            stations, dissemination in community gathering spaces, etc.).




                                                                                                   52
                                                                                                    Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


       •    Encourage dissemination and socialization through allies and representatives of ejidos,
            communities, productive organizations, and other groups in the territory previously
            identified.
       •    Issue broad Public Calls that align with local, linguistic, and cultural contexts to promote
            the participation of all stakeholders, including women, youth, Indigenous and Afro-
            Mexican people, LGBTQ+ individuals, and any other relevant groups who live in or use
            forest areas in the implementation of the ERP.
       •    Invite participants from the ERP’s socialization and validation workshops, as well as those
            involved in each phase of the participatory process for defining benefit distribution, since
            they are expected to be informed and familiar with the program. However, the
            participation of anyone interested in the topic should also be encouraged.
       •    Public Calls should be made well in advance, considering community schedules related to
            harvest seasons, festivities, daily activities, and caregiving responsibilities.
       •    For Indigenous populations, Public Calls should consider the cultural and linguistic
            relevance of the territory, ensuring the presence of interpreters to support the
            participatory and translation process (including other phases of the process). Coordination
            with the National Institute of Indigenous Peoples (INPI) or local allies should be established
            for this purpose. Indigenous governance structures and customary practices must always
            be respected.
       •    Consider organized groups present in the territory, such as ranchers’ associations,
            farmers, foresters, women’s groups, among others.
       •    Include civil society, academia, and other relevant actors in the territory, particularly in
            specific feedback workshops, to strengthen transparency and validate the methodology
            and participatory process for defining benefit distribution.
       •    The use of information technologies and social networks for Public Calls should be
            considered and tailored to the target audience (e.g., youth, women, Indigenous groups,
            etc.). Additionally, the accessibility of these technologies in forest landscapes within the
            jurisdiction of the ERP must be taken into account.
       •    Disseminate information on the Citizen Attention Mechanism (Grievance Mechanism)
            from the outset of the Public Calls for participation, ensuring it is fully accessible and
            available to all stakeholders.

       B) Regarding the implementation of the phases of the participatory consultation process

       •    Promote a differentiated attention approach to foster the inclusion of women, youth,
            Indigenous and Afro-Mexican populations, persons with disabilities, individuals without
            land tenure, and other groups facing barriers to participation in the phases of the process
            and the workshops.




                                                                                                        53
                                                                                                         Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


       •    Identify key messages and information in a simple, accessible, inclusive, and culturally
            appropriate language, recognizing the diversity of needs and perspectives.
       •    Prepare communication materials and media tailored to the needs of each phase and
            workshop, respecting the linguistic, cultural, and contextual characteristics of
            stakeholders. Some examples include:
               - Informative broadcasts via community loudspeakers, local radio stations, or INPI
                    Indigenous radio stations.
               - Community newspapers or bulletins.
               - Posters.
               - Brochures.
               - Informational sheets.
               - Infographics.
               - Speech scripts for distribution among stakeholders.
               - Audio or text messages for distribution on social media (Facebook, WhatsApp, etc.).
               - Videos and/or animations.
               - Other locally relevant methods.
       •    Plan sessions by developing a didactic and logistical strategy, using facilitation guides as
            support material.
       •    Ensure that, workshops and/or in-person activities, take place in easily accessible locations
            (with available transportation routes), with proper ventilation, restrooms with potable
            water for participants and facilitators, internet access, and electricity. It is also important
            to include adequate breaks in the activities and, when possible, offer refreshments or
            meals aligned with the local diet (in some cases, remunerated support from local allies
            may be sought for this purpose).
       •    Ensure that, for virtual workshops and/or activities, adequate conditions are in place for
            their implementation. This includes scheduling them at appropriate times for connectivity,
            providing accessible and culturally appropriate instructions, and, when possible,
            facilitating resources to support participation.
       •    Foster trust, respect, and horizontal dialogue in facilitation, ensuring an inclusive approach
            and gender perspective, where all contributions are valued and heard, regardless of age,
            identity, gender, land tenure status, etc.
       •    Use accessible, jargon-free language during sessions, employing everyday examples to
            explain key topics. Cultural and linguistic relevance in facilitation is essential, as is the use
            of inclusive and non-sexist language.
       •    Present key information about the ERP and its BSP to stakeholders, regardless of the
            participatory process phase. Priority should be given to ensuring general understanding of
            its significance, functioning, benefits, implications, and impacts. A timeline summarizing
            the ERP’s operation and benefit-sharing process can be used as a visual aid.




                                                                                                           54
                                                                                                            Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


       •    Reinforce, during all workshops, communication about the Citizen Attention Mechanism
            (Grievance Mechanism), ensuring it remains accessible and available to all participants.
       •    Seek to establish alliances through facilitation and execution of each phase to support and
            strengthen ERP implementation in the territory.
       •    Avoid creating confusion, generating false expectations, or prematurely promising
            benefits before knowing the results of ERP implementation. It is crucial to remember that
            benefit distribution will only be possible due to verified emission reductions and the
            derived results-based payments. In this regard, the objectives, goals, and agreements
            emerging from the participatory process must be realistic, measurable, and achievable.
       •    Define agreements and progress throughout the participatory process for defining benefit
            distribution in a participatory manner, ensuring participant understanding and validation.
       •    When capturing audiovisual material, ensure participant authorization for image use in
            activities across different process phases. A verbal explanation should be provided about
            the purpose of the authorization and intended use of the audiovisual material before
            requesting consent.
       •    Ensure proper handling of personal data collected during the different phases of the
            participatory process for defining benefit distribution, communicating it to participants
            and ensuring its protection, confidentiality, and exclusive use for the purposes established
            in the BSP, in compliance with applicable legal frameworks.
       •    Consider using a camera to document workshops and digitally store the materials
            generated as a result.
       •    Define, when applicable, mechanisms for monitoring and follow-up on agreements at the
            territorial level.
       •    Systematize agreements and relevant information from each phase and workshop.



   PROPOSED FACILITATION GUIDE FOR THE PARTICIPATORY PROCESS T0 DEFINE BENEFIT-SHARING UNDER THE ERP

                                                   PARTICIPATORY WORKSHOPS

                                                DURATION: 4 HOURS, 35 MINUTES
   Time             Topic/Content                        Description                    Technique      Requirements
                                              The facilitators will provide space for
                                                 participants to register on the                    ATTENDANCE LIST AND
                                            attendance list. At the same time, each                      IMAGE USE
                                             participant will be given a name tag to                  AUTHORIZATION
                                                write their name (support will be
  30                 Attendance
                                              provided if needed) with the goal of         NA           NAME TAGS
MINUTES              Registration
                                           identifying each person by their name or
                                              preferred form of address, as well as                        PENS
                                            building trust and making the workshop
                                                            more fluid.                              FINE-TIP MARKERS




                                                                                                                      55
                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


   PROPOSED FACILITATION GUIDE FOR THE PARTICIPATORY PROCESS T0 DEFINE BENEFIT-SHARING UNDER THE ERP

                                                   PARTICIPATORY WORKSHOPS

                                                DURATION: 4 HOURS, 35 MINUTES
   Time             Topic/Content                         Description                    Technique           Requirements
                                            The image use authorization form will
                                             also be explained for participants to
                                                             sign.



                                           The workshop facilitators will deliver a
                                              welcoming message, outlining the                                PROJECTOR
                                             objective of validating and agreeing
                                           upon the benefit-sharing arrangements                               LAPTOP
                                           with stakeholders of the ERP through a
                                           participatory process that ensures free,                        EXTENSION CORD
                                                                                            Oral
                                           prior, and informed consultation within
                                                                                        presentation
                                                        its jurisdiction.                                 AUDIO EQUIPMENT
                    Welcome and
  10
                     Workshop                                                           Presentation
MINUTES                                     To this end, the workshop will provide                           MICROPHONE
                     Objective                                                          with didactic
                                            attendees with information about the
                                                                                         and visual
                                                       ERP and its BSP.                                 DIDACTIC PRESENTATIONS
                                                                                          materials
                                                                                                            AND MATERIALS
                                                Additionally, the facilitators will
                                             establish the expected outcomes and                              FLIPCHARTS
                                                the working methodology of the
                                           workshop through discussion tables and                             MARKERS
                                                         plenary sessions.
                                           The facilitators will present the general
                                            concepts of the ERP and the BSP. They
                                            will clarify how the program operates,
                                              its target population and potential                             PROJECTOR
                                           participants, as well as its implications,
                                                      benefits, and impacts.                                   LAPTOP

                    Presentation of           It is important to note that benefit                         EXTENSION CORD
                                                                                            Oral
                    Key Concepts of          distribution will only occur if results-
                                                                                        presentation
                   the ERP, the BSP,            based payments are achieved. A                            AUDIO EQUIPMENT
  20                and the Citizen         distinction will also be made between
                                                                                        Presentation
MINUTES                Attention                the Initial Activities and the BSP                           MICROPHONE
                                                                                        with didactic
                      Mechanism                       Activities of the ERP.
                                                                                         and visual
                      (Grievance                                                                        DIDACTIC PRESENTATIONS
                                                                                          materials
                     Mechanism)             The Citizen Attention Mechanism will                            AND MATERIALS
                                              also be introduced as the channel
                                               through which stakeholders can                                 FLIPCHARTS
                                                exercise their right to request
                                            information or clarification regarding                            MARKERS
                                              the ERP and its BSP, and to submit
                                           suggestions, complaints, or grievances
                                                related to its implementation.




                                                                                                                            56
                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


   PROPOSED FACILITATION GUIDE FOR THE PARTICIPATORY PROCESS T0 DEFINE BENEFIT-SHARING UNDER THE ERP

                                                   PARTICIPATORY WORKSHOPS

                                                DURATION: 4 HOURS, 35 MINUTES
   Time             Topic/Content                        Description                     Technique           Requirements
                                                                                                              PROJECTOR

                                                                                                               LAPTOP

                                                                                                           EXTENSION CORD
                                                                                            Oral
                                                                                        presentation
                                           The facilitators will initiate and guide a                     AUDIO EQUIPMENT
   15               Questions and          question-and-answer session to clarify
                                                                                        Presentation
MINUTOS            Answers Session          or address any doubts related to the                             MICROPHONE
                                                                                        with didactic
                                            presentation on the ERP and its BSP.
                                                                                         and visual
                                                                                                        DIDACTIC PRESENTATIONS
                                                                                          materials
                                                                                                            AND MATERIALS

                                                                                                              FLIPCHARTS

                                                                                                               MARKERS
                                                                                                              PROJECTOR

                                                                                                               LAPTOP

                                                                                                           EXTENSION CORD
                                                                                            Oral
                    Presentation of         The facilitators will present the results   presentation
                                                                                                          AUDIO EQUIPMENT
                   Results from the         of the ERP socialization and feedback
  10
                   ERP Socialization       workshops to provide context and guide       Presentation
MINUTES                                                                                                      MICROPHONE
                     and Feedback           the participatory process for defining      with didactic
                      Workshops                         benefit-sharing.                 and visual
                                                                                                        DIDACTIC PRESENTATIONS
                                                                                          materials
                                                                                                            AND MATERIALS

                                                                                                              FLIPCHARTS

                                                                                                              MARKERS
   5
                                                      COFFEE BREAK                                      COFFEE BREAK SUPPLIES
MINUTES
                                            The facilitators will guide the work by         Oral              PROJECTOR
                                           dividing the group into breakout tables      presentation
                                            to identify local socio-environmental                              LAPTOP
                                                  issues that may impact the            Presentation
                     Participatory         implementation of the ERP. To do this,       with didactic      EXTENSION CORD
                    Matrix for the          participatory matrices will be used at
                   Identification of                                                     and visual
                                                          each table.                     materials       AUDIO EQUIPMENT
  40                  Territorial
MINUTES             Opportunities
                                            These matrices will be distributed on        Printed             MICROPHONE
                     and Conflicts
                    Related to the         pre-prepared flipcharts, and an example      matrices on
                                             will be projected digitally during the      working        DIDACTIC PRESENTATIONS
                          ERP
                                               session to demonstrate how to              tables            AND MATERIALS
                                             complete them. Before starting the
                                             activity, facilitators will explain each      Digital            FLIPCHARTS
                                            section of the matrix and define what          Matrix



                                                                                                                            57
                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


   PROPOSED FACILITATION GUIDE FOR THE PARTICIPATORY PROCESS T0 DEFINE BENEFIT-SHARING UNDER THE ERP

                                                   PARTICIPATORY WORKSHOPS

                                                DURATION: 4 HOURS, 35 MINUTES
   Time             Topic/Content                        Description                     Technique          Requirements
                                           constitutes a socio-environmental issue                            MARKERS
                                                      linked to the ERP.                  Plenary
                                                                                          session         PRINTED MATRICES
                                            Each matrix will include the following
                                                         sections:                                         DIGITAL MATRIX

                                                                                                           MASKING TAPE
                                                 a) Socio-environmental issue
                                                b) Area where it occurs (region,
                                                                                                              CAMERA
                                           municipality, locality, community, ejido,
                                                               etc.)
                                             c) Stakeholders involved in the issue
                                             (including those responsible for it or
                                            those associated with its resolution, as
                                                  well as a description of their
                                                          interactions)
                                            d) Timeline of the socio-environmental
                                           issue (whether it is a recent issue or has
                                             a long history, and whether it occurs
                                                    during a specific season)
                                           e) Potential corrective measure (actions
                                              to correct, prevent, or mitigate the
                                                              issue)

                                            This activity will help identify the root
                                             causes that could hinder emissions
                                                reduction and outline possible
                                            corrective measures, which could be
                                           integrated into the ERP's BSP Activities
                                              as part of the benefit distribution.

                                           At the end of the group work, each table
                                               will present its results in a plenary
                                            session. Simultaneously, one facilitator
                                            will input the information into a digital
                                           matrix to be used in upcoming activities.

                                            It is important to preserve the physical
                                             materials or take photographs of the
                                              results, as they will be necessary for
                                                         systematization.
   5
                                                      COFFEE BREAK                                      COFFEE BREAK SUPPLIES
MINUTES
                                            The facilitators will guide group work          Oral             PROJECTOR
                                           organized in breakout tables to identify     presentation
  40               Identification of            potential individual or group                                  LAPTOP
MINUTES              beneficiaries                       beneficiaries.                 Presentation      EXTENSION CORD
                                                                                        with didactic




                                                                                                                           58
                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


   PROPOSED FACILITATION GUIDE FOR THE PARTICIPATORY PROCESS T0 DEFINE BENEFIT-SHARING UNDER THE ERP

                                                   PARTICIPATORY WORKSHOPS

                                                DURATION: 4 HOURS, 35 MINUTES
   Time             Topic/Content                        Description                    Technique          Requirements
                                                This activity will begin with an        and visual      AUDIO EQUIPMENT
                                           introductory presentation that includes      materials
                                               information, a glossary, and key                            MICROPHONE
                                           concepts related to benefit-sharing (for      Printed
                                              example: monetary benefits, non-          matrices on   DIDACTIC PRESENTATIONS
                                           monetary benefits, co-benefits, results-      working          AND MATERIALS
                                           based payments, MRV, access barriers,          tables
                                                         equity, etc.).                                     FLIPCHARTS
                                                                                          Digital
                                             The presentation will emphasize that         Matrix            MARKERS
                                            the BSP aims to include populations in
                                           situations of vulnerability or those who      Plenary        PRINTED MATRICES
                                                  have experienced exclusion,            session
                                             discrimination, or access barriers that                      DIGITAL MATRIX
                                           hinder their participation in Sustainable
                                               Forest Development activities and                          MASKING TAPE
                                           related support programs. Therefore, it
                                           is essential to highlight the importance                          CAMERA
                                              of integrating, as beneficiaries and
                                           under principles of equity and inclusion:
                                            Indigenous and Afro-Mexican peoples,
                                           women, youth, persons with disabilities,
                                             LGBTIQ+ individuals, persons without
                                              land tenure, among other relevant
                                                            groups.

                                           Following the presentation, the activity
                                            will be conducted in breakout tables.
                                           Each group will complete a matrix with
                                                  the following information:

                                                    a) Potential beneficiaries
                                                       (individuals/groups)
                                              b) Main characteristics of potential
                                                           beneficiaries
                                           c) Activities they carry out in connection
                                                         with forest areas
                                                  d) Access barriers they face
                                             e) Conditions that would enable their
                                                           participation
                                            f) Requirements to be met for benefit
                                                            distribution

                                              Before filling out the matrix, the
                                           facilitators will show a digital example
                                           to guide the process. At the end of the
                                            activity, each group will present their
                                           results in plenary. Simultaneously, one




                                                                                                                          59
                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


   PROPOSED FACILITATION GUIDE FOR THE PARTICIPATORY PROCESS T0 DEFINE BENEFIT-SHARING UNDER THE ERP

                                                   PARTICIPATORY WORKSHOPS

                                                 DURATION: 4 HOURS, 35 MINUTES
   Time             Topic/Content                         Description                      Technique           Requirements
                                           facilitator will input the information into
                                                a digital matrix to be used in the
                                                       following activities.

                                            It is important to preserve the physical
                                             materials or take photographs of the
                                           results, as they will be necessary for the
                                                    systematization process.

   5
                                                      COFFEE BREAK                                        COFFEE BREAK SUPPLIES
MINUTES

                                             Based on previous presentations and
                                            activities, the facilitators will guide the
                                            breakout groups in prioritizing benefit-
                                             sharing. This activity will take place in
                                                 plenary and will build upon the
                                             identification of socio-environmental
                                              issues and potential beneficiaries to
                                           structure a proposal for BSP Activities to
                                                                                                                PROJECTOR
                                                   be validated by the group.
                                                                                                                 LAPTOP
                                           This will be done using a digital matrix,          Oral
                                           which will be filled out in parallel with      presentation       EXTENSION CORD
                                             the plenary facilitation. The matrix
                                                           includes:                      Presentation      AUDIO EQUIPMENT
                                                                                          with didactic
                                                          a) BSP Activities                and visual          MICROPHONE
  40               Prioritization of        b) Type of benefits (monetary and non-          materials
MINUTES                Benefits                              monetary)                                    DIDACTIC PRESENTATIONS
                                            c) Individuals or groups of beneficiaries        Digital          AND MATERIALS
                                           d) Affirmative action (specific measures          Matrix
                                           required to ensure the participation and                             FLIPCHARTS
                                            inclusion of specific populations in BSP        Plenary
                                               Activities and benefit distribution)         session             MARKERS
                                             e) Requirements to be met for benefit
                                                            distribution                                      DIGITAL MATRIX
                                                    f) Associated co-benefits
                                             g) Prioritization criteria for vulnerable                           CAMERA
                                              populations and other groups facing
                                                              barriers

                                           It is important to preserve the materials
                                             or take photographs of the results, as
                                                  these will be necessary for the
                                                     systematization process.




                                                                                                                              60
                                                                                                                               Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


   PROPOSED FACILITATION GUIDE FOR THE PARTICIPATORY PROCESS T0 DEFINE BENEFIT-SHARING UNDER THE ERP

                                                  PARTICIPATORY WORKSHOPS

                                                DURATION: 4 HOURS, 35 MINUTES
   Time             Topic/Content                        Description                   Technique           Requirements

   5
                                                     COFFEE BREAK                                     COFFEE BREAK SUPPLIES
MINUTES

                                                                                                            PROJECTOR

                                            The facilitators will review with the                            LAPTOP
                                           group a summary of the activities and
                                             information developed during the             Oral           EXTENSION CORD
                                           workshop, as well as the results of the    presentation
                                           benefit prioritization matrix (previous                      AUDIO EQUIPMENT
                                                           activity).
                                                                                      Presentation         MICROPHONE
                                                                                      with didactic
                                              Each proposed BSP activity will be       and visual
                    Validation and                                                                    DIDACTIC PRESENTATIONS
  30                                           reviewed, along with its related         materials
                    Agreements on                                                                         AND MATERIALS
MINUTES                                         information, and submitted for
                    Benefit-Sharing
                                           validation by the group to structure the      Digital            FLIPCHARTS
                                           local benefit-sharing arrangement (with       Matrix
                                                the possibility of adjustments).
                                                                                                            MARKERS
                                                                                        Plenary
                                           At the end of the session, participants      session           DIGITAL MATRIX
                                            will be asked to sign the workshop
                                           minutes to formalize their agreement                              CAMERA
                                                with the validated outcomes.
                                                                                                      MINUTES OF VALIDATION
                                                                                                      OF WORKSHOP RESULTS
                                                                                                           PROJECTOR

                                                                                                             LAPTOP

                                                                                          Oral           EXTENSION CORD
                                                                                      presentation
                                               The facilitators will outline the                        AUDIO EQUIPMENT
  10                 Definition of           upcoming phases and steps of the
MINUTES               Next Steps            participatory process for defining the    Presentation         MICROPHONE
                                                       benefit-sharing.               with didactic
                                                                                       and visual     DIDACTIC PRESENTATIONS
                                                                                        materials         AND MATERIALS

                                                                                                            FLIPCHARTS

                                                                                                            MARKERS

                                                                                          Oral              PROJECTOR
                                           The facilitators will close the workshop
                                             by thanking the participants for their   presentation
   5                  Workshop                                                                               LAPTOP
                                           attendance. At the same time, they will
MINUTES                Closure
                                            open a space for final reflections from   Presentation       EXTENSION CORD
                                                          the group.                  with didactic




                                                                                                                          61
                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


   PROPOSED FACILITATION GUIDE FOR THE PARTICIPATORY PROCESS T0 DEFINE BENEFIT-SHARING UNDER THE ERP

                                             PARTICIPATORY WORKSHOPS

                                           DURATION: 4 HOURS, 35 MINUTES
   Time             Topic/Content                 Description              Technique         Requirements
                                                                           and visual     AUDIO EQUIPMENT
                                                                           materials
                                                                                             MICROPHONE

                                                                                        DIDACTIC PRESENTATIONS
                                                                                            AND MATERIALS

                                                                                              FLIPCHARTS

                                                                                              MARKERS




                                                                                                            62
                                                                                                            Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


Bibliography

Angelsen, Arild (2010). La implementación de REDD+: Estrategia nacional y opciones de Política.
       CIFOR. Bogor Barat, Indonesia. Online consultation: https://www.cifor-
       icraf.org/publications/pdf_files/Books/BAngelsen1001.pdf

Banco Internacional de Reconstrucción y Fomento, Banco Mundial (2017). Marco Ambiental y
       Social.       Washington,        DC,       EEUU.        Online       consultation:
       https://thedocs.worldbank.org/en/doc/345101522946582343-
       0290022018/original/EnvironmentalSocialFrameworkSpanish.pdf

Banco         Mundial.   Margo      Ambiental      y     Social.    Online    consultation:
          https://www.bancomundial.org/es/projects-operations/environmental-and-social-
          framework

BioCarbon Fund (2020). Nota sobre la distribución de beneficios para los programas de
       reducción de emisiones en virtud del Fondo para reducir las emisiones de carbono
       mediante la protección de los bosques y la iniciativa del Fondo del Biocarbono para
       paisajes        forestales        sostenibles.           Online         consultation:
       https://www.forestcarbonpartnership.org/sites/fcp/files/Benefit%20Sharing%20Note_
       August%202020_Spanish_.pdf

CONAFOR (2024). ISFL Emission Reductions Program Document. Online consultation:
      https://www.biocarbonfund-isfl.org/system/files/2024-09/ISFLMexicoERPD_20230830-VF-
      senttoscs_atenci%C3%B3n%20CONAFOR_v4_0.pdf

Guerrero Pacheco, G.; González Montiel, I.; García Sánchez, S. y Hernández Ángeles, G. (2016).
       Metodología para guiar el proceso de construcción participativa de los arreglos de
       distribución de beneficios a nivel local en el contexto de la Iniciativa de Reducción de
       Emisiones (IRE) de México. Enfoca, Gobernanza y Fortalecimiento Ambiental; Alianza
       México para la Reducción de Emisiones por Deforestación y Degradación. Online
       consultation:
       https://www.gob.mx/cms/uploads/attachment/file/170308/Anexo_4_Metodologia_pa
       ra_guiar_el_proceso_de_construccion_participativa_de_los_arreglos_de_distribucion_
       de_beneficios_a_nivel_local_en_el_contexto_de_la_IRE_de_Mexico.pdf

INEGI      (2022). Censo de Población y Vivienda               2020.    Online   consultation:
          https://www.inegi.org.mx/programas/ccpv/2020/

Instituto Nacional de los Pueblos Indígenas (2015). Atlas de los Pueblos Indígenas de México.
        Online consultation: https://atlas.inpi.gob.mx/



                                                                                            63
                                                                                             Official Use Only
Draft Benefit-Sharing Plan
Sustainable Forest Landscapes Initiative
CONAFOR, 2025


Registro Agrario Nacional. Estadística con perspectiva de género 2016-2025. Online
        consultation: http://www.ran.gob.mx/ran/index.php/sistemas-de-consulta/estadistica-
        agraria/estadistica-con-perspectiva-de-genero

Sistema de Información de Salvaguardas (SIS) – ENAREDD+. Online consultation:
       https://sis.cnf.gob.mx/

Zúñiga, I. & Deschamps P. (2014). Elementos para el diseño del mecanismo de distribución de
        beneficios para REDD+ en México. Agencia de los Estados Unidos para el Desarrollo
        Internacional (USAID), Proyecto de Reducción de Emisiones por la Deforestación y la
        Degradación de Bosques de México (Alianza México-REDD+). México, Distrito Federal.
        Online                                                                  consultation:
        http://www.monitoreoforestal.gob.mx/repositoriodigital/files/original/098fb9c9d1426
        7336f1f1afc0b8d25f1.pdf




                                                                                          64
                                                                                           Official Use Only
