Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project - Phase 2 (P180429)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                             Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      ( ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                         Date Prepared/Updated: 07/21/2023 | Report No: ESRSC03692




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Oct 02, 2023                                                                          Page 1 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project - Phase 2 (P180429)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                 Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P180429                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)      Bahia que Alimenta          2025

                     Operation Name            Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project - Phase 2

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries           Region                     Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Brazil                    Brazil                                  LATIN AMERICA AND           Agriculture and Food
                                                                                       CARIBBEAN

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Board Date

                     Government of the         CAR - Companhia de Desenvolvimento      13-May-2024                 12-Aug-2024
                     State of Bahia            e Acao Regional, FLEM - Fundacao Luis
                                               Eduardo Magalhaes

                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost



Public Disclosure
                     Review Date

                     24-May-2023               150,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     To improve productivity, access to markets and climate change resilience of family farmers and access to water in
                     selected rural areas..


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The proposed project aims to improve access to markets, climate change resilience of family farmers, and access to safe
                     water in selected rural areas. The project will benefit mostly small-scale family farmers, indigenous people, and
                     traditional communities.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings

                    Oct 02, 2023                                                                                                  Page 2 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project - Phase 2 (P180429)



                     The state of Bahia has 417 municipalities distributed in 27 Territories and encompasses an area of 567.4 thousand km2,
                     which corresponds to 6.7% of the total area of the country and more than a third of the Brazilian Northeast Region.
                     With an estimated population of 14.9 million inhabitants in 2021, it is the 4th largest state in Brazil in population size.
                     The state is in an area with very different climatic characteristics and three Brazilian biomes coexist in its territory: (i)
                     Caatinga, (ii) Atlantic Forest and (iii) Cerrado. Caatinga biome, in the semi-arid region, represents 78.6% of the entire
                     area of the state. The occurrence of climate events such as droughts in the semi-arid region and floods along the coastal
                     zones are getting more frequent over the last years.
                      Indigenous peoples, quilombola communities and other traditional communities are overrepresented among the poor
                     rural population in the state of Bahia. According to the National Indigenous People Foundation (Fundação Nacional dos
                     Povos Indígenas or FUNAI in Portuguese) there are 16 Indigenous Peoples in the state of Bahia. They account for 16,817
                     people, living in 31 indigenous lands, which comprise 113 local communities. Nearly 56 percent of them live with
                     monthly per capita income up to ¼ of the Brazilian minimum wage and 80% earn up to ½ of the minimum wage. There
                     are also 468 quilombola communities and 507 communities (11,431 families) in which the system of “fundo de pasto”
                     prevails.
                     Bahia has the largest economy in the Northeast Region. In 2019, it accounted for approximately 4% of Brazil's Gross
                     Domestic Product (GDP) and for 27.9% of the economy of the Northeast Region and has achieved important economic
                     results and remains in a prominent position in the national economy, however, even in this positive economic scenario,
                     most recent social indicators shows that there is still maintenance of poverty data in Bahia. In the context of food
                     security, the most recent impacts resulting from the Covid-19 pandemic pointed out in the National Survey on Food
                     Insecurity in the Context of the Covid-19 Pandemic in Brazil, carried out in 2021, indicate an increase in the food
                     insecurity index of the Brazilian population. It is noteworthy that, for the Northeast Region, this index reached 71.9% of




Public Disclosure
                     the population in 2021, being above the national average.
                     Regarding family agriculture, out of a total of 762 thousand agricultural properties, 593,000 are family production units,
                     according to the Agricultural Census (IBGE, 2017). Of the total area of 28 million hectares occupied by rural properties,
                     family farmers occupy 9 million (32%) and are responsible for 25% of the total value of state agricultural production.
                     Family farming in the semi-arid region of Bahia is fundamentally characterized by rain-dependent production systems
                     that integrate animal husbandry, plant production and extractives.
                     Considering water access, only 49.4% of rural households in Bahia have a general distribution network as a source of
                     water supply. 32% depend on wells and springs. 18.6% have a water source from another type of source (generally in a
                     fragile, insecure and non-regular way), which highlights the need for investments that seek to expand or even
                     universalize access to water for consumption and production in rural areas.
                     Despite the interventions of numerous public policies to promote rural development, including the Bahia Produtiva
                     Project (Phase I), the rural population still has limited access to credit lines, technologies, good agricultural practices,
                     technical assistance services, difficulties in accessing profitable markets and infrastructure limitations.


                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Project Management Unit will be hosted under the Company for Development and Regional Action (CAR), which
                     will be responsible for the general management, planning, coordination, execution, monitoring and evaluation of all
                     activities of this project, as known as locally “Bahia que Alimenta” Project.
                     The Project will build on five years of experience of implementing phase 1 of Bahia Produtiva - BAHIA SUSTAINABLE
                     RURAL DEVELOPMENT PROJECT (P147157), and substantial implementation capacity and operational procedures
                     developed and largely mainstreamed in the CAR, CERB (Companhia de Engenharia Hidrica e Saneamento da Bahia) and
                     others involved institutions. Throughout this time, CAR has installed a reliable management system following the
                    Oct 02, 2023                                                                                                        Page 3 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project - Phase 2 (P180429)



                     requirements for environmental and social assessment, monitoring and evaluation (M & E), reporting, gender, and
                     generation, technical approaches for sustainable land management at family agriculture, Indigenous Peoples, and
                     grievance redress. The previous project was implemented under the former Safeguards Operational Policies and closing
                     rating was Satisfactory in terms of Environmental and Social Safeguards compliance.
                     CAR will continue to be the leading agency during project preparation and implementation, in coordination with CERB -
                     responsible for component 2 action (Water supply systems), where the project will operate. The Social and Environment
                     Safeguards (SES) team which oversees the implementation of the former environment and social safeguards framework,
                     will upgrade this arrangement in accordance with Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) following
                     the ESF requirements.
                     Despite CAR’s experience working with the Bank’s Safeguard Policies and robust and institutional platform developed
                     for Bahia Produtiva Project (phase 1), the need for institutional capacity strengthening will be evaluated during project
                     preparation.


                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                          Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                   Substantial
                     Overall, the Components covered by this Project are expected to contribute to sustainable, resilient and inclusive
                     rural development, generating positive environmental impacts and co-benefits. Notwithstanding, the environmental



Public Disclosure
                     risk classification is proposed as Substantial. This is to account for the project scope and potential environmental risks
                     and impacts resulting from the activities related to the small scale primary agricultural production, food processing,
                     and the construction or rehabilitation works from small rural water supply systems “centrais de água”. These impacts
                     may include: (i) waste streams and surface water contamination from food processing plants such as dairy and yuca
                     processing; (ii) diffuse impacts from agricultural production such as soil erosion, habitat conversion into agriculture
                     land, environmental contamination with pesticides; (iii) small scale construction wastes, erosion, environmental noise
                     and dust emissions, small leaks of lubricants and fluids from construction machinery; (iv) sludges and other water
                     treatment plant wastes from filters, sedimentation and flotation tanks; (v) OHS hazards and risks from a variety of
                     activities covered under project’s sub components such as exposure to hazardous refrigerant gases (ammonia),
                     unprotected moving parts and machinery, exposure to hazardous chemicals and pesticides, construction traffic
                     hazards, exposure to electrical hazards, working at heights, entering in confined spaces; exposure noise and dusts
                     emissions, excavation hazards, ergonomic hazards; among others. Foreseen risks and impacts from this project are
                     expected to be limited to the site locations, temporary, reversible and can be controlled or mitigated by the adoption
                     of standard GIIP as defined in the WBG EHSGs, which will be further detailed in Project’s environmental and social
                     management documentation. Under component two the project also includes potential risks and impacts from dam
                     failure if there is a need of using existing reservoirs for water supply. Given the diffuse nature and small footprint of
                     foreseen individual impacts, the team does not see at this stage the potential of cumulative impacts or need of a
                     cumulative impact assessment. The project also includes Technical Assistance components under component 3 to
                     support technological innovation and climate resilient agriculture practices. It is unclear at this point whether the
                     outcomes from TA activities could generate adverse impacts to the environment, but the potential impacts will be
                     assessed during project preparation.


                    Oct 02, 2023                                                                                                       Page 4 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project - Phase 2 (P180429)



                     A.2 Social Risk Rating                                                                                        Moderate
                     The social risk is rated as Moderate at this stage. The project interventions are small-scale, and community based in
                     nature which are not expected to have any significant or unmitigable social impacts and there will likely be no adverse
                     impacts linked to resettlement or land acquisition. No significant adverse impacts are anticipated. Component 1
                     supports family farming activities, which may involve children from families. However, national legislation prohibits
                     child labor and requires children to attend school. This is a condition for receiving greater income transfer benefits
                     from the Bolsa Família Program. Anyone who witnesses child labor has a duty to notify the responsible authorities.
                     Due to these incentives and strict laws, there has been a significant reduction in child labor in families. To further
                     prevent the child labor, the Labor Management Plan and technical assistance services will provide guidance on this
                     issue. The expected impacts are predictable, site specific, have minimal adverse impacts and easily mitigable. The
                     ESMF will fully address all these areas to propose adequate mitigation measures and recommend modalities to
                     maximize project benefits for the target population by aligning the project design with the socio-cultural and context
                     specific needs of communities. Project workers may be exposed to health and safety risks, which will also be assessed
                     as part of the ESMF, including the risks during construction and operational phases of the project. Measures to ensure
                     OHS will be defined in the Labor Management Procedures (LMP). Although Project-supported activities can take place
                     in remotely located communities, they are not expected to increase risks ordinarily associated with the influx of
                     workers on small rural communities as this number is expected to be low. There is a risk of exclusion of disadvantaged
                     and vulnerable social groups from the benefits of the Project, especially indigenous peoples and other traditional
                     communities. This risk will be minimized by the Borrower’s full commitment to carry out consultation and
                     engagement processes in culturally appropriate manners to build informed consensus and broad support as a
                     requisite for Project interventions. The Borrower would develop an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF)



Public Disclosure
                     and a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) considering the different views, aspirations and needs and proposing
                     measures to ensure these social groups can fully participate in the Project. The project will be implemented across
                     the State’s 27 rural territories and will target family farmers who are overrepresented among the poor population in
                     the state. The later include quilombolas, indigenous groups, among other traditional groups, who collectively number
                     approximately 150,000 families. The project also aims at ensuring that women, youth, indigenous peoples and other
                     vulnerable rural groups can benefit from increased agricultural and nonagricultural rural competitiveness, as well as
                     from water services investments. Under Component 1 and 3, the project interventions are expected to enhance
                     productivity, increase production and income, and expand the resilience and the coping capacity of these
                     disadvantaged and vulnerable social groups in face of the adverse effects exacerbated by Covid-19 and climate
                     change on their livelihoods, food security and well-being. The Project would contribute to reduce rural poverty and
                     avoiding rural-urban migration, while stimulating the adoption of sustainable and resilient production systems.
                     Component 2 is expected to bring about better social outcomes through improved access to water leading to better
                     health and hygiene. Especially for women - menstrual hygiene, privacy, security, access and comfort will be greatly
                     improved. Women are disproportionately affected with lack of access to water and sanitation. Therefore, the project
                     will address gender gaps and will include among the indicators and targets to reduce the identified gaps.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                Relevant



                    Oct 02, 2023                                                                                                    Page 5 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project - Phase 2 (P180429)



                      This standard is relevant. Project interventions are expected to result in more environmentally sustainable and
                      climate-smart production among beneficiaries, generating positive social and environmental co-benefits.
                      Nevertheless, subprojects may cause site specific and reversible impacts, as described below: Under component 1, the
                      project will support small farmers’ associations and agriculture production chains, financing primary agricultural
                      production and processing, which may include machinery, infrastructure, vehicles and tools. The main potential
                      environmental risks and impacts associated with these activities are soil erosion and runoff of sediments to the rivers
                      and water bodies, environmental contamination with pesticides, environmental pollution with empty pesticide
                      containers, land conversion and habitat loss for farming production, inadequate disposal of construction wastes,
                      environmental pollution with wastewater streams from processing agriculture products processing (i.e. dairy, casava,
                      meat processing etc.). Component 2 includes water access to remote rural communities through central water supply
                      systems. Potential impacts associated with component 2 are related to civil works from water supply systems
                      (construction wastes, earth works, emissions of noise and vibration, Occupational Hazards, etc.) and the impacts from
                      water treatment facilities (solid wastes from primary treatment), which are expected to be limited in number as in
                      most cases the water should come from wells and therefore, just chlorination treatment is required. Under
                      component 3, the project will support the adoption of climate-smart technologies and measures focusing on climate
                      mitigation, adaptation and resilience. It will promote technical assistance services and technological innovation,
                      prioritize the production of healthy foods, food and nutritional security, income generation and the commercialization
                      of products. It is unclear at this stage what could be the impacts related to TA activities (if any), which will be further
                      explored during project preparation. The project will have mostly social positive benefits that include: a) improved
                      access to water and sanitation; b) increased income generation and technical capacity for farmers and rural
                      households; c) expand opportunities for rural youth and women; d) strengthened institutional capacity for better




Public Disclosure
                      planning and practices due to enhanced skills in management. The project social risks and impacts are primarily
                      possibility of excluding vulnerable groups from full participation in project benefits either due to lack of information or
                      benefit allocation decisions; related to small land acquisition for project activities; community impacts during civil
                      works, risks related to labor and working conditions. A more detailed description of relevant risks and impacts
                      identified at concept stage are described above in Subsection A. Based on the experience from previous project “Bahia
                      Produtiva”, CAR has already developed a robust framework, and related systems to manage subprojects’ risks and
                      impacts, including sub projects selection and exclusion criteria, impact identification, and monitoring of performance.
                      Going forward, to manage the risks and impacts from this project, CAR must complete a new updated version of the
                      ESMF during project preparation, in accordance with the requirements from ESF and the EHSGs, and strengthen the
                      systems they already have in place. At this stage the team believes that the ESMF must include criteria for subprojects
                      eligibility, an exclusion list including resettlements activities, dam safety and activities posing severe biodiversity
                      impacts however, exact ESMF content details and requirements will be confirmed at appraisal stage. The Project’s
                      ESMF would pay special attention to the distributive impacts and benefits of Project interventions on disadvantaged
                      and vulnerable social groups, including analysis and measures to reduce gender inequalities in access to water and to
                      improve women's income and participation conditions. Family agriculture encompasses an array of social groups that
                      are more likely than others to be disadvantaged and vulnerable as well as excluded from taking advantage of project
                      benefits. They include Indigenous Peoples, quilombola and traditional communities as well as the poorer Afro-
                      Brazilian small landholders and the female small landholders without secure tenure. The Project’s ESMF would pay
                      special attention to the impacts and benefits of Project interventions on these disadvantaged and vulnerable social
                      groups and the Project’s SEP would define – as needed – special measures to engage, disseminate information and
                      consult in a culturally appropriate manner with them, as detailed in ESS 10. The draft ESMF including E&S risk
                      assessment would be prepared before appraisal, and final ESMF would be disclosed by 30 days after Effectiveness


                    Oct 02, 2023                                                                                                       Page 6 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project - Phase 2 (P180429)



                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                        Relevant

                      Stakeholder engagement, consultation and communication, including grievance redress and disclosure of information
                      will be required throughout the project life. Based on the experience of the previous Project it is possible to state that
                      the borrower holds a high capacity when it comes to stakeholder engagement. During the period of the COVID-19
                      pandemic it developed several strategies for maintaining contact through digital means that proved to be highly
                      responsive and satisfactory. In consultation with the Bank team, the Client is preparing an inclusive Stakeholder
                      Engagement Plan (SEP) proportional to the nature and scale of the project and associated risks and impacts identified.
                      A preliminary stakeholder mapping has already identified more than 100 stakeholders groups and their detailed
                      analysis will be incorporated into the SEP. Specific identification of vulnerable groups and their inclusion in
                      stakeholder engagement will be addressed. Among the preliminarily identified stakeholders are: rural smallholders,
                      rural families without access to water and sanitation, reform settlers, traditional communities (such as Indigenous
                      Peoples, Quilombola communities, artisanal fishery communities, extractive communities, and others traditional
                      groups), family agriculture organizations and unions, community associations and cooperatives, and central water
                      supply systems (including the existing rural water supply organizations). Other interested parties include municipal
                      governments, financing agents, providers of technical assistance and rural extension services, NGOs and the private
                      sector engaged on the value chains of biodiversity products, state and federal authorities that are incumbent of
                      environmental and water regulation, protection of Indigenous Peoples, Quilombolas and traditional communities, the
                      state and municipal Councils of Sustainable Rural Development and similar. A draft of the SEP will be prepared and
                      disclosed as early as possible allowing enough time for review and feedback from interested parties. The project is
                      incorporating feedback from relevant stakeholders, including IP and vulnerable groups early in project preparation,
                      which is improving the overall project design. To this, it has used strategies such as meetings with focus groups and



Public Disclosure
                      assessments of lessons learned and satisfaction - points of improvement from the previous project (a wide survey was
                      carried out). The draft version of the SEP will be disclosed prior to appraisal. The client will engage in meaningful
                      consultations with all stakeholders throughout the project life cycle considering the different access and
                      communication needs of various groups and individuals, particularly the vulnerable and disadvantaged groups.
                      Stakeholder consultations will be essential to providing inputs to the project design, environmental and social
                      assessment and mitigation plans, Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), monitoring reports, and further
                      evaluation of the project. A project wide GRM needs to be designed which will enable a broad range of stakeholders
                      to channel concerns, questions, and complaints related to the Project. The GRM will be cognizant of and follow
                      required levels of discretion, and cultural appropriateness, especially when dealing with cases of sexual harassment
                      and GBV. Specific GRMs relevant to ESS2 will be set up. Aiming to avoid the unsustainable duplication of structures,
                      the Borrower may rely on existing engagement structures and grievance redressing mechanism (GRM) within its
                      system for carrying out meaningful consultations with stakeholders, engaging on a continued basis with stakeholders
                      and responding to concerns and grievances raised by stakeholders. During preparation, the existing engagement
                      structures and GRM would be assessed on their main features and functionalities and decisions will be taken with
                      regards to their utilization, with or without the adoption of supplementary project-specific arrangements as needed.
                      Prior to appraisal, the following measures will be implemented: 1) stakeholder identification and analysis 2)
                      developing the SEP 3) disclosure of information and 4) consultation with stakeholders on the project overall as well as
                      on the ESMF and meaningful consultations tailored to Indigenous Peoples will be conducted as per ESS7. The final
                      version of the SEP – updated with the feedback collected through the consultation process – would be publicly
                      disclosed in a dedicated Project website within 30 days of Project effectiveness.



                    Oct 02, 2023                                                                                                       Page 7 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project - Phase 2 (P180429)



                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                             Relevant

                      This standard is relevant. Project implementation would rely on direct workers (including civil servants from the
                      implementing agencies), contracted workers and primary supply workers. During preparation it would be assessed
                      whether or not the Project would engage community workers for the purpose of fostering community-driven
                      development (Under Component 1) and – in case it would – also assess whether or not the application of all
                      requirements of ESS 2 is appropriate or whether or not the Borrower should just require measures to be implemented
                      to ascertain that such labor would be provided on a voluntary basis as an outcome of individual or community
                      agreement (as provided on ESS 2, paragraph 34). The project will involve physical works with most expected to take
                      place only in rural areas. Due to the nature of the activities, these works may pose a (low and manageable) safety risk
                      to workers. During project preparation, the Borrower would prepare Labor Management Procedures (LMP) that will
                      include considerations, among other risks, on child labor in family farms, as there may be occasions where children
                      may help their parents in carrying out activities related to the Project supported activities, as part of broader family
                      task sharing. The LMP would also assess the potential risks faced by different groups of workers, including gender
                      discrimination, GBV, and propose occupational health and safety measures. The LMP would state that the Borrower
                      would make reasonable efforts to ascertain that the employers of contracted workers and primary supply workers are
                      legitimate and reliable entities and have in place labor management procedures applicable to the project that will
                      allow them to operate in accordance with the requirements of ESS 2. The ESMF would identify potential risks of child
                      labor, forced labor and serious safety issues that may arise in relation to primary suppliers and the LMP would set out
                      roles, responsibilities, and measures to remedy these risks. The LMP would state the need to establish a standalone
                      grievance redressing mechanism to raise workplace concerns and would define the features of this mechanism in line
                      with the requirements of ESS 2. The workers grievance mechanism may utilize existing grievance mechanisms –



Public Disclosure
                      providing that they are properly designed and implemented, address concerns promptly, and are readily accessible to
                      such project workers - and would be put in place within 30 days of Project effectiveness and operated thereafter. The
                      GRM would be accessible to direct and contracted workers. The LMP would also include measures to prevent SEA/SH
                      in the workplaces and in the relationships between project workers and beneficiary community populations. Finally,
                      the LMP would address potential risks related with labor influx and propose a code of conduct to which all project
                      workers will abide in their relationships with the beneficiary community populations. To ensure the health and safety
                      of workers during project implementation, all construction contractors will be required to complete and implement a
                      C-ESMP, in line with ESS2 and LMP, including an OHS Incident Prevention Plan (OHSPP, or PPRA in Portuguese). This
                      plan must follow the requirements from the OHS Regulatory Standards from Ministry of Labor (known as NRs),
                      including the NR18 for civil works, which are consistent with the WBG’s EHS Guidelines and Good International
                      Industry Practice (GIIP). The OHSPP must include work procedures and requirements for hazard identification and
                      control (applying the hierarchy of controls), allocation of OHS responsibilities and accountability, Hazardous works
                      procedures (i.e. excavations, working at heights, Lifting and howling, entering in confined spaces, etc.), workplace
                      inspections and disciplinary policy, construction traffic safety, the use of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE),
                      Monitoring of OHS performance, planning of training activities, investigation/reporting of accidents, and also include
                      measures for prevention, infection control and case management of infectious diseases. A draft LMP will be prepared
                      prior to board approval and the final version LMP will be disclosed by 30 days after Project Effectiveness.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                              Relevant

                      This standard is relevant. The construction of water supply system and Agriculture processing facilities may result to:
                      (i) the generation and disposal of construction wastes; (ii) air emissions from construction combustion sources

                    Oct 02, 2023                                                                                                     Page 8 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project - Phase 2 (P180429)



                      (machines and backup power generators); (iii) noise and fugitive dust emissions; (iv) environmental contamination
                      risks from the use and storage of fuels and lubricants for the construction machines and power generators; Likewise,
                      the operation of food processing facilities and water supply systems, potential key environmental impacts are (i)
                      process wastewater discharges to surface water streams, air emissions from boilers, generation and disposal of
                      process solid wastes, including wastes from water treatment facilities. Finally, farming activities under component 1
                      can potentially result in soil erosion and surface water streams contamination from runoff sediments, environmental
                      contamination with pesticides and empty pesticides containers, and air emissions from land clearing fires etc. The
                      ESMF should assess the potential risks related with the use of pesticides and should include screening procedures to
                      identify any adverse risks, as well as measures to promote careful management and use of agricultural chemicals in all
                      situations where appropriate under the project. It would also define the set of criteria that would apply to the
                      selection and use of pesticides in line with the requirements of ESS3 requirements. The project is not expected to
                      involve significant pest management issues and, consequently, the Borrower would not be required to prepare a
                      standalone Pest Management Plan. GHG emissions, some subprojects may have single source emissions of GHG gases
                      (a.e. boilers) that could potentially meet the ESS3 requirements to estimate gross GHG emissions from these sources,
                      therefore the ESMF should include a screening process to identify these subprojects and a GHG estimation method
                      and requirements for reporting to the Bank. Given that subprojects are not expected to be known before appraisal,
                      recordable GHG emissions (if any) will be reported during project implementation.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                           Relevant

                      This Standard is Relevant – Whilst the impacts from civil works under component 1 are expected to be small, and
                      therefore only minor nuisance to nearby communities are foreseen, if any, the construction works under component



Public Disclosure
                      2, can potentially be hazardous to the nearby community, including open excavations for water distribution lines, the
                      traffic of construction machinery, and nuisances from noise and dust emissions, disruption to access to ecosystem
                      services, and its associated risks including GBV, spread of infectious diseases, etc. However, labor influx is not
                      expected, for this type of minor construction activities, local labor will be used. As mentioned above, the Borrower
                      must complete an ESMF identifying the risks and impacts from each individual components, and related mitigation
                      and control measures, which must include the E&S specifications for contractors’ Environmental and Social
                      Management Plan, or other form of requirements for contractors, which will include protocols for prevention of
                      SEA/SH. Component 2 includes water supply systems, which could be a hazard for the communities if the water is not
                      suitable for human consumption. Therefore, water must be tested and treated to meet potable water standards in
                      accordance with local regulatory framework. The ESMF should describe the process, procedures and methodologies to
                      test, treat and monitor the supply of drinking water quality under this component. Dam Safety: Project activities
                      would neither support the design and construction of new dams. Although under component 2 water is expected to
                      be supplied mostly by tubular wells, but under some circumstances where there is no availability of underground
                      water resources nearby the community, it is possible that the water will be supplied from existing water reservoirs,
                      which may fall under bank’s classification of “large Dams”. Under these circumstances, the borrower must hire an
                      independent panel of experts to evaluate the safety status of the existing dams, its appurtenances, and its
                      performance history; (b) review and evaluate the owner’s operation and maintenance procedures; and (c) provide a
                      written report of findings and recommendations for any remedial work or safety related measures necessary to
                      upgrade the existing dam to an acceptable standard of safety.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                               Relevant



                    Oct 02, 2023                                                                                                   Page 9 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project - Phase 2 (P180429)



                      This Standard is relevant. No civil works or activities under the project are expected to have impacts that result in
                      involuntary resettlement or on livelihoods. However, based on the experience of the previous project, with similar
                      activities, Component 2 interventions may be required land acquisition (small scale) or land use restrictions (in water
                      catchment areas). Under Component 1 interventions, investments are likely to be built on land owned by the family
                      farmers associations benefiting from the subprojects. The ownership situation of the areas is part of the socio-
                      environmental screening conducted in the subprojects and it will be detailed in the ESMF, which will vet activities
                      involving involuntary resettlement as not eligible for Project support under component 1. Whenever necessary, land
                      acquisitions will be of unoccupied areas, preferably non-productive, or land that either belongs to the local
                      government or are voluntary community donations. For the latter, dsubject to prior Bank approval, this may be
                      acceptable providing the Borrower demonstrates that: (a) the potential donor or donors have been appropriately
                      informed and consulted about the project and the choices available to them; (b) potential donors are aware that
                      refusal is an option, and have confirmed in writing their willingness to proceed with the donation; (c) the amount of
                      land being donated is minor and will not reduce the donor’s remaining land area below that required to maintain the
                      donor’s livelihood at current levels; (d) no household relocation is involved; (e) the donor is expected to benefit
                      directly from the project; and (f) for community or collective land, donation can only occur with the consent of
                      individuals using or occupying the land. The Borrower will maintain a transparent record of all consultations and
                      agreements reached, aligning with the requirement’s ESS5 (footnote 10)Under Component 3, for the technical
                      assistance activities no impacts related to involuntary resettlement or acquisition of areas are expected. Based on the
                      borrower's previous experience with the Bank's operational standards for involuntary resettlement and the small
                      possible impact scale of land acquisition needed for Component 2 works, the requirements for preparing RAPs (if
                      needed) will be described in the Resettlement Framework – RF. After the proposed sites are identified and based on




Public Disclosure
                      the screening and selection criteria of communities to be served by the project, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) or
                      an abbreviated version of it will be prepared (if necessary) for those communities where land acquisition is required.
                      Site-specific RAPs will address issues of inclusion, social vulnerability, GBV, consultation and communication strategy
                      (developed in the SEP), and any other issues identified through the ESMF and stakeholder consultations. Site-specific
                      RAPs should be prepared and implemented prior to the execution of works in communities where land acquisition is
                      required, following the requirements of this Standard. As part of Project preparation, the Borrower will prepare and
                      disclosed prior to Appraisal, a Draft Resettlement Framework (RF) following the requirements of this Standard. The
                      final version of the RF to be issued and disclosed within 60 days after Effectiveness.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                   Relevant
                      Resources

                      This standard is relevant. Small scale farming can potentially result in diffuse impacts to biodiversity and habitat loss
                      from land conversion to farming production. Likewise, construction works for water supply systems may potentially
                      result in the small land clearings, or habitat fragmentation for the water piping, or potential, although unlikely,
                      negative impacts to aquatic biodiversity from water reservoirs . Whereas the ESMF have not been completed, and
                      control measures are yet unknown, the team expects that it will include procedures and criteria to assess, avoid,
                      mitigate, or compensate for degradation or loss of habitats or impacts to the biodiversity that they support. Whilst the
                      ESMF has not been completed and there is very limited information at this stage, we believe that the avoidance of
                      impacts should be the primary strategy going forward, and the ESMF should include the exclusion of any farming
                      activities that could result to loss of habitats or any form of impacts to critical Habitats. Should the project include
                      support to traditional communities inside protected areas, it should be restricted to already converted and


                    Oct 02, 2023                                                                                                    Page 10 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project - Phase 2 (P180429)



                      consolidated lands, in accordance with the requirements from protected area’s management plans and ESS6
                      requirements. More detailed information will be provided at appraisal stage.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                                Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      This standard is relevant. The Project is not expected to have any adverse impact on Indigenous Peoples. On the
                      contrary, it aims to contribute to promote sustainable development interventions that would benefit Indigenous
                      Peoples in a manner that respects their aspirations, unique cultural identities, traditional knowledge and natural
                      resource-based livelihoods and is culturally appropriate and inclusive. Indigenous peoples are a priority target of this
                      project (especially under Subcomponent 1.3) as they are overrepresented among the poor rural population of the
                      state of Bahia. According to FUNAI (the Brazilian Agency of Indigenous Affairs) there are 16 Indigenous Peoples in the
                      state of Bahia (Arikosé, Atikum, Botocudo, Kaimbé, Kantaruré, Kariri, Kiriri, Kiriri-Barra, Pankararé, Pankararú, Pataxó,
                      Pataxó Hã-Hã-Hãe, Tupinambá, Tuxá e XucuruKariri). They count for 16,817 people, living in 31 indigenous lands,
                      which comprise 113 local communities. Nearly 56 percent of them live with monthly per capita income up to ¼ of the
                      Brazilian minimum wage and 80% earn up to ½ of the minimum wage. Poor soils in drought prone areas and low
                      technology productive practices compromise their livelihood. Perennial water shortage reduces quality of life in
                      indigenous villages at the North Northwest portions of the state and land conflicts prevail in some areas at the
                      southern coastal region. As the exact type, nature and location of subprojects to be financed would not be known
                      prior to project appraisal, an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) has been prepared by the client in
                      compliance with the ESS7, its principles and guidelines, including circumstances where FPIC is required,, before
                      Appraisal (draft version) and final IPPF within 30 days of project effectiveness The IPPF draws on lessons from previous



Public Disclosure
                      operations implemented by CAR, which have set participatory processes of consultation and planning and have
                      benefited indigenous communities (3,337 families from 23 indigenous lands). Given the ondemand nature of the
                      Project, the IPPF will clarifies the processes to carry-out free, prior and informed consultation with potential
                      beneficiaries and ensure broad community support for subprojects to be supported by their communities.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                          Relevant

                      Project activities may include minor impacts, for example excavations, especially those under Component 2 water
                      supply. Based on the information available so far, the Project's activities are not located in, or in the vicinity of, known
                      cultural heritage sites. However, the Project would support interventions within Indigenous Lands, “quilombola” and
                      traditional communities and the Borrower will propose a methodology to identify – through research and consultation
                      with these project-beneficiary groups – natural features with cultural heritage significance that might be located in the
                      areas of intervention, the people who value such features and the ones with authority to represent and negotiate
                      regarding the location, protection and use of the cultural heritage. The need (or not) to define a chance finds
                      procedure to be followed, if previously unknown cultural heritage is encountered during project activities, will be
                      assessed during preparation. If needed, a chance finds procedure will be included within the ESMF and included as a
                      contract requirement once subprojects are identified. As assessed so far, the Project does not intend to promote the
                      commercial use of cultural heritage. Nevertheless, some possible activities to be supported in Component 1 may
                      involve community-based tourism to indigenous and “quilombola” territories and sale of cultural crafts. Such heritage
                      will be identified through community consultations as part of the SEP and IPP preparation and if needed the necessary
                      measures will be incorporated during the preparation phase, following the requirements of this Standard. The



                    Oct 02, 2023                                                                                                       Page 11 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project - Phase 2 (P180429)



                      requirements for assessment and measures to be taken regarding the impact on intangible cultural heritage will form
                      part of the SEP, IPPF and the ESMF and will also guide the development of action plans at the community level.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                               Not Currently Relevant

                      This standard is not currently relevant



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                        No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                 No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework
                       The use of Borrower Framework is not being considered at this stage. To be confirmed later during project
                       preparation


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                               No
                       None



Public Disclosure
                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                     Task Team Leader:       Eirivelthon Santos Lima                Title:         Senior Agriculture Economist

                     Email:                  elima@worldbank.org

                     TTL Contact:            Luis Alfonso Alvestegui Justiniano     Job Title:     Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                   Specialist

                     Email:                  aalvestegui@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT


                    Oct 02, 2023                                                                                                   Page 12 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project - Phase 2 (P180429)



                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                   Eirivelthon Santos Lima, Luis Alfonso Alvestegui Justiniano

                     Practice Manager (ENR/Social)          Genevieve Connors Recommended on 21-Jul-2023 at 13:41:4 EDT

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:          Eric Shayer

                     ADM Social Specialist:                 Juliana Medeiros Paiva




Public Disclosure




                    Oct 02, 2023                                                                                          Page 13 of 13
