Public Disclosure Authorized
                               The World Bank
                               Cameroon Second Fiscal Sustainability, Inclusive and Sustainable Growth Development Policy Financing
                               (P180017)




Public Disclosure Authorized



                                                 Program Information Document
                                                              (PID)


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 12-Apr-2023| Report No: PIDC35619




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                                      Page 1 of 7
      The World Bank
      Cameroon Second Fiscal Sustainability, Inclusive and Sustainable Growth Development Policy Financing
      (P180017)


 BASIC INFORMATION


 A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE

 Country                        Project ID                    Project Name                    Parent Project ID (if any)
 Cameroon                       P180017                       Cameroon Second Fiscal          P175249
                                                              Sustainability, Inclusive and
                                                              Sustainable Growth
                                                              Development Policy
                                                              Financing (P180017)
 Region                         Estimated Board Date          Practice Area (Lead)            Financing Instrument
 WESTERN AND CENTRAL            Nov 30, 2023                  Macroeconomics, Trade           Development Policy
 AFRICA                                                       and Investment                  Financing
 Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
 Republic of Cameroon           Republic of Cameroon



 Proposed Development Objective(s)

  The development objective is to (i) improve fiscal sustainability, governance, and public sector management; (ii)
  strengthen human capital and women’s economic empowerment; and (iii) lay the foundations for sustainable
  infrastructure development.

 Financing (in US$, Millions)
  FIN_SUMM_PUB_TBL
 SUMMARY

  Total Financing                                                                                              100.00

 DETAILS   -NewFin3




 Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                               100.00
    World Bank Lending                                                                                          100.00


 Decision
  The review did authorize the preparation to continue


 B. Introduction and Context

Country Context

1. Poverty has remained high, largely due to insufficient economic growth. More than one in four Cameroonians lives



                                                                                                              Page 2 of 7
         The World Bank
         Cameroon Second Fiscal Sustainability, Inclusive and Sustainable Growth Development Policy Financing
         (P180017)


      on less than US$2.15 a day (2017 PPP).1 Between 2014 and 2018, it is estimated that poverty slightly declined, driven
      by a modest growth record. This reduction was mainly in rural areas, while poverty increased in urban areas. However,
      poverty remains mostly a rural phenomenon, as about one in two people living in rural areas is poor. Rural areas,
      especially in conflict-affected regions, continue to experience deprivation in access to basic infrastructure and
      essential social services. The persistent poverty in rural areas also negatively affects the well-being of vulnerable
      groups, particularly children. The child mortality rate is significantly higher in rural areas at 92 per 1,000 births
      compared to 65 per 1,000 in urban areas, and the child stunting rate is 36 percent, compared to 20 percent in urban
      areas. Despite a slight decline in the poverty rate over the last decade, the absolute number of poor people has
      increased consistently as the population has grown almost as fast as the economy. To make significant dent against
      poverty, Cameroon needs to boost its growth potential by implementing structural reforms to strengthen productivity
      and accelerate private sector-led economic diversification (Systematic County Diagnostic, SCD Update, 2022).
2. Low human capital development limits Cameroon's potential for inclusive growth. While it is a lower middle-income
   country (LMIC), Cameroon's health and education outcomes are closer to the average of low-income countries and
   are marked by large regional and rural-urban disparities. The country has a Human Capital Index (HCI) of 0.4 percent,
   lower than the average of SSA and LMICs. A child born in Cameroon today will grow up to be, at best, 40 percent as
   productive as he or she could be if he/she enjoyed complete education and full health. Similarly, 92 out of 100 children
   born in Cameroon survive to age 5, compared to 96 out of 100 across LMICs. Cameroonian children who start school
   at age 4 are expected to complete only 8.7 (adjusted) years of school by their 18th birthday compared to 10.4 years
   across LMIC. Cameroonian children who start school at age 4 are expected to complete only 8.7 (adjusted) years of
   school by their 18th birthday compared to 10.4 years across LMICs. Meanwhile, large gender gaps remain with
   unemployment rates for men and women is high (13.7 percent for men compared to 30.6 percent for women in
   2014).2 Similarly, informal employment rates were ten percentage points higher for women (88.0 percent) than for
   men (78.1 percent) in 2016. Laws have yet to be passed, upholding the rights of women to work in the same sectors
   as men.
3. Cameroon remains highly vulnerable to the impact of climate change, threatening the economy's prospects of
   sustained growth and the livelihoods of millions of people who depend on the land. The 2022 Climate Change and
   Development Report (CCDR) identifies four main sectors of the economy as highly vulnerable to the effects of climate
   change: agro-forestry, transport, energy, and urban development. Coastal areas are vulnerable to floods and rising
   sea levels, while northern regions risk increased drought and floods. The country's southwest region contains coastal
   and rainforest areas characterized by hot and humid conditions. Over the past years, higher temperatures, and
   prolonged drought in the conflict-affected regions of northern Cameroon have further driven local populations to
   migrate into neighboring countries or further south in search of water and arable land. Additionally, climate variability
   has affected crop yields and threatened food security. Road transport, the backbone of Cameroon's primary and
   secondary sectors, accounting for 85 percent of national transport, is highly exposed to climate risks.

    Relationship to CPF

4. The proposed operation is aligned with the WBG strategic priorities, the 2022 SCD Update, the ongoing Country
   Partnership Framework (CPF) 2023–2027, the Global Crisis Response Framework3 (GCRF) and the country PRA. The

1  Source: Macro and Poverty Outlook, March 2023. There are delays in conducting core statistical operations such as the Population and Housing
Census and the Cameroon Household Survey (Enquête Camerounaise Auprès des Ménages, ECAM) household survey. Consequently, the narrative on
poverty is based on micro-macro simulations as opposed to observed microdata. The country is currently finalizing data collection of the 5th ECAM
survey with support from the World Bank.
2 ECAM (Living Standards Measurement Study, LSMS) 2014 calculations (indicator n jobs = 0). Latest ECAM was completed in 2014.
3 Report Number 174677



                                                                                                                                       Page 3 of 7
       The World Bank
       Cameroon Second Fiscal Sustainability, Inclusive and Sustainable Growth Development Policy Financing
       (P180017)


    proposed DPF contributes to the three pathways of the SCD update, including (i) strengthening the Private Sector
    through sounder fiscal policy and improved infrastructure; (ii) reducing Fragility and Strengthening Governance by
    setting frameworks for effective (decentralized) regions, improved public expenditure management and service
    delivery; and (iii) Protecting and Investing in People by Improving human capital through better water and sanitation,
    basic education, and productive safety nets and greater women empowerment. The DPF is also aligned with GCRF.
    PAs 2, 3, and 4 align with Pillar 3 of the GCRF as they will enhance the country's capacity to better manage macro-
    fiscal and debt vulnerabilities by improving revenue mobilization and SOE oversight and strengthening cash
    management. Similarly, PA 7 also aligns with Pillar 3 as it will contribute to upgrading social protection systems to
    respond rapidly to future shocks. PAs 1, 8 and 9 align with Pillar 4 through the sustainable agricultural system and the
    promotion of climate-smart investments. While PAs 5 and 6 align with Pillar 2 as they will contribute to protecting
    people through improved equal access to services while rebuilding better the education sector.

 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

 The development objective is to (i) improve fiscal sustainability, governance, and public sector management; (ii)
 strengthen human capital and women’s economic empowerment; and (iii) lay the foundations for sustainable
 infrastructure development.

Key Results

5. The key results for this operation are to promote inclusive and robust growth in Cameroon while strengthening
   the country's resilience to climate change. The proposed operation includes 10 prior actions grounded in in-depth
   analyses of the challenges related to three pillars. The first pillar includes five prior actions aiming to improving
   public sector management. This will be achieved through a combination of measures focused on i) accelerating the
   ongoing decentralization process with a focus on transparent and equitable fiscal arrangements; (ii) strengthening
   the governance and accountability of SOEs; (iii) improving revenue mobilization; and (iv) improving Treasury
   management and public sector efficiency. Pillar 2 includes four actions that will promote socio-economic inclusion,
   access to education, better identification, and improved mechanisms for households’ mitigation to shocks. Pillar 3
   includes two prior actions that will help Cameroon to lay out the foundation of sustainable (i) road infrastructure
   and (ii) water resource management.

 D. Concept Description

6. The proposed operation aims to support to support the Government of Cameroon’s efforts to promote inclusive
   and robust growth by (i) improving fiscal sustainability, governance, and public sector management (ii)
   strengthening Human Capital and women economic empowerment, and (iii) laying the foundations for
   sustainable infrastructure development. This operation, the second in a programmatic series of three DPFs planned
   for 2022-2024, is closely aligned with the country’s economic recovery efforts and the medium-term structural
   reforms that lay the foundations for its aspiration to become an upper middle-income country (UMIC) by 2035. As
   the National Development Strategy (Stratégie Nationale de Développement, SND) for the period until 2030 (SND30)
   recognizes, these goals require accelerating structural transformation, strengthening fiscal management, reducing
   disparities, especially gender and regional disparities, and improving resilience to climate change. The operation is
   also closely aligned with the World Bank’s Global Crisis Response Framework (GCRF). To support the Government's
   reforms, the series is organized around three pillars.



                                                                                                                   Page 4 of 7
       The World Bank
       Cameroon Second Fiscal Sustainability, Inclusive and Sustainable Growth Development Policy Financing
       (P180017)


7. Policy areas supported under pillar 1 will be achieved through a combination of measures focusing on: (i)
   accelerating the ongoing decentralization process with a focus on transparent and equitable fiscal arrangements;
   (ii) strengthening the governance and accountability of SOEs; (iii) improving revenue mobilization; and (iv) improving
   Treasury management and public sector efficiency. Reforms under pillar one will also contribute to rebuild trust
   between citizens and the state to create a new social contract through strengthening institutions and accountability
   and a more effective balance between the decentralized and the central administration.

8. Policy areas supported under pillar 2 focus on promoting inclusion, access to education, and better mechanism for
   households’ mitigation to shocks. These are critical reforms for long term economic growth and improved social
   cohesion. Improving efficiency and transparency of resource allocation and funds flow within the education sector
   and strengthening management and planning, including a focus on the teachers’ reforms throughout the education
   cycle, have been identified as short-term priority reforms to boost learning outcomes and sustained growth (World
   Bank/IMF joint paper, 2021). At the same time, building inclusive and shock-responsive delivery systems to facilitate
   identification, registration, and provision of services (universal Health coverage, social registry) will help households
   manage shocks and invest in their human capital. Empowering girls and women through an enabling environment by
   repealing discriminatory laws or restrictive provisions will promote inclusive development. Lastly better identification
   would improve access to services to all, especially women and other vulnerable groups. Modernizing the Civil
   Registration and Identity ecosystems will therefore allow more inclusive access to public and private services across
   all sectors.

9. Pillar 3 includes two prior actions that will help Cameroon to lay out the foundation of sustainable infrastructure in
   line with the CCDR's recommendations and existing analytical works. Adapting road transport to climate change,
   including improved maintenance, is essential to ensure sustainable socio-economic development in Cameroon. At the
   same time, integrated Water Resources will promote a systematic process for the sustainable development,
   allocation, and monitoring of water resources among sectors. Investments in water management systems are
   adaptation measures that would provide the necessary means to target sustainable agricultural intensification and
   the resilience of agricultural production systems (CCDR, 2022). The proposed actions under pillar 3 align with the Paris
   Agreement’s adaptation and resilience goals as the reforms will strengthen the country’s resilience to climate effects,
   particularly transport and water sectors. Improving road maintenance will contribute to reducing hydrocarbon
   consumption contributes to reducing greenhouse gases. Sustainable water management will help Cameroon adapt to
   climate change by protecting ecosystems. The Cameroon NDC indicated that the agricultural sector remains
   Cameroon's most important source of GHG emissions, representing 69 percent of total emissions. While water
   management is essential to adapt to climate change by addressing increasing water stress for agriculture and
   industry), water management measures directly affect energy savings, which can lead to reduced greenhouse gas
   emissions (GHGs)

 E. Poverty and Social Impacts, and Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects

Poverty and Social Impacts

10. Reforms supported by this Operation are expected to have positive social impacts and contribute to poverty
    reduction by creating fiscal space, strengthening institutions, promoting equitable access to education, and
    boosting women's economic participation, building an effective social protection system; and supporting
    sustainable road and water infrastructures. As designed, the proposed reforms will have a mix of direct and indirect
    effects on poverty reduction. By supporting the operationalization of ongoing decentralization efforts via the


                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 7
         The World Bank
         Cameroon Second Fiscal Sustainability, Inclusive and Sustainable Growth Development Policy Financing
         (P180017)


      clarification of competencies transferred from the central Government to regions, the proposed reform will allow
      an increase of financial resources allocated to local governments, which is expected to result in better service
      delivery at the local level. Recent research by Chuling Chen and Jon Jellema (2018)4 shows that Cameroon's fiscal
      system is not doing enough to reduce poverty and inequality. The proposed actions, including the optimization of
      the tax regime and the increased efficiency of spending in social sectors, will improve the impact of fiscal policies
      on poverty and inequality. Introducing equalization criteria in formula-based budgetary transfers to local authorities
      will improve the targeting of poor areas and ensure that resources are allocated where they are most needed.
      Reforms aiming at reducing gender gaps in education and labor force participation will have a long-lasting effect on
      livelihood, especially for poor households where issues of gender gaps are more pronounced. Access to
      identification (ID) and civil registration (CR) will improve access to public services required, particularly for the poor
      and marginalized groups. Quality roads and access to water for production are critical in boosting economic
      activities, especially for poor households who rely primarily on agriculture for livelihood. Enhanced irrigation will
      increase productivity, while the quality road will boost market accessibility, resulting in higher income.

 Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects

11. Measures supported by the proposed operation are expected to have positive or neutral environmental effects.
    Cameroon is highly exposed to climate and disaster risks including rising temperatures, propensity for droughts,
    rising sea levels along the coast, and severe flooding during the rainy season as well as geophysical hazards
    (landslides), and the authorities are working toward enhancing the country’s resilience. A climate and disaster risk
    screening for the DPF has been completed. Prior Actions 9 and 10 are expected to have a positive direct impact on
    the environment through improved water resources management and the promotion of smart and resilient
    agriculture practices. These prior actions as well as Prior Action 8 are expected to strengthen the resilience of the
    agriculture and transport sectors to climatic hazards while also contributing to reducing greenhouse gas emission.
    Prior Action 1 is also likely to contribute positively to the protection of the environment, as is the transfer of the
    power from the central Government to the Decentralized Territorial Collectivities (CTD), the modalities of execution
    of these functions, and the provision of financial and qualified human resources. As about 40 percent of women are
    involved in agriculture, increasing women's access to education and the labor market (Prior Action 7) is expected to
    increase innovation in sustainable farming practices and resilience to natural disasters.
.
    CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
    Amina Coulibaly, Abdoul Ganiou Mijiyawa
    Senior Economist


 Borrower/Client/Recipient
    Republic of Cameroon
    Alamine Ousmane Mey
    Minister of Economy, Planning and Regional Development
    cabinet_minepat@yahoo.com

4 https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/journals/002/2018/256/article-A002-en.xml?rskey=vT5ci3&result=66



                                                                                                                         Page 6 of 7
     The World Bank
     Cameroon Second Fiscal Sustainability, Inclusive and Sustainable Growth Development Policy Financing
     (P180017)



Implementing Agencies

Republic of Cameroon
Cyrille Edou
Director General of Budget
cyrill.edoualoo@yahoo.com


FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects



 APPROVAL

Task Team Leader(s):                     Amina Coulibaly, Abdoul Ganiou Mijiyawa

Approved By
APPROVALTBL
Country Director:                       Elisabeth Huybens                      02-May-2023




                                                                                                            Page 7 of 7
