Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Cameroon water security and supply project (P180321)




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                         Project Information Document (PID)



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                        Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 12-Apr-2023 | Report No: PIDC35679




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Apr 12, 2023                                                                                         Page 1 of 10
         The World Bank
         Cameroon water security and supply project (P180321)


  BASIC INFORMATION


  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE

  Country                                        Project ID                     Parent Project ID (if any)   Project Name
  Cameroon                                       P180321                                                     Cameroon water
                                                                                                             security and supply
                                                                                                             project (P180321)
  Region                                         Estimated Appraisal Date       Estimated Board Date         Practice Area (Lead)
  WESTERN AND CENTRAL                            Nov 12, 2024                   Jul 16, 2024                 Water
  AFRICA
  Financing Instrument                           Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
  Investment Project Financing                   MINEPAT (ministère de          MINEE (ministère de
                                                 l'économie, de la              l'énergie et de l'eau)
                                                 planification et de
                                                 l'aménagement du territoire)

   Proposed Development Objective(s)

    Improve access to WASH services and contribute to water security by promoting integrated water resources
    management in targeted rural and peri-urban areas.

    PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

   SUMMARY-NewFin1

    Total Project Cost                                                                                                       200.00
    Total Financing                                                                                                          200.00

                             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                               200.00
    Financing Gap                                                                                                               0.00

   DETAILS     -NewFinEnh1




    World Bank Group Financing

       International Development Association (IDA)                                                                           200.00

          IDA Credit                                                                                                         200.00




  Environmental and Social Risk Classification                                  Concept Review Decision


Apr 12, 2023                                                                                                               Page 2 of 10
            The World Bank
            Cameroon water security and supply project (P180321)


     High                                                           Track II-The review did not authorize the preparation
                                                                    to continue



     Other Decision (as needed)



     B. Introduction and Context

     Country Context

 1. Cameroon is a lower-middle-income country with per capita income in 2017 between the thresholds of $1,006 to
 $3,955. The average annual growth during the period 2003-2017 was 5.2%1. Prior to the pandemic, Cameroon's growth
 had been slow, with real GDP growth averaging 2.5% between 2019 and 2021 and GDP per capita growth below zero. The
 COVID-19 pandemic hit the economy hard, slowing Cameroon’s GDP growth from 3.7 percent in 2019 to 0.5 percent in
 2020, driven by a significant contraction of activity in export-oriented sectors as well as sectors affected by containment
 measures such as travel and hospitality. After rebounding to 3.6 percent in 2021, the Cameroonian economy’s growth
 momentum slowed in 2022, as real GDP grew at 3.4 percent, driven by strong commodity exports, agro-forestry
 production, construction, and demand for services.2

 2. Poverty remains highly concentrated in rural areas with regional disparities. Nearly 56.8% of the rural population lives
 below the national poverty line, more than five times that in urban areas (9.0%). The urban/rural divide is significant, with
 a regional distribution of the poverty rate indicating that the Far North (74.3%), North (67.9%), North-West (55.3%) and
 Adamaoua (47.1%) regions are the poorest.3

 3. Insecurity in the country is marked by two main crises: (i) abuses by the terrorist group Boko Haram in the Far North
 and (ii) internal crises following socio-political problems in the North-West and South-West regions. In general, nine out
 of ten regions are impacted by the effects of the security crises due to the prolongation of violence in the Lake Chad basin
 and the North-West and South-West regions, as well as the presence of more than 325,000 refugees from the Central
 African Republic (CAR) in the East, Adamaoua and North regions. More than one million people are internally displaced
 across Cameroon, mainly from the Far North, North-West and South-West regions.4

 4. Cameroon’s economy and its population are highly susceptible to climate variability, climate change, and extreme
 events, all of which threaten its ability to develop as an emerging country. Between 1990 and 2014, the Cameroonian
 Emergency Events Database recorded that floods accounted for 77% of all natural hazards (followed by drought and
 landslides). In 2012, Cameroon was hit by its worst flood in 60 years, which resulted in more than 3,000 people being
 hospitalized and more than 60,000 displaced; public services were disrupted throughout the affected north and far-
 northern regions of Cameroon, with extensive damage to property and infrastructure. Rainfall is deficient in the northern
 target area (in average 500 mm) and is abundant in the southern area (around 1550 mm annual rainfall). Land degradation


 1 Politique Nationale de l’Eau, MINEE, 2019
 2
     Global Water Partnership, country brief, 2021
 3 MINEPAT, SND 30, 2020
 4 MINEPAT, SND 30, 2020



Apr 12, 2023                                                                                                        Page 3 of 10
          The World Bank
          Cameroon water security and supply project (P180321)


 and pronounced deforestation increase the erosive potential of watercourses and consequently floodings. Nearly 2 million
 people in Cameroon live in drought-affected areas.5

 5. Cameroon's vision for an inclusive response to the impacts of climate change is summed up in the slogan: "transforming
 climate constraints into development opportunities". To reverse the negative effects of climate change and meet the
 commitments made in its updated National Determined Contribution (NDC, 2021), the Government has dedicated one of
 the overall objectives of the National Development Strategy 2030 (NDS30) to the fight against climate change: "Strengthen
 climate change mitigation and adaptation measures and environmental management to ensure sustainable and inclusive
 economic growth and social development".6 As long as the resilience of the country's Sudano-Sahelian regions (Far North,
 Northern and Adamaoua Regions) and to a lesser extent that of the Western and North-Western regions, is not
 significantly improved, the state's own resources needed to address the challenges of climate change will not be able to
 meet the challenges at hand.6



     Sectoral and Institutional Context

 6. Cameroon relies in majority on transboundary surface water, which is unevenly distributed geographically. The
 distribution of rains is quite heterogeneous and increases from the north to the south of the country. Cameroon is drained
 by five major hydrographic units (Lake Chad, Niger, Sanaga, Congo and Coastal Rivers). Apart from the Sanaga Basin, the
 four other basins are transboundary, thus implying a concerted management of resources with the riparian countries
 sharing the respective basins. Renewable surface water resources represent 79% of total resources and are estimated at
 265.88 km3 per year, unequally distributed in the watersheds: Lake Chad (12.23%), Congo (12.58%), Niger (16.51%),
 Sanaga (23.02%) and Coastal Rivers (35.66%). Surface water resources decrease from the South to the North of the
 country. Regarding groundwater resources, they are estimated at 55.98 km3 or 17% of total water resources. Their
 distribution in the main hydrogeological formations is as follows: Lake Chad sedimentary basin (5.72%), Benue
 sedimentary basin (28.14%), Coastal Region sedimentary basin (38.63%) and base (27.51%).7

 7. Water insecurity is becoming a growing matter of concern due to the lack of integrated water resources management
 (IWRM), the high population growth and the important increase of water demand in the different sectors. In Cameroon,
 an IWRM framework exists since 2009 but has not yet been operationalized. There is no mechanism or assigned authority
 for allocating water resources according to the different types of use (agriculture, hydroelectricity, domestic, livestock,
 industrial, environment, etc.). Although the country has globally abundant water resources (water needs in 2009
 represented only 4 percent of available resources), the continuous satisfaction of the various water needs requires
 integrated and efficient management, to address the challenges associated with climate change negatively impacting
 water resources and increased water needs. Between 2009 and 2021, water needs assessments have shown a drastic
 increase in total water needs (sevenfold, from 11,008.57 million m3 to 73,312.71 million m3), and a change in the most
 water demanding sectors. In 2009, hydroelectric production was thirstiest at close to 89% of total needs, whereas today
 agriculture dominates uses at close to 62% of total needs.

 8. The combined effects of climate change and anthropogenic pressures, particularly in the northern and Far North
 regions, contribute to a reduction in the available water potential, threatening the sustainability of water for different
 uses. The poor conditions of water storage infrastructures increase the risk of flooding and drought. The lack of hydraulic

 5
   MINEE/GWP-Cmr, PANGIRE, 2009
 6
   Global Water Partnership, country brief, 2021
 7 MINEE/GWP-Cmr, PANGIRE, 2009



Apr 12, 2023                                                                                                      Page 4 of 10
         The World Bank
         Cameroon water security and supply project (P180321)


 and hydrological data for forecasting is another risk to water security and resources management even more in rural areas
 where adaptation measures are a must. Waste and open defecation pose a high risk of water contamination and of the
 development of waterborne diseases during the rainy season, as most water infrastructures are wells, boreholes, and
 simple pits. If emission of greenhouse gas (GHG) is not properly addressed, accordingly to most of the models, this will
 contribute to increase the temperature with an hydrological effect on floods and droughts. Although wastes represent
 less than 8% of CO2 emissions, their reduction remains significant in mitigating climate change.8

 9. The expansion of water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) infrastructures and services is linked to adequate investments
 and institutional arrangements. Under the ongoing decentralization process, the government has continued to transfer
 powers to local authorities while reducing its budgetary support for rural sector development. This, coupled with poor
 governance, has created significant disparities between regions and an urban-rural divide in the WASH sector. In 2017,
 the level of access to basic WASH services was estimated at 82% in urban areas against 42% in rural areas for drinking
 water, and 59% against 23% for sanitation services.9 In addition, the Covid-19 pandemic has highlighted the weaknesses
 of water services in rural areas and in small towns. While the targets in rural areas by 2030 are 77% for access to drinking
 water and 56% for access to sanitation services; it should be mentioned that from 2000 to 2017, the coverage rate has
 stagnated mainly due to population growth and the slow rate of expansion of WASH facilities. Between 2005 and 2020,
 the national population increased by more than half, while it is envisaged that it will more than double in 2030 compared
 to 2005 numbers.
 In this context an initiative is proposed to contribute to i) improving water security through IWRM, and ii) providing a
 reliable access to resilient drinking water, sanitation, and hygiene services in selected rural and peri-urban areas of
 Cameroon (Figure 1). The proposed project, Cameroon Water Security and Supply or SEWASH project, aims to support
 these two objectives.




 8 MINEPAT, SND 30, 2020
 9 WHO/UNICEF, JMP, 2022




Apr 12, 2023                                                                                                       Page 5 of 10
         The World Bank
         Cameroon water security and supply project (P180321)




  Relationship to CPF

 10. The SEWASH Project is aligned with the Cameroon Country Partnership Framework (CPF 2023-2027) of the World
 Bank, which identified three ways to reduce poverty and achieve shared prosperity: (i) Strengthening the private sector,
 (ii) reducing fragility and strengthening governance, and (iii) protecting and investing in people's livelihoods. The proposed
 project will be implemented in fragile regions of the country and will build the capacity of local entities (including private
 and public institutions), stimulate stakeholder participation, and protect people's lives and property through activities to
 improve/expand water and sanitation services, as well as improve security and storage capacity. The project will support
 the strengthening of the private finance participation via the transfer of some of the delivered WASH infrastructures to
 local Committees for the management of WASH systems, which are private in nature, and which will have the support of
 the Municipalities or even via the transfer to third private administrators with the whole responsibility for operation and
 maintenance of the systems. This will have a positive impact on the health and on improving quality of life of the poorest,
 as well on the sustainability of service.

 11. The project is aligned with the Government’s development vision for the country, which is supported by 4 main
 pillars, namely: (i) the structural transformation of the national economy, (ii) the development of human capital and well-
 being, (iii) the promotion of employment and economic integration, (iv) governance, decentralization, and strategic
 management of the State. The proposed project will be contributing to the second and fourth pillars by ensuring good
 health to people and their participation in the management of water and sanitation facilities. The IWRM will be piloted in
 selected watersheds to improve water security, improve involvement of the local stakeholders for a sustainable water
 management, and improve water governance.




Apr 12, 2023                                                                                                         Page 6 of 10
         The World Bank
         Cameroon water security and supply project (P180321)


 12. The project is aligned with the general objective of Cameroon's National Water Policy (NWP) currently being validated
 at presidential level, which aims to contribute to the country's sustainable development, by providing appropriate
 solutions to water-related problems, considering the effects of climate change, and from a management perspective,
 sustainable use of water resources and associated environmental resources. To achieve this, the NWP has defined 4 major
 axes: (i) Ensuring the right of universal access to water and sanitation by 2030, (ii) Effectively ensuring knowledge and
 monitoring of the country's water resources, (iii) Promote the creation of structuring infrastructure for the economic
 development of water resources, (iv) Promote good governance of the water sector. The adopted decentralization law
 will facilitate the good governance of the water sector by favorizing the delegation of public services including to the
 private sector. It will be a significant push for the involvement of private finance in the water sector.

 13. The proposed project appears consistent with the country’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC; 2021).
 Agriculture, forestry, and others land uses is one of the key sectors identified in the 2021 NDC for interventions towards
 the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions (GHG). The NDC further identifies rapid urbanization and deforestation as key
 drivers of the country’s challenges in the face of climate change. Ensuring the strengthening of and access to water
 resources and sanitation services in the context of climate change is among the key objectives of the adaptation strategy
 outlined in the NDC. The proposed project will promote climate change mitigation by promoting resilient water storage
 and functionality of water retention infrastructure and promoting shared management of the resource, thus reducing the
 erosive potential of watercourses and, in turn, the degradation of land and forest areas. By exploiting the potential of
 nature, especially the sun, to generate energy for pumping water and by promoting the bio digestion of liquid waste, the
 project will reduce GHG emissions. The project has been screened for climate change and disaster impacts and specific
 potential resilience-enhancing measures will be identified and properly reflected in project documents before the
 appraisal. No specific risks with respect to the mitigation and adaptation aspects of the Paris Alignment Assessment are
 flagged at this stage.



  C. Proposed Development Objective(s)


   Improve access to WASH services and contribute to water security by promoting integrated water resources
   management in targeted rural and peri-urban areas.

     14. Key results of the project are:
     • Increased households with access and use of potable water
     • Increased public entities (such as schools, health centers, etc.) with access and use of potable water
     • Improved management of water system
     • Increased households and public entities using safe sanitation facilities
     • Increased application of hygiene practices
     • integrated watershed management plans developed
     • creation of a local water commission for integrated watershed management plans
     • Increased knowledge of water uses at watershed level




Apr 12, 2023                                                                                                     Page 7 of 10
         The World Bank
         Cameroon water security and supply project (P180321)


  D. Concept Description

 15.The issue of water insecurity is increasingly at the forefront of government discussions, combined with a focus on rural
 areas and peri-urban where the access to WASH services is still very low compared to urban areas and SDGs targets. The
 SEWASH Project will serve as an instrument for improving the legal and technical frameworks at the national and local
 level to implement IWRM and will contribute to water security and access to WASH services for the poorest people in
 selected rural and peri-urban areas. To address these challenges the SEWASH project will be articulated along three main
 components.

 16. Component A: Design and Operationalization of a simplified IWRM at watershed level. 20. This component aims to
 define and implement measures contributing to water security and increasing resilience to climate change in the project
 intervention areas. Beyond IWRM, it will support the protection of existing catchments, water, and soil conservation, as
 well as the improvement of storage capacities, the management of water-related risks and the reduction of water-related
 conflicts.

 17. Component B: Development of resilient WASH facilities in rural and small towns. This component aims at identifying
 needs for new WASH infrastructures and/or to rehabilitate existing ones in the five regions identified as the most
 vulnerable (Far North, North, Adamaoua, East and West), with the aim of improving access to WASH services. Whenever
 possible, the project will favor WASH interventions in the watershed targeted for planning in Component A.

 18. Component C: Support to sector development and implementation. This component aims to ensure the sustainability
 of the achievements made further, the ownership of key actors and stakeholders. It will include institutional
 strengthening, stakeholder cooperation and project implementation components and sub-components.




  Legal Operational Policies                                                            Triggered?
  Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                           No
  Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60                                                    No

  Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
  .




Apr 12, 2023                                                                                                      Page 8 of 10
          The World Bank
          Cameroon water security and supply project (P180321)


 .
     CONTACT POINT


     World Bank
     Thierry Davy, Jose Jorge Trevino Paredes
     Senior Water Specialist


     Borrower/Client/Recipient
     MINEPAT (ministère de l'économie, de la planification et de l'aménagement du territoire)
     Guy Ronel Guemaleu
     Sous directeur de la coopération multi-latérale
     gemaleuguy@yahoo.fr

     Implementing Agencies

     MINEE (ministère de l'énergie et de l'eau)
     Justin Madi Vondou
     Directeur de la gestion des ressources en eau
     madivondou@yahoo.fr


     FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
     The World Bank
     1818 H Street, NW
     Washington, D.C. 20433
     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects



     APPROVAL

     Task Team Leader(s):                       Thierry Davy, Jose Jorge Trevino Paredes

     Approved By
     APPROVALTBL
     Country Director:                          Cheick Fantamady Kante                 30-Jun-2023




Apr 12, 2023                                                                                         Page 9 of 10
         The World Bank
         Cameroon water security and supply project (P180321)




Apr 12, 2023                                                    Page 10 of 10
