Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Mexico Biocarbon Emission Reduction Program (P180533)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                          Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                    (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                       Date Prepared/Updated: 02/28/2025 | Report No: ESRSC04796




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Mar 04, 2025                                                                        Page 1 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Mexico Biocarbon Emission Reduction Program (P180533)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                  Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P180533                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)       Mexico BioCarbon ERP         2026

                     Operation Name            Mexico BioCarbon Emission Reduction Program

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries           Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Mexico                    Mexico                                   LATIN AMERICA AND            Environment, Natural
                                                                                        CARIBBEAN                    Resources & the Blue
                                                                                                                     Economy

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                 Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     SEMARNAT                  CONAFOR                                  07-May-2025                  29-Aug-2025


                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost



Public Disclosure
                     Review Date

                     29-Jan-2025               50,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The program will generate measured, reported, and verified Emission Reductions (ER) from the Land Use, Land Use
                     Change, and Forestry (LULUCF) sector in the jurisdiction and will distribute ER payments in accordance with an agreed
                     benefit sharing plan.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The proposed Mexico Emission Reductions Program (Mexico’s ERP) is led by the GoM with the goal of generating
                     verified ISFL ER and distribute ER payments in accordance with an agreed benefit sharing plan. Mexico’s ERP will be
                     implemented across four northern states Chihuahua, Coahuila, Durango, and Nuevo León. The selection of these states
                     is based on their mitigation potential in the forestry and agricultural sectors, as well as their political commitment to
                     integrated landscape management. For the GoM, this program represents an opportunity to scale up various

                    Mar 04, 2025                                                                                                     Page 2 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Mexico Biocarbon Emission Reduction Program (P180533)



                     interventions at the forest-landscape level to better address the main drivers of deforestation and degradation. The
                     Program recognizes that deforestation and forest degradation are complex and multifactorial phenomena, especially
                     considering that in Mexico forests are found in multiple land use landscapes and deforestation is not only determined
                     by direct productive activities but also by underlying causes involving multiple stakeholders. Thus, the program seeks to:
                     (i) strengthen intersectoral collaboration to better align investments in forest landscapes, (ii) reduce greenhouse gas
                     (GHG) emissions from the land sector and improve forest livelihoods through the promotion of activities to conserve
                     and sustainably use and restore forest landscapes, (iii) maintain and enhance Mexico’s capacity to monitor and report
                     GHG emissions. By achieving the Program objectives, the GoM will enhance its capacity to access new sources of climate
                     finance. Mexico’s Emissions Reduction Program will adopt a programmatic approach beginning with interventions in the
                     LULUCF sector and aiming to transitioning a potential second phase to emissions reductions from the AFOLU sector. This
                     ESRS focuses on the first phase. A potential second phase which would be prepared separately will require a stand alone
                     E&S assessment depending on program activities under this second phase. The ERP is designed in two components:
                     Component 1: Emission Reductions payment distributed in accordance with agreed Benefit Sharing Plan (BSP):
                     Subcomponent 1.a.: Payment for ERCs and Subcomponent 1.b.: Distribution of Emission Reductions payments as per an
                     agreed BSP. Component 2: Program’s Operating and Coordination Costs. Activities through this component will better
                     target Program measures, maintain program operation, enhance GHG inventory data, improve interagency
                     collaboration, and mainstream gender. The Program measures/activities that will generate the Emission Reductions will
                     be financed by CONAFOR and implemented through its public incentive programs.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings



Public Disclosure
                     The ERP will be implemented in four northern states: Chihuahua, Coahuila, Durango, and Nuevo León, covering 30% of
                     Mexico's land and 23% of its forests. These states are vital for forestry, agriculture, and livestock production,
                     contributing over half of Mexico's timber and non-timber forest products. They also account for 13.8% of the live cattle
                     inventory (2018) and are key dairy and meat production centers. Additionally, they lead in producing walnuts, apples,
                     forage corn, alfalfa, beans, and oats, linking 1.3 million farmers, communities, and workers to the market.

                     These states provide vital environmental goods and services and are recognized for high biodiversity, including 56
                     natural protected areas. However, a quarter of the population lives in marginalization and poverty, mainly in rural areas.
                     The Program will be implemented in rural communities (i.e., ejidos), some of which are indigenous communities (a total
                     of ten have been identified including Raramuris, Kikapues, Nahuatl).

                     These areas are prone to significant environmental challenges, including deforestation and degradation driven by
                     overgrazing, extensive livestock production, commercial agriculture, forest fires, and illegal logging. Indirect drivers
                     include weak inter-institutional coordination and law enforcement. Social challenges are also present, with organized
                     crime contributing to high homicide and feminicide rates. Despite these challenges, the ERP presents opportunities for
                     sustainable development through improved coordination and community engagement.

                     Mexico has a solid legal framework, including the General Law of Climate Change and the General Law for Sustainable
                     Forest Development (LGDFS), both of which prioritize sustainable forest development. The country's land tenure and
                     communal property system, with a substantial proportion of forest land under collective ownership by Indigenous and
                     local communities, support a community-based landscape approach.


                    Mar 04, 2025                                                                                                    Page 3 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Mexico Biocarbon Emission Reduction Program (P180533)



                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Program will be implemented by CONAFOR, which has extensive experience with WB financed operations and a
                     strong track record in implementing demand-driven programs. It applies robust Operational Rules (ROP) to its
                     projects, updating them annually to integrate E&S management. Its proven capacity and commitment position it to lead
                     this Program and implement E&S policies effectively. Currently, it implements the Strengthening Entrepreneurship in
                     Productive Forest Landscapes Project (P151604), financed by the WB in 2018 under the safeguard policies. CONAFOR's
                     structure includes Program Management and state and local Forest Development Promoters supported by the Program
                     Coordinator and E&S specialists, ensuring oversight of technical, operational, and E&S management aspects.

                     The Program will require vertical coordination between the central agencies and the local offices and cross-agency
                     collaboration for effective implementation and sustainability. Despite well-defined and mandated mechanisms in the
                     regulatory framework, practical effectiveness has been limited in recent years. To address these challenges and
                     enhance coordination, CONAFOR has signed institutional agreements with (i) SADER-SEMARNAT-CONAFOR, (ii)
                     CONAFOR-INECC, (iii) CONAFOR-INMUJERES, (iv) CONAFOR-INPI. Specific ISFL annexes will be included as part of the
                     agreements between CONAFOR and the jurisdiction's subnational governments to strengthen interinstitutional working
                     arrangements of the Program. Collaboration between the federal government, its agencies, and subnational
                     governments will continue enhancing policy coherence and implementing incentive programs in the rural landscapes.
                     To ensure the adequate implementation of the ESF, central offices and forest promoters operating in the four states
                     have participated in ESF courses provided by the WB. ESF training will be provided to those preparing and executing the
                     ERP during the Program's implementation.




Public Disclosure
                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                     Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                               Moderate
                     The environmental risk rating is considered moderate at this stage. The Program includes activities related to
                     landscape management investments to generate verified emission reductions (ER) while addressing key regional
                     drivers of deforestation and degradation. It is expected that the Program will support the shift of conventional
                     practices towards more sustainable models aimed at restoring ecosystem functions and environmental services while
                     enhancing productive efficiency per unit of surface area. Additionally, it is expected to expand CONAFOR's efforts to
                     drive jurisdictional impact through landscape-level investments while managing environmental risks and impacts
                     effectively. While these activities are expected to generate environmental benefits, challenges include uncertainty
                     regarding the location and scope of investments, complex multi-stakeholder implementation, and the need for strong
                     coordination. Potential environmental impacts from ER investments include soil degradation (erosion, sediment
                     runoff, nutrient loss, and changes in soil microorganisms), land use changes, biodiversity loss, and disruption of
                     biological corridors. Additional risks may involve ecosystem service degradation, water contamination from waste,
                     potential use of agrochemicals, and occupational health and safety hazards associated with machinery and
                     equipment. Such potential impacts are expected to be temporary and reversible and subject to the establishment of
                     proper environmental management measures. CONAFOR has already included most mitigation measures and best
                     practices needed to manage these impacts as part of their ROPs. An exclusion list as part of the ESMF will also be
                     implemented to restrict ER activities that could pose adverse environmental impacts.


                    Mar 04, 2025                                                                                                  Page 4 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Mexico Biocarbon Emission Reduction Program (P180533)



                                                                                                                                     Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risk rating at this stage is substantial. Despite mainly positive social impacts and minimal adverse physical
                     interventions, significant efforts are required to engage stakeholders effectively and in a culturally appropriate
                     manner. Key factors contributing to this rating include: 1. Stakeholder conflicts: Potential intensification of conflicts
                     among local stakeholders over land use; 2. E&S risk management: Risks of mismanagement of environmental and
                     social (E&S) impacts, particularly in the distribution of benefits from GHG emissions payments, necessitating capacity
                     development and enhanced oversight; 3. Vulnerability recognition: Potential lack of recognition of vulnerable
                     population segments, requiring full participation and understanding of key stakeholders, especially local communities;
                     4. Operational rules: Implementation through CONAFOR's ROP, which needs revision to address gaps with the ESF,
                     particularly in supporting stakeholders without land titles; 5. Stakeholder engagement: Challenges in engaging a
                     diverse range of rural dwellers, with a need for a robust stakeholder engagement strategy; 6. Contextual factors:
                     External factors like rising agricultural prices and increasing violence that could exacerbate deforestation and hinder
                     forestry activities; 7. Child and forced labor risks: Significant risk of forced labor and child labor in the supply chain,
                     particularly in rural productive areas, requiring assessment and mitigation. These factors highlight the need for strong
                     stakeholder engagement, capacity building, and effective management of E&S risks to mitigate potential adverse
                     impacts and ensure the successful implementation of the ERP. An exclusion list will limit program activities to avoid
                     significant adverse social risks and impacts, e.g., preliminarily, activities in protected areas not allowed in the ESMPs,
                     resettlement or involuntary restrictions to land access or use of resources, and negative impacts to IP and their
                     territories.




Public Disclosure
                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                   Relevant

                      A systems approach will be applied as per the directive on E&S risks under BioCarbon Fund ISFL; E&S instruments will
                      address gaps between CONAFOR´s Operational Rules and the ESF. TA activities in the ERP (phase 1) will integrate E&S
                      aspects, including a social assessment of intersectional vulnerability, to ensure ESF consistency and potential
                      downstream impacts. The SEP will include guidelines for Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPP). The Environmental and Social
                      Management Framework (ESMF) will include an Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA), Labor Management
                      Procedures (LMP) and an Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP), site-specific Environmental and Social
                      Management Plans (ESMPs) or checklists as needed for certain types of interventions, depending on the concrete
                      activities of the subprojects, along with an exclusion list to avoid significant adverse E&S risks and impacts; a GAP; a
                      Process Framework if restrictions on use/access to land/resources in legally protected areas.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                        Relevant

                      Key stakeholders are public sector governance institutions, small and medium producers, landscape committees,
                      regional governments' Interinstitutional Technical Group, communal/ejido organizations, indigenous communities,
                      rural dwellers, and stakeholders related to protected areas. ERP activities were prioritized through participatory
                      consultations (dissemination workshops, validation, and follow-up stages). Sixteen workshops with 649 participants
                      discussed deforestation drivers and mitigation actions. The SEP will ensure effective, inclusive, culturally sensitive,


                    Mar 04, 2025                                                                                                       Page 5 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Mexico Biocarbon Emission Reduction Program (P180533)



                      and meaningful consultation and information disclosure with IPs and vulnerable groups, including content and
                      implementation of the BSP, in line with the WB Directive on Addressing Risks and Impacts on Vulnerable Groups and
                      ESS7. The SEP will be articulated with the BSP and communication plan. SEP and BSP drafts are being developed; draft
                      SEP will be disclosed before Appraisal. The GM will be adapted to meet ESF requirements.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                            Relevant

                      The project will involve government civil servants, direct workers, community workers, and contract
                      workers/consultants. Underlying activities are customarily carried out by local communities; should hiring be
                      required, local workers would be prioritized. Community labor and other workforce will be assessed for risks of child
                      and forced labor, with strict clauses against it in ESMF and LMP. The minimum hiring age is 18. The number of
                      workers is currently unknown. CONAFOR will develop Labor Management Procedures (LMP) with a Code of Conduct
                      and a Grievance Mechanism for all workers. Transparency in employment terms, non-discrimination, and equal
                      treatment will be promoted. Risks and impacts in the forestry sector (logging, working at heights, heavy machinery,
                      extreme weather) will be assessed during preparation when a more detailed project description is available. LMP will
                      be finalized within 60 days after Effectiveness or before hiring any project worker.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                             Relevant

                      ESS3 requirements will be integrated into studies on environmental services, soil degradation, and biodiversity. TA
                      activities will address E&S risks, particularly in agrochemical use, by promoting best practices such as integrated pest
                      management, occupational safety, and improved soil management. Increasing forest cover through agroforestry and




Public Disclosure
                      forestry management will enhance ecosystem connectivity, soil stability, and water quality. The ESMF will include
                      measures for resource management and pollution prevention measures along with guidelines for Integrated Pest
                      Management Plans (IPMP) and the use of personal protective equipment. The need to prepare an IMP and/or include
                      IPMP measures in site-specific ESMPs will be determined during preparation once activities are defined. Additionally,
                      retroactive claims of GHG credits for OP safeguards-complying activities from 2019 will require an E&S due diligence
                      following the E&S risk management considerations detailed in the ESMF.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                             Relevant

                      Mexico is vulnerable to climate events, such as fires, floods, landslides, and their effects on communities. Mexico has
                      developed emergency plans to be applied in case such events arise. The Bank will support the Borrower with
                      technical guidance and capacity building to manage occupational and community health and safety risks, ensuring
                      compliance with ESS4. Measures to ensure project activities do not exacerbate risks and potential impacts to local
                      communities related to illegal logging, insecurity, organized crime, femicide, homicide and societal violence will be
                      taken. It will be analyzed as part of the due diligence process and will be reflected in the ESMF. Guidance includes
                      managing agrochemical use (through the IPMP), hygiene and safety measures, and the use of personal protective
                      equipment. The ESMF will address SEA/SH risks with specific measures, code of conduct and SEA/SH-sensitive GRM.
                      GBV awareness and capacity building will be enhanced in the GAP and through training.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                 Relevant

                      This standard is currently relevant. The project does not foresee land acquisition or resettlement of any kind.
                      Potential impacts are related to the restoration and conservation activities which could imply temporary restrictions


                    Mar 04, 2025                                                                                                     Page 6 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Mexico Biocarbon Emission Reduction Program (P180533)



                      on land use or on access to resources; these risks would be managed under ESS5. Should project activities lead to
                      temporary restrictions to land use if restrictions on access to legally designated parks and protected areas, impacts
                      would be managed through a Process Framework (PF) under ESS5. Specific areas are not yet known. As more details
                      are obtained during preparation, especially in relation to the program activities, it will be decided whether these risks
                      and impacts will be managed through a PF or in the ESMF and under ESS1, if the impacts are not a direct result of
                      land acquisition or restrictions on use/access to land/resources imposed by the project, as specified in paragraph 5 of
                      ESS5.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                    Relevant
                      Resources

                      The Program aims to support biodiversity conservation and sustainable resource management. To align with ESS6
                      requirements, the ESMF will assess risks and impacts and mitigation measures. Key concerns include soil degradation,
                      land use change, biodiversity and ecosystem loss, disruption of biological corridors, water pollution from waste and
                      agrochemicals, and OHS hazards from machinery and equipment. Mitigation measures and best practices are
                      included in the ROPs, along with an exclusion list to prevent high-impact ER activities. The Program includes support
                      for protected areas (PAs), voluntary conservation sites, and Payment for Environmental Services. It may also include
                      productive activities such as non- timber activities, reforestation with native species, among others, in and around
                      these areas if their management plans allow it. Further details on Program activities on PAs will be clarified during
                      preparation.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                               Relevant



Public Disclosure
                      Local Communities

                      Indigenous communities involved in forestry are both affected parties and potential beneficiaries, necessitating their
                      inclusion with a differentiated focus. Approximately 1.58% (230,000 people) of the population in the four states are
                      IPs, mainly Raramuris, Kikapues, and Nahuatl, which are officially recognized. They face barriers (distance, poor roads,
                      monolingualism and structural discrimination) limiting their access to public programs and technology, and
                      experience greater marginalization and vulnerability, requiring specific measures to prevent their exclusion and
                      ensure culturally appropriate engagement. The SEP will include a differentiated approach related to the vulnerability
                      of Indigenous Peoples, considering language, customs and decision-making processes. It will set guidelines to develop
                      Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPP) if determined as necessary based on an Environmental and Social Analysis,
                      incorporating feedback from initial consultations with Indigenous Peoples.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                         Relevant

                      This standard is currently relevant. Project activities are not expected to have significant negative impacts on cultural
                      heritage, whether in its tangible and intangible forms. However, taking into consideration the presence of the
                      indigenous population in the jurisdictional area, a chance finds procedure will be developed in case of chance finds,
                      coordinated with the INAH National Institute of Anthropology and History (INAH), which investigates, disseminates,
                      and protects the historical, archaeological, anthropological and paleontology of Mexico. The chance finds procedure
                      will be included as part of the ESMF. The impact on landscape elements with potential cultural or religious value will
                      be assessed, and measures will be established in the ESMF to mitigate it.




                    Mar 04, 2025                                                                                                       Page 7 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Mexico Biocarbon Emission Reduction Program (P180533)



                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                 Not Currently Relevant

                      This standard is not currently relevant.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                        No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                 No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                          TBD
                       It is being analyzed whether the use of CONAFOR´s ROP as the ERP´s ESMS means a partial use of the borrower
                       framework – to be confirmed prior to appraisal. Forest conservation, restoration and sustainable management
                       activities, including social management, will be implemented under CONAFOR ROP, which are applied to its program
                       and are legally binding. These standards and guidelines have incorporated E&S management aspects and are
                       evaluated and updated annually considering national and regional priorities, and requirements of local communities.
                       ROP are the basis for the Operational Guidelines that CONAFOR will apply to the ERP.

                       An E&S due diligence of ROP and the legal and institutional framework is being carried to identify gaps with the ESF,
                       which will be covered in the ESMF through assessments, instruments and capacity building measures to ensure



Public Disclosure
                       effective E&S management of program activities, leveraging CONAFOR’s capacity in a manner consistent with the
                       Bank's ESF and guidelines.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                               No
                       Not applicable

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     Prior to Appraisal, the borrower will prepare and disclose the following instruments:
                     •        Draft Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP). It will specify that the ERP will apply an E&S systems
                     approach as per the Bank Directive on Managing E&S Risks and Impacts for the ERP under the FCPF and BioCarbon ISFL.
                     This will imply an E&S audit for the retroactive period in line with the directive and the ESF. The ERP will use CONAFOR’s
                     Operational Rules as the ESMS. Independent third-party E&S monitoring will also take place during implementation.
                     The ESCP will require the following instruments:
                     o        Labor Management Procedures (LMP) with a specific GM and a Code of Conduct for workers; to be finalized in a
                     satisfactory manner to the Bank no later than 60 days (estimated) after Effectiveness or before hiring any Project
                     worker, whichever comes first.




                    Mar 04, 2025                                                                                                    Page 8 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Mexico Biocarbon Emission Reduction Program (P180533)



                     o         If required, Process Framework (PF) – depending on the impacts and risks identified during further screening –
                     prepared consistent with ESS5. Consulted and disclosed no later than 60 days (estimated) after Effectiveness or as a
                     condition prior to the initiation of any activity with associated impacts covered by ESS5, depending on what happens
                     first.
                     o         Site-specific Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMP) when required according to the guidelines set
                     in the ESMF.
                     o         Integrated Pest Management plan (IPMP) when required according to the guidelines set in the ESMF.
                     o         Chance Finds Procedure (CFP) for cultural heritage related risks, as part of the final version of the ESMF.
                     It will also require periodic performance reports, including GM management, inter-institutional arrangements and
                     capacity building measures if necessary to strengthen compliance with the ESF.
                     •         Draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) with the program’s GM and guidelines for Indigenous Peoples Plans
                     (IPP). It will record consultations with key stakeholders carried out until then, including with IPs and other vulnerable
                     groups.
                     •         Draft Environmental and Social System and Management Framework (ESMF) to cover the gaps between
                     CONAFOR´s ESMS (Operational Rules) and the ESF;, in particular, to assess the risks associated to the proposed Program
                     activities, incorporate mitigation measures consistent with World Bank ESS, and propose actions to improve the design
                     and/or implementation of the Program activities. The ESMF will include:
                     o         Environmental and Social Assessment.
                     o         Labor Management Procedures
                     o         Gender Action Plan
                     o         Integrated Pest Management Plan




Public Disclosure
                     o         Chance Finds Procedure
                     o         Guidelines for the preparation of ESMPs and Biodiversity Action Plan.

                     The draft versions of the SEP and ESMF will be updated following the final definition and timing of the activities under
                     the ERP and based on feedback from consultations. Timeframe for disclosure of SEP and ESMF final versions will be
                     defined during appraisal and explicitly addressed in the ESCP.
                     Further clarification of program activities may require additional E&S management instruments.


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:      Katharina Siegmann                     Title:          Senior Environmental Specialist

                      Email:                 ksiegmann@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:           Rosa Maria Martinez                    Job Title:      Senior Social Development Specialist

                      Email:                 rmartinez2@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT


                    Mar 04, 2025                                                                                                      Page 9 of 10
                              The World Bank
                              Mexico Biocarbon Emission Reduction Program (P180533)



                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                             Katharina Siegmann, Rosa Maria Martinez

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                    Fabiola Maria Lucia Mercado Jaldin

                     ADM Social Specialist:                           Juan Cambreleng Contreras




Public Disclosure




                    Mar 04, 2025                                                                                Page 10 of 10
