Public Disclosure Authorized
                                      The World Bank
                                      Cameroon water security project (P180321)




                               \\\\\\\\\

                                @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                    Project Information Document (PID)

                                                  Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 26-Mar-2025 | Report No: PIDIA00801




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     Cameroon water security project (P180321)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                       Operation ID                 Operation Name
                               WESTERN AND CENTRAL                                       Cameroon water security
Cameroon, Cameroon                                          P180321
                               AFRICA                                                    project
Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Approval Date      Practice Area (Lead)
Investment Project
                               17-Mar-2025                  07-May-2025                  Water
Financing (IPF)
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
MINEPAT (ministère de
l'économie, de la              CAMWATER, MINEE
planification et de            (ministère de l'énergie et
l'aménagement du               de l'eau)
territoire)

Proposed Development Objective(s)

Strengthen institutional capacity to implement IWRM and increase access to water and sanitation services in selected
areas of Cameroon

Components
Implementing water security measures at sub-basin level by operationalizing IWRM plans in the Benue
Supporting the transformation of key institutions and the adoption of critical regulation
Development of resilient WSS facilities in rural and peri-urban areas and in Yaounde and Douala
Project Implementation, Monitoring and Evaluation support
Contingent Emergency Response

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             Yes

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                          200.00



                                                                                                                   Page 1
           The World Bank
           Cameroon water security project (P180321)



     Total Financing                                                                                              200.00
                      of which IBRD/IDA                                                                           200.00
     Financing Gap                                                                                                   0.00

  DETAILS
     World Bank Group Financing
        International Development Association (IDA)                                                               200.00
           IDA Credit                                                                                             200.00




  @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
Environmental And Social Risk Classification
Substantial


  Decision
  The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate




 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context
1.       Cameroon is strategically located on the Gulf of Guinea and is a lower-middle-income country of approximately
29 million people (40.7 percent in rural areas and 59.3 percent in urban areas in 20231). With a GDP per capita US$1,663.5
in 2023, the economy is driven by its primary sectors, agriculture and mineral resources. The gross domestic product
(GDP) growth was 3.3 percent in 2023. Cameroon benefits from its location in the Congo Basin, the world’s second-largest
tropical forest zone, which provides an exceptional ecological diversity.

2.       The COVID-19 pandemic has negatively affected Cameroon’s economy. Despite having one of the most
diversified economies in the Central African Economic and Monetary Community region, Cameroon’s economic activity
and real GDP growth slowed down before the pandemic, averaging 2.5 percent between 2019 and 2021 and GDP per
capita growth below zero for the same period. Lower global demand and lower prices for the country’s main export
commodities (oil, coffee, cocoa, cotton, aluminum, and rubber) as well as severe contractions in the hospitality and
transport sectors most affected the country’s growth.




1 World Bank, 2022, Rural population (% of total population) | Data (worldbank.org).




                                                                                                                       Page 2
       The World Bank
       Cameroon water security project (P180321)


3.        Poverty remains highly concentrated in rural areas with regional disparities. According to the Cameroon
Household Survey (ECAM-5), around 56.3 percent of rural dwellers lived below the national poverty line in 2021-22
compared with 21.6 percent of urban dwellers. Thus, around 7 in 10 poor Cameroonians live in rural areas. Moreover,
the poverty rate is significantly higher in the Far North, Northwest, and North regions at 69.2 percent, 66.8 percent, and
61.1 percent respectively – compared with the Centre region (home to Yaoundé, the administrative capital) and the
Littoral region (home to Douala, the commercial capital), with poverty rates at 10.8 percent and 8.3 percent, respectively.

4.      The country faces insecurity due to two main crises: violence, and armed attacks by the terrorist group Boko
Haram in the Far North and internal crises resulting from sociopolitical demands by English-speaking populations in the
North-West and South-West regions. Nine out of ten regions are affected by insecurity, including in the Lake Chad Basin
and the North-West and South-West regions. Over 1 million people are internally displaced persons (IDPs) from the Far
North, North-West, and South-West regions, and 325,000 economic and political refugees from the Central African
Republic now resides in Cameroon’s East, Adamawa, and North regions.

5.      Cameroon’s economy and its population are highly affected by climate change, associated extreme weather
events, variations in the hydrological cycle, and water-related disasters induced by climate change. In the last two
decades, floods, droughts, and landslides occurred more frequently than in the past, with climate models projecting
further temperature increases and more severe floods and droughts in the future. In 2024, climate change-exacerbated
floods in the Far North region have caused significant social and economic impacts: some 459,102 people (65,945
households), were severely affected by the floods and at least 38 people died, 56,084 houses were destroyed, 5,278
heads of livestock were lost, and 85,253 hectares of agricultural land were destroyed. More generally, nearly 2 million
people are living in water-scarce areas of the country.

6.      Cameroon’s vision for an inclusive response to the impacts of climate change is summed up in its slogan:
“transforming climate constraints into development opportunities.” To address the negative impacts of climate change
and meet the country’s updated Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) commitment under the 2021 Paris
Agreement, the Government of Cameroon (GoC) dedicated a key objective of its National Development Strategy 2030
(NDS30) to the fight against climate change and its hydrological impacts: “Strengthen climate change mitigation and
adaptation measures and environmental management to ensure sustainable and inclusive economic growth and social
development.” Cameroon’s CCDR highlights the need for an infrastructure system transition in efficient water use.

 Sectoral and Institutional Context

7.      Cameroon has significant renewable water resources (273 bn m3/yr), however this endowment is mainly
transboundary surface waters unevenly distributed in space and time. Rainfall is unevenly distributed from a drier North
to a wetter South. Cameroon is drained by five major river systems: Niger, Sanaga, Congo, and coastal rivers, which drain
into the Gulf of Guinea and the Lake Chad Basin. Internal renewable water resources per capita in Cameroon declined
from 40,809 m3 in 1971 to 10,284.1 m3 in 2020 due to significant population growth and increase in demand. Despite its
abundant water resources compared to global and regional benchmarks, Cameroon has faced a sevenfold increase in
water demand between 2009 and 2021, from 11 billion m3 to 73.3 billion m3.

8.       Water insecurity is hindered by inadequate infrastructure and insufficient integrated water resources
management (IWRM). Water security refers to “a society's capacity to have enough water of sufficient quality for survival
and to carry out different productive activities. Therefore, a society with water security can reduce poverty and improve
living standards.” Reduce water security due to increasing water demand and erratic weather patterns driven by climate
change is most evident in the northern regions, where eight to nine months of dry season in a year leads to water


                                                                                                                        Page 3
       The World Bank
       Cameroon water security project (P180321)


shortages and droughts. The three- to four-month long rainy season comes with increased frequency and intensity rainfall
of floods in coastal and agro-ecolological zones. Erratic rainfall patterns and rising temperatures due to climate change
have caused local water sources to become unreliable, increasing the water collection burden on vulnerable
communities. Cameroon first introduced IWRM principles in its legal framework in 2009 through the National Action Plan
for IWRM (Plan d’Action National de Gestion Intégrée des Ressources en Eau, PANGIRE). PANGIRE aimed to implement
IWRM principles in Cameroon which are “an optimal water management, considering both technical aspects and social
goals like meeting basic needs and improving population welfare”. However, PANGIRE’s operationalization remains too
limited to be impactful. There is no mechanism or assigned authority to regulate and allocate water resources among
different uses, namely agriculture, hydroelectricity, domestic, livestock, industry, and environment. A coordinated and
cross-sectoral approach to IWRM at the sub-basin level must involve key stakeholders in the decision-making process,
particularly as water insecurity exacerbated by climate change increasingly drives conflicts and fuels climate induced
displacement. One of the most severe examples occurred in November 2021, when intercommunity clashes between
farmers, fishermen, and herders in the Far North region displaced more than 20 000 people.

9.       Lack of access to water and sanitation services and poor hygiene are key drivers of endemic waterborne
diseases such as cholera. Cameron does not have an integrated data system to monitor access to water supply and
sanitation (WSS). A UN Water Study reports that, from 2017 to 2022 access to safely managed drinking water services
stagnated in urban areas at 80 percent and only increased by 10 percentage points in rural areas (from 42 percent to 52
percent, see figure 1). In the same period, access to sanitation facilities slightly decreased both in urban and rural areas,
as efforts to increase access have not kept up with population growth. This is exacerbated by climate change impacts on
health outcomes, in the form of water contamination during floods and higher contaminant loading during droughts As
a result, Cameroon is still far from its 2030 targets of increasing access to drinking water to 77 percent and access to
sanitation to 56 percent in rural areas. The COVID-19 pandemic also highlighted the need to focus on improving service
quality, as existing services were insufficient to address the increasing needs of the population.

Figure 1. Population using Safely Managed Drinking Water and Sanitation Services in Urban and Rural Areas 2017 to2022




10.      Institutionally, Cameroon’s water sector faces significant challenges, including fragmentation, inadequate
legislation, limited operational capacity, and insufficient cost recovery for operations and maintenance. Drawing on
lessons from previous interventions, the World Bank is implementing a multi-pronged approach to comprehensively
address these issues. Legal reforms are being incentivized through the DPO series to strengthen Water Resource
Management (WRM) and improve irrigation infrastructure maintenance. Additionally, a dedicated Disbursement-Linked
Indicator (DLI) under the Governance PforR is being developed to enhance Cameroon Water Utility Corporation’s
(CAMWATER) operational efficiency, including improvements in billing and revenue collection, thereby supporting its
financial sustainability. The proposed SEWASH Multi-phase Programmatic Approach (MPA) complements these efforts,



                                                                                                                         Page 4
       The World Bank
       Cameroon water security project (P180321)


focusing on transformational institutional strengthening and expanding sustainable water access over the long term (11
years).

11.     The Ministry of Water Resources and Energy (Ministère de l’eau et de l’énergie, MINEE) oversees the sector.
MINEE’s mandate is the development and implementation of policies and regulations, data collection and dissemination,
and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of water resources and services. However, many other actors intervene in the
sector at the national level, including the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development and the Ministry of Environment,
among others. Ensuring coordination among them has been and remains a challenge.

12.     Urban WSS services are the responsibility of CAMWATER. It is a state-owned enterprise entrusted by the GoC,
with the mandate to provide WSS services to people in 216 urban centers and peri-urban areas. However, CAMWATER
only manages to provide water services to 117 urban centers, effectively servicing about 400,000 registered customers,
compared to a national population of 29 million in Cameroon. In 2007, the GoC, through the ‘Société Nationale des Eaux
du Cameroun’ (SNEC, then replaced by CAMWATER), entered a comprehensive 10-year public-private partnership (PPP)
delegating the responsibility to provide water supply services through an ‘affermage’ model to a private operator, ‘la
Camerounaise des Eaux’ (led by the Moroccan national operator). In 2018, the GoC decided not to extend the lease
contract (Decree 2018/144)., leading to the transfer of debts of the former SNEC to CAMWATER, worsening its already
challenged balance sheet. An audit of CAMWATER requested by the Government was carried out during the first quarter
of 2024, which confirmed its difficult financial situation and the need to reinforce its financial, technical, and commercial
capacity. The audit recommended the preparation and adoption of a Strategic Development Plan identifying targets for
the different areas to be improved: production, operation, governance, and non-revenue water (commercial and
technical). The Strategic Development Plan 2025-2029 was adopted by CAMWATER’s board on November 18, 2024.


13.     In rural areas, the responsibilities to deliver WSS services have been transferred to the municipalities (lowest
tier of government in Cameroon) as part of the decentralization process. While the decentralization law aims at
addressing these shortcomings, the decentralization process falls short of specifying the conditions, methods of
execution, support system, and mechanism to transfer financial resources. Hence, many look to CAMWATER to deliver
and manage these services, through delegated management arrangements. There is an urgent need for the GoC to
address these challenges by strengthening the capacities of municipalities to effectively manage WSS services and
supporting the ongoing restructuring of CAMWATER to reinforce its institutional and technical capacity to provide
sustainable water services to the centers it is responsible to serve.

14.      A strong system approach is required to effectively manage water resources and deliver inclusive services.
Water security will be achieved by effectively managing water resources with fit-for-purpose institutional and legal
arrangements. Investments should promote efficient use of water, contribute to reducing technical and commercial
losses, and boost cost recovery and financial viability of the service providers. Non-revenue water (NRW) is a major issue
for Cameroon Water utility Corporation (CAMWATER) at about 40 percent. The utility is implementing a metering
campaign to improve its water accounting and billing, and close to 348 km of pipes have been identified as being in urgent
need of replacement. As other utilities globally, CAMWATER is also exploring new solutions to adapt to and minimize the
impacts of climate change. This has driven decision makers to adopt water conservation policies that prioritize leak
reduction and a holistic approach to minimizing unaccounted for losses. However, these efforts require continuous
collaboration within the metering and maintenance ecosystem.

 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)



                                                                                                                         Page 5
       The World Bank
       Cameroon water security project (P180321)


15.       The overall Program Development Objective (PrDO) is to strengthen institutions, improve water resources
management and increase access to water and sanitation services in selected areas of Cameroon. The PDO for Phase
1 is to “Strengthen institutional capacity to implement IWRM and increase access to water and sanitation services in
selected areas of Cameroon”.


  Key Results

16.     About 650,000 people are expected to benefit from at least basic water and 400,000 to limited sanitation in these
target areas because of the project. The project will also finance access to safely managed water for about 225,000
additional beneficiaries in the cities of Douala and Yaoundé.

17.    Two sub-basin management plans (IWRM plans) will be developed in selected sub-basins of the Benue River
basin.

18.     key institutions such as MINEE, CAMWATER, and municipalities will be accompanied in their structural
transformation to be able to support the important investments and to become credit worthy.


D. Project Description

19.      Despite the access gaps and the socioeconomic impact of poor services, investments in water and sanitation
are low in Cameroon. It is estimated that in total about one billion dollars of investment is needed to extend access to
water and sanitation to the entire population and reach the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) targets, with
more than half the needs being in the three northern regions and the East and West regions. SEWASH represents the
World Bank’s reengagement in the water sector in Cameroon. It will focus on (a) supporting the improvement of the
institutional framework for IWRM; (b) strengthening the capacity and systems of the main actors (MINEE, CAMWATER,
and local authorities) to implement IWRM and improved WSS services; (c) piloting the operationalization of IWRM in
selected sub-basins of the Benue River basin; and (d) supporting investments to improve access to WSS services in peri-
urban and rural areas in the three regions of the “Septentrion” and in Douala and Yaounde. The project is an IPF with
PBCs and represents the first phase of a three-phase MPA.

20.     In sum, the project will seek to strengthen the entire value chain for water service delivery, starting from
improving the capacity of key institutions and supporting reforms. It will support the reinforcement of IWRM, service
delivery, operation and maintenance capacities, and evidence-based decision-making at the national and local level to
effectively improve water security and access to WSS services for the poorest people in selected sub-basins, and in Douala
and Yaounde.



 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate




                                                                                                                       Page 6
       The World Bank
       Cameroon water security project (P180321)


 Legal Operational Policies                                                            Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                           Yes
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                     No


Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts




21.      Although the main, long-term impact of the project is expected to be positive, several short-term adverse risks
and impacts need to be addressed under Components B and C. Among the activities envisaged in the project are the
construction, extension, or rehabilitation of WSS systems in rural areas and small towns, the construction and/or
rehabilitation of infrastructure such as the construction of water supply systems, toilets, community water pumps,
sewerage systems, and water treatment plants. All these activities will be sources of impacts and risks for the physical,
biological, and human environment including loss of plant cover, pollution from wastewater/suspended matter/heavy
metals, soil excavation, occupational health and safety risks, and risks for the communities. Given that the specific sites
where the project activities will be implemented are not clearly defined, the project has prepared, consulted and
disclosed on November 22, 2024 an ESMF which identifies the risks associated with the various project interventions,
defines the mitigation measures to be implemented and defines the institutional monitoring arrangements to be made
before, during and after the implementation of the project activities to eliminate or mitigate the adverse environmental
impacts. When the project activities were budgeted, a provision was made for the implementation of the measures set
out in the ESMF and the documents that will be prepared before the project activities are carried out.

22.      The project aims to enhance access to water and sanitation services in the Far North, North, Adamawa regions,
Yaoundé and Douala cities. These areas were prioritized due to their low coverage of WASH services, high poverty levels,
pressure on WASH services, vulnerability to climate change, conflict, migration, internal displacements, and population
size. The extension or rehabilitation of water supply and sanitation in rural areas, small towns, Yaoundé, and Douala is
not expected to cause significant physical displacements, resulting in minimal resettlement compensation. The project
will primarily focus on rehabilitating existing water supply systems that are no longer functional or adapted to the
production capacity of the national water service provider (CAMWATER). Potential extensions of water supply systems
are also not expected to require significant resettlement compensation as they will be installed within the right-of-way
of existing roads, which is part of CAMWATER's deployment strategy. This significantly reduces the risk associated with
resettlement compensation. The project will involve small-scale activities carried out by local municipal councils, which
are unlikely to generate labor influx. Consequently, the risk associated with community health and safety, such as
tensions between project communities and migrant workers, is minimized. The risk of excluding marginalized groups has
been mitigated by the project design as it is planning to improve access to potable water in public entities such as health
centers, schools, and markets. Additionally, a significant number of new standpipes will be installed in underserved
neighborhoods, making these public services accessible to everyone. Project activities will thus contribute to reducing
vulnerabilities by facilitating access to water and sanitation for vulnerable populations.

23.     However, suitable measures to ensure inclusion of vulnerable groups should result from the social assessment
as part of the ESMF. In addition, a GBV action plan will be prepared during project implementation and before the
commencement of civil works. These risks will be addressed by including provisions for assessing and addressing them in



                                                                                                                        Page 7
       The World Bank
       Cameroon water security project (P180321)


the terms of reference and work plans and/or other documents, defining the scope and outputs of the activities so that
they are consistent with ESSs 1-10.


 E. Implementation

 Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

24.     Implementing agencies. The project will have two implementation agencies: MINEE and CAMWATER. MINEE will
implement components with strategic and policy dimensions, while CAMWATER will implement components that are
more operationally focused. Thus, MINEE will implement Components/Subcomponents A1, B, C1 (institutional
strengthening, IWRM and small drinking water systems and climate- resilient public latrines in the three regions of the
‘Septentrion’) and CAMWATER will implement Components/Subcomponents A2 and C2 (institutional strengthening and
access to drinking water in for Douala and Yaoundé). A project agreement will be established between the Bank and
CAMWATER and a subsidiary agreement between the government and CAMWATER.

25.      Steering Committee. The strategic supervision of project implementation and overall coordination across
implementing agencies will be coordinated by a Steering Committee, chaired by MINEE. The COPIL (Comité de Pilotage)
will be established by decree. The Steering Committee, presided by the Minister of MINEE, will be composed of
representatives from MINEE (Direction de la Mobilisation des Ressources en Eau (DMRE) and Direction de la Gestion des
Ressources en Eau (DGRE)), MINEPAT, Ministère des Finances (MINFI), and CAMWATER. The COPIL will be regularly
informed of the progress on project implementation, including through quarterly progress and financial reports by the
respective Implementation Units. The Steering Committee will review and validate the key options proposed under the
project.

26.      PIUs. MINEE will have a PIU and CAMWATER will have an Execution Unit. MINEE’s PIU will be created before
project effectiveness. Headed by a project coordinator responsible for the day-to-day management of project activities,
the PIU will include a financial management (FM) specialist, an accountant, a procurement specialist, and a social
development and environmental specialist. While PIU will be based in Yaoundé, a technical unit, under PIU’s supervision,
will be established in Garoua at the latest four months after effectiveness. This technical unit will include a deputy
coordinator, and five staff covering the technical and the Environmental and Social (E&S) domains to enable the
monitoring of small infrastructure works in the three regions of the septentrion. CAMWATER’s Execution Unit will be set
up just after the effectiveness of the project. This unit will be staffed with CAMWATER existing technical and fiduciary
personnel to be dedicated to the project’s activities. CAMWATER Execution Unit will include, at a minimum, a
coordinator, an FM specialist, an accountant, a senior procurement specialist, a social development specialist, and an
environmental specialist. The Execution Unit will add a financial controller and senior procurement specialist through
competitive recruitment. Institutional arrangements with municipalities will be established during the project to ensure
infrastructure operation and maintenance beyond the project's completion.


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank



                                                                                                                     Page 8
     The World Bank
     Cameroon water security project (P180321)


 Thierry Davy
 Senior Water Specialist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 MINEPAT (ministère de l'économie, de la planification et de l'aménagement du territoire)
 Guy Ronel Guemaleu
 Sous directeur de la coopération multi-latérale
 gemaleuguy@yahoo.fr

Implementing Agencies
 CAMWATER
 Blaise Moussa
 General Director
 blaise.moussa@camwater.cm

 MINEE (ministère de l'énergie et de l'eau)
 Justin Madi Vondou
 Directeur de la gestion des ressources en eau
 madivondou@yahoo.fr

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                     Thierry Davy

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:                Anna Cestari                          18-Nov-2024

Country Director:                        Cheick Fantamady Kante                26-Mar-2025




                                                                                             Page 9
The World Bank
Cameroon water security project (P180321)




                                            Page 10
