Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Cameroon Water Security Project (P180321)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                          Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                    (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                       Date Prepared/Updated: 12/14/2024 | Report No: ESRSA03864




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Mar 26, 2025                                                                        Page 1 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Cameroon Water Security Project (P180321)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                  Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P180321                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)       SEWASH                      2025

                     Operation Name            Cameroon water security project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries           Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Cameroon                  Cameroon                                WESTERN AND CENTRAL          Water
                                                                                       AFRICA

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     MINEPAT (ministère        CAMWATER, MINEE (ministère de           13-Mar-2025                  07-May-2025
                     de l'économie, de la      l'énergie et de l'eau)
                     planification et de
                     l'aménagement du
                     territoire)



Public Disclosure
                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost
                     Review Date

                     26-Nov-2024               200,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     Strengthen institutional capacity to implement IWRM and increase access to water and sanitation services in selected
                     areas of Cameroon


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     Cameroon has, in general, abundant water resources but they are geographically unevenly distributed and the poor
                     implementation of IWRM is hampering their sustainability. In addition, the delivery of water and sanitation services is
                     not satisfactory both in terms of delivery rate and quality of service, in urban areas and even more in rural areas. The
                     three Northern regions selected for the project (Far North, North and Adamawa) represent 29% of national population

                    Mar 26, 2025                                                                                                    Page 2 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Cameroon Water Security Project (P180321)



                     and the majority of the poorest (56%). They are also most affected by climate change and are the most exposed to
                     Fragility, Conflict and Violence (FCV). Water scarcity, even during the rainy season, and pollution are negatively affecting
                     these regions socio economic development. Climate change brings droughts and floods which exacerbate the situation,
                     adding conflicts and displacements. Despite recent institutional progress in the latest years (2019 decentralization law,
                     2022 NWP, ongoing update of the 1998 water law), there are still shortcomings to build a sustainable/resilient water
                     sector. This is why the Government requested financial support from the World Bank to support ongoing institutional
                     reforms; strengthen capacity of MINEE, CAMWATER, and local institutions; help operationalize IWRM in selected areas;
                     and provide improved access to WSS services in peri-urban and rural areas. The Government and the Bank agreed to
                     focus the Project on the Far North, North and Adamawa regions. These regions cover the portion of the Benue River
                     basin located in Cameroon, the rural and peri-urban areas where access to water and sanitation is most critical and
                     areas where internal and cross-borders migration and FCV situations take place. Focusing the proposed Project activities
                     on both IWRM and WSS on these three regions. In addition the project will deliver 20 000 new drinking water
                     connection in Yaounde and Douala to provide drinking water to 225 000 new beneficiaries. The project also aims at
                     achieving greater and noticeable impacts, which could then be replicated and /or scaled up in other areas through
                     future supports. Considering the foregoing, Project activities will capitalize on and promote synergy with existing WB-
                     funded VIVA Benue and VIVA Logone projects.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     With a per capita income of US$5,122.60 in 2022, the economy is driven by its primary sectors, agriculture and mineral
                     resources. The gross domestic product (GDP) growth was 3.7 percent on average between 2015 and 2017. Cameroon



Public Disclosure
                     benefits from its location in the Congo Basin, the world’s second-largest tropical forest zone, which provides an
                     exceptional ecological diversity. . The average annual growth during the period 2003-2017 was 5.2% . COVID-19 has
                     further negatively impacted the economy due to a slowdown in private economic activity. Nevertheless, the country
                     has experienced a sustained recovery since the third quarter of 2020. Poverty remains highly concentrated in rural areas
                     with regional disparities. The urban/rural divide is significant, with a regional distribution of the poverty rate indicating
                     that the Far North (74.3%), North (67.9%), and Adamaoua (47.1%) regions are the poorer.
                     Insecurity in the country is marked by two main crises: (i) abuses by the terrorist group Boko Haram in the Far North and
                     (ii) internal crises following socio-political problems in the North-West and South- West regions. The country counts
                     about 325,000 refugees from the Central African Republic (CAR) located in the East, Adamawa and North regions and
                     more than one million people are internally displaced across Cameroon, mainly from the Far North, North West and
                     South West regions.
                     However, the three regions are experiencing numerous water-related conflicts between herders and farmers on the one
                     hand, and between herders and fishermen on the other. The latter is exacerbated in the Far North by the quarrels
                     between “Arabes Choa” herders and Mousgoum fishermen over access to water resources.

                     Climate change is generating an increasing pressure on territories and populations. Urban populations in Cameroon, for
                     example, are generally settled in climate-prone areas, such as along the coast and in flood-prone areas. At the same
                     time, in rural areas, health, wealth and well-being are threatened by extreme heat and water scarcity. Climate risk levels
                     show that the Far North. Adamawa and North are the most vulnerable . The combined effects of climate change and
                     anthropogenic pressures, particularly in the northern and Far North regions, contribute to a reduction in the available
                     water potential and threaten the sustainability of water-related uses.


                    Mar 26, 2025                                                                                                       Page 3 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Cameroon Water Security Project (P180321)



                     Renewable surface water resources represent 79% of the total resource and are estimated at 265.88 km3 per year,
                     unequally distributed in the watersheds.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     To effectively achieve the expected results, the project depends on a strong commitment from the national and local
                     administrations, given that several institutions and sub-sectors will be intervened in the program. A Project Steering
                     Committee (PSC) chaired by The Ministry of Water and Energy (MINEE) will provide technical oversight and strategical
                     guidance.
                     The project will have two implementing agencies: MINEE and CAMWATER. Each PIU will hire and maintain throughout
                     project implementation adequate E&S stafffing. For MINEE PIU : 02 Social Development Specialists, 01 Environmental
                     Specialists, 01 OHS specialist, 01 GBV specialist . For CAMWATER PIU : 01 Social Development Specialist, 01 assistant
                     social development specialist, 01 Environmental Specialists, 01 OHS assistant specialist, 01 GBV specialist . MINEE has
                     solid experience in managing the E&S risks and impacts of projects financed by the World Bank.
                     However, the proposed project will be implemented under the Environmental and Social Framework (ESF), and the PIU
                     will not have had practical experience in applying ESF requirements. The E&S systems assessment (ESSA) carried out
                     within the framework of the Cameroon Power Sector Reform Program (PfoR _P178136) identified MINEE needs and
                     proposed capacity building plan. Subcompenent A2.2 includes a capacity building program for CAMWATER. The World
                     Bank will provide solid ESF training before implementation starts.
                     The country has stable E&S institutions, namely the Ministry of the Environment, Nature Protection and Sustainable
                     Development (MINEPDED), which is the central ESIA authority on impact assessment. Another key (governmental) party
                     involved in ESIA impact assessment is the inter-ministerial Committee on the Environment (CIE), who gives an opinion




Public Disclosure
                     on the quality of reports prior to their approval by the Minister. At the local level, there are Divisional Committees for
                     the technical and administrative supervision of ESMP.
                     The Ministry of social affairs (MINAS) is responsible for government policy on prevention, assistance
                     assistance and protection of Socially Vulnerable People. Prime Minister’s Decree No.2022/5074/PM of July 04, 2022
                     putting in place a national brigade on social compliance of projects give the mandate to MINAS of Social risk
                     management of projects to MINAS.

                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                        Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                 Substantial
                     Although the main, long-term impact of the Project is expected to be positive, there are several short-term adverse
                     risks and impacts that need to be addressed under components B and C. Among the activities envisaged in the Project
                     are the construction, extension, or rehabilitation of water supply and/or sanitation systems in rural areas and towns
                     in the Far North, North, and Adamawa region and, in Yaoundé and Douala the country's 2 main cities, the
                     construction and/or rehabilitation of infrastructure such as the construction of water supply systems, toilets,
                     community water pumps, sewerage systems, water treatment plants. All these activities will be sources of impacts
                     and risks for the physical, biological, and human environment including destruction of plant cover (plantations);
                     disturbance of aquatic fauna; accidental spillage of hydrocarbons and waste oils (maintenance of machinery); risk of
                     degradation of soil structure through compaction (machinery traffic); risk of groundwater contamination by chemical


                    Mar 26, 2025                                                                                                     Page 4 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Cameroon Water Security Project (P180321)



                     pollutants; air pollution; noise pollution; risk of respiratory illness due to air pollution (dust and exhaust emissions);
                     risk of damage to cultural remains in the event of accidental discoveries during excavations; risk of work-related
                     accidents; Occupational health and safety risks,; disruption to the normal peace and quiet of local communities; risk
                     of disruption to road traffic during the works and to access to local residents ., The component E Contingency
                     Emergency Response Component (CERC) defined for rapid response to natural disasters or health crises to protect
                     livelihoods of the population, if necessary, as part of the World Bank's project portfolio contributions to the
                     mobilization of financial resources to support the government's contingency plan will also include activities that will
                     involve some civil works and also present significant risks and impacts on the environment. However, measures
                     resulting from the implementation of similar projects in similar contexts (Cameroon, CAR) and scientific and technical
                     knowledge exist to address these risks and impacts. But, in addition to these risks and impacts related to project
                     activities, it is important to note that the project will be implemented in the three northern regions prone to drought,
                     the advancing dessert and flooding, and in the cities of Yaoundé and Douala, which are characterized by poorly
                     structured neighborhoods that will make the works phase tedious due to insufficient space for organizing safe work
                     areas. More over the risk related to the weak capacities of MINEE/CAMWATER/PIUs in the preparation of E&S
                     instruments and their implementation. Based on the above, the environmental risk is considered substantial. Given
                     that the specific sites where the project activities will be implemented are not clearly defined, the project has
                     prepared, consulted and disclosed on December 16, 2024 an ESMF which identifies the risks associated with the
                     various project interventions, defines the mitigation measures to be implemented and defines the institutional
                     monitoring arrangements to be made before, during and after the implementation of the project activities to
                     eliminate or mitigate the adverse environmental impacts.
                                                                                                                                     Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating



Public Disclosure
                     The project aims to enhance access to water and sanitation services in the Far North, North, Adamawa regions,
                     Yaoundé and Douala cities. These areas were prioritized due to their low coverage of WASH services, high poverty
                     levels, pressure on WASH services, vulnerability to climate change, conflict, migration, internal displacements, and
                     population size. Social risks associated with this project are related to resettlement compensation, population influx
                     in project areas, the marginalization of vulnerable groups and security risks. Resettlement Compensation: The
                     extension or rehabilitation of water supply and sanitation in rural areas, small towns, Yaoundé, and Douala is not
                     expected to cause significant physical displacements, resulting in minimal resettlement compensation. The project
                     will primarily focus on rehabilitating existing water supply systems that are no longer functional or adapted to the
                     production capacity of the national water service provider (CAMWATER). Potential extensions of water supply
                     systems are also not expected to require significant resettlement compensation as they will be installed within the
                     right-of-way of existing roads, which is part of CAMWATER's deployment strategy. This significantly reduces the risk
                     associated with resettlement compensation. Population influx in the project area: The project will involve small-scale
                     activities carried out by local municipal councils, which are unlikely to generate labor influx. Consequently, the risk
                     associated with community health and safety, such as tensions between project communities and migrant workers, is
                     minimized. Marginalization of vulnerable groups: The risk of excluding marginalized groups has been mitigated by the
                     project design as it is planning to improve access to potable water in public entities such as health centers, schools,
                     and markets. Additionally, a significant number of new standpipes will be installed in underserved neighborhoods,
                     making these public services accessible to everyone. Project activities will thus contribute to reducing vulnerabilities
                     by facilitating access to water and sanitation for vulnerable populations. On the other hand, the project will conduct
                     accessibility and safety audits can help identify barriers and opportunities for more inclusive design, ensuring that
                     facilities are accessible to persons with disabilities, the elderly, and women with small children. Security risks: Among


                    Mar 26, 2025                                                                                                       Page 5 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Cameroon Water Security Project (P180321)



                     the 05 regions prioritized, the Adamawa, North and Far North, Far North are subject to insecurity risks. The main
                     security risk in the Far North is related to Boko Haram terrorist group incursions in the Cameroon territory. However,
                     the three northern regions involved in the project are experiencing numerous water-related conflicts between
                     herders and farmers on one hand, and between herders and fishermen on the other. The social risk and impact are
                     assessed as Substantial at the appraisal stage. This risk will be addressed by including provisions for assessing and
                     addressing them in the terms of reference, work plans, and other documents, ensuring that the scope and outputs of
                     activities are consistent with ESSs 1-10.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                   Relevant

                      The program is an MPA (with 3 phases). The current project is the frst phase, , which includes a component on
                      investments on water security and WSS in prioritized rural and peri-urban areas. This standard is relevant because
                      these investments are likely to result in adverse environmental and social impacts. The E&S risk of the project is rated
                      as substantial given that the activities envisaged in the project, such as the construction, extension or rehabilitation of
                      water supply and/or sanitation systems in rural areas and towns in the Far North, North and Adamawa regions and in
                      Yaoundé and Douala, the country's 2 main cities, will give rise to environmental and social risks and impacts that will
                      require good capacities to manage.. However, identified security risks are not intrinsic to the project. Works will be
                      executed at the local level through municipal councils, involving less labor influx and associated social risks. The risk



Public Disclosure
                      of excluding marginalized groups is minimized, as the project will improve access to potable water in public entities
                      which are accessible to all. Activities under subcomponent C2 implemented by CAMWATER, involving the
                      construction and/or rehabilitation of resilient drinking water supply systems in Yaoundé and Douala are likely to
                      cause the disruption of economic activities and involve economic displacement. These activities are located within
                      the right -of-way of existing roads with associated OHS risks, especially road accidents. Given that the specific sites
                      where the project activities will be implemented are not clearly defined, the project has prepared and consulted an
                      ESMF (Environmental and Social Management Framework) including a GBV assessment, a SEP (Stakeholder
                      Engagement Plan), an LMP (Labor Management Procedure) and a Resettlement Framework The ESMF sets out
                      environmental and social screening procedure for sub-projects and the preparation of operational tools (ESIA,
                      Environmental and Social Impact Notice, RAP) prior to the implementation of activities. The ESMF have made some
                      key findings related to E&S risk management. Activities planned under each component of this project will generate
                      specific impacts : (i) Component A will contribute to : a sustainable management of water resources, a strengthened
                      governance and coordination of water users, improved access to drinking water and sanitation, capacity building and
                      employment, stakeholder stakeholder participation and reducing conflicts related to water use. (ii) Component B will,
                      among other: reduce the risk of water pollution, improve access to drinking water and sanitation services and
                      sanitation services, reduce water-related conflicts and strengthen governance and local governance and local
                      participation. (iii) Component C will, among other things: improve public health public health, equitable access to
                      water and sanitation, reducing water-related conflicts, improving water resource management, reducing
                      environmental pollution, improving the quality of urban life and strengthening local governance and community
                      participation. However, among the project components, Component C is the one that is also likely to generate
                      adverse environmental and social risks/impacts : economic displacement of project affected people, OHS risk related


                    Mar 26, 2025                                                                                                        Page 6 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Cameroon Water Security Project (P180321)



                      to road accidents during during the rehabilitation of WSS in Yaoundé and Douala; lack of coordination between the
                      various stakeholders; disruption to drinking water supply during works, disruption to road traffic; poor design of
                      facilities; water pollution; inadequate waste management; delays in infrastructure delivery; Risk of social and political
                      pressure during the selection of beneficiary municipal councils and communities. The general measures
                      recommended to mitigate impacts and risks include the development and implementation of specific environmental
                      and social instruments, selection of beneficiary communities based on eligibility criteria publicly disclosed, integrating
                      environmental and social actions, activities and measures into the works schedule; selecting contractors with a good
                      environmental and social track record will have a favorable impact on the E&S performance of the works to be
                      carried out.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                        Relevant

                      ESS10 is relevant to the Project. Stakeholder analysis and participation, together with a prior definition of watershed
                      characteristics, are fundamental to the selection of the watershed(s) to be targeted for intervention in the project.
                      The SEP was prepared using a participatory approach that enabled all project stakeholders to be consulted and their
                      expectations and concerns to be considered. Data was collected through documentary research, individual interviews
                      with key informants, focus group discussions and direct observations in the field. The data obtained made it possible
                      to map all the stakeholders, to take account of their interests and fears in the context of the Project and to propose
                      strategies for better stakeholder participation. 03 categories of stakeholders have been identified and analyzed under
                      this project: Affected parties, Other parties concerned and Disadvantaged or Vulnerable individuals or groups. (i)
                      Affected parties are individuals or groups of individuals directly affected by the project, whether due to the loss of
                      property on the project site, economic losses, or the environmental and social impacts. This category include the



Public Disclosure
                      following: project affected people, (local populations, vulnerable groups, farmers local pastoral producers, local
                      fishermen, traders in agricultural, pastoral and fishery products), organized civil society, Community-Based
                      Organizations (CBOs) organized in the field of agriculture, fishing, livestock farming and sanitation, CAMWATER staff,
                      the communes that will host the sub-projects, pupils and teachers, the medical profession and patients, service
                      providers who will be involved in implementing the sub-projects, the workforce that will be recruited, projects and
                      programs (PAEPYS, MEADEN) and the SEWASH project implementation unit. (ii) Other stakeholders including: local
                      authorities (city councils, communes), traditional chiefs, religious leaders, sectoral administrations, civil society
                      organizations, research institutions, financial and technical partners, the media, etc. (iii) Disadvantaged or vulnerable
                      individuals or groups. This category refer to those who may be disproportionately impacted or harmed by the project,
                      compared to other groups due to their vulnerable status, and who may require special engagement efforts and
                      methods to ensure their equal representation in project consultation and decision-making. This category includes:
                      rural women, women heads of households with little or no support, landless women, elderly people with no support,
                      children in difficult circumstances, particularly those with no fixed address (orphans and vulnerable children (OVC)),
                      IDPs, landless farmers, young people, girl mothers, people living with a disability (physical or mental), people and
                      households affected by HIV/AIDS, etc. Specific stakeholder engagement strategies have been proposed, relating to
                      the dissemination of information to stakeholders, consultations and taking into account the views of disadvantaged
                      and vulnerable groups. The implementation of stakeholder engagement activities will mobilize the teams of the
                      project's two PMUs (MINEE PMU and CAMWATER PMU). A Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) is included in this
                      SEP. There are several types of complaints within this mechanism: those relating to resettlement, those expressed by
                      beneficiary communities during the implementation of project activities, those relating to Gender-Based Violence and
                      especially to Sexual Exploitation and Abuse, Sexual Harassment or Violence Against Children (GBV/EAS/HS/VCE),


                    Mar 26, 2025                                                                                                       Page 7 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Cameroon Water Security Project (P180321)



                      those relating to the negative environmental and social impacts generated by the implementation of sub-projects,
                      those arising from bidders' complaints before, during or after the award of a contract, those relating to corruption,
                      misappropriation of funds and complaints related to the selection of beneficiary communities . Three bodies are
                      involved in handling complaints: the Grievance Management Committee (GRM committee) and the two Project
                      Management Units (PMU). For complaints relating to GBV, HS/EAS and VCE, the decentralized services of MINAS and
                      MINPROFF and the safeguard specialists of the two PMUs (MINEE PMU and CAMWATER PMU) will work together.
                      The complaints management mechanism should enable dissatisfied stakeholders to submit complaints about the
                      project's impacts or the consultation and engagement process implemented by the project.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                             Relevant

                      ESS2 is relevant for this project. The project will include direct workers, contracted workers and primary suppliers, all
                      of which will be covered under ESS2. Community workers as defined by ESS2 will also be mobilized to avoid labor
                      influx and security risks. Relying on community workers for small-scale infrastructure works will help avoid labor
                      influx and its associated challenges. By engaging community workers, projects can enhance local employment, reduce
                      the negative impacts of labor influx, and ensure that the benefits of infrastructure development are more equitably
                      distributed within the community. The rehabilitation or construction of new water and sanitation systems (WSS)
                      involves several labor risks, primarily related to occupational health and safety (OHS). Here are the key risks and
                      considerations: (i) Physical Hazards: Workers may fall into trenches or excavations, risk of equipment or soil collapsing
                      on workers, Handling of heavy materials can lead to injuries, working on Steep and Treacherous Terrain increasing
                      the risk of falls and other accidents. (ii) Exposure to Hazardous Materials, (iii) Confined Spaces. Working in confined
                      spaces like pipelines can be hazardous due to limited ventilation and movement. (iv) Electrical Hazards: Workers can



Public Disclosure
                      be exposed to underground electrical equipment during excavations and pipeline works. (v) Traffic Hazards : WSS to
                      be rehabilitated are within the corridor of existing roads. Working Near Roads with Live Traffic increases the risk of
                      accidents involving vehicles and project workers. (vi) Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) Practices. Poor OHS
                      practices can lead to accidents and health issues. By identifying and addressing these risks through proper planning,
                      training, and implementation of safety measures, projects can mitigate the potential hazards associated with the
                      rehabilitation or construction of water and sanitation systems. In order to mitigate labor and working conditions risks,
                      promote safety and health at work and ensure adherence to ESS2 provisions, the project will develop no later than 30
                      days after Project effectiveness and implement a Labor Management Plan (LMP) including a GRM for workers, a
                      tailored window for GBV issues, etc.. The project also consider the General EHSGs and, as appropriate, the industry
                      specific EHSGs and other GIIP. These OHS measures applying will also be set out in the ESCP. Code of Conduct to
                      adequately manage risks related to GBV, particularly SEA/SH in the workplace and in the community as well as any
                      other risks from labor influx will also prepared during implementation. A GBV action plan plan will be prepared during
                      project implementation and before the commencement of civil works. The action plan should include measures to
                      prevent and respond to GBV, such as integrating GBV risk management into project safeguard documents, developing
                      a GBV response and accountability framework, conducting GBV training for project staff, and establishing reporting
                      and referral mechanisms for survivors. OHS measures, ESMP, GBV requirements will be included in contractors
                      contracts, associated with the key performance indicators.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                              Relevant

                      ESS 3 is relevant to the project. Construction activities will be sources of pollution from wastewater/suspended
                      matter/heavy metals. Under component C and during the operation phase, water will be extracted from nearby


                    Mar 26, 2025                                                                                                      Page 8 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Cameroon Water Security Project (P180321)



                      surface water resources or underground through boreholes which can potentially impact other users of the facility,
                      water in the project area and on water quality. In addition, lack of maintenance and poor operation of water
                      infrastructure can lead to deterioration of water quality and water wastage due to leaks. Considering the sensitive
                      nature of watersheds ecosystems, specific measures will be put in place to minimize, mitigate and/or offset potential
                      adverse impacts. These impacts will be mitigated by the preparation and implementation a waste management plan
                      as part of the environmental and social impact assessment or environmental and social impact Notice for sub
                      projects.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                               Relevant

                      ESS4 is relevant to this project. The nature of the proposed activities including small-scale infrastructures
                      implemented at the local level by municipal councils are unlikely to exacerbate the GBV occurrences. The current
                      project also supports women empowerment by setting a target of women’s representation and participation in
                      decision-making positions in water institutions, providing safe and private facilities for women and girls, promoting
                      female entrepreneurs in delegating public services to private entities at the local levels. The project will also support
                      the training of young people and women from the MINEE on water and liquid sanitation professions. However, a GBV
                      risk assessment has been conducted as part of the ESMF. A GBV action plan will be prepared during project
                      implementation and before the commencement of civil works . Communities living in the project area are exposed to
                      health and safety issues, especially during construction and operations. However, the three regions are experiencing
                      numerous water-related conflicts between herders and farmers on the one hand, and between herders and
                      fishermen on the other. The latter is exacerbated in the Far North by the quarrels between “Arabes Choa” herders
                      and Mousgoum fishermen over access to water resources. The risk related to conflict between these users will be



Public Disclosure
                      mitigated through the following: (i) Participatory Approach and Stakeholder Engagement: The selection of Sub-
                      projects will be based on a participatory approach, involving all relevant stakeholders in the planning and
                      implementation phases. This includes conducting social analysis to identify and mitigate potential conflicts and
                      ensure inclusive access to benefits. (ii) Addressing Potential Conflict Triggers: Transparency and management issues
                      and limited capacities of local self-government can be potential conflict triggers. These issues will be addressed
                      through public consultation programs, capacity building to local municipal councils, and ensuring transparency in
                      project implementation. (iii) Conflict Over Resource Allocation: In areas with scarce water resources, such as
                      pastoralist regions, conflicts can arise over the location of water facilities. The project will engage with both host and
                      IDP communities in the planning process to ensure equitable distribution of resources and prevent conflicts. (iv)
                      Implementing Environmental and Social Management Frameworks (ESMF) and Environmental and Social
                      Management Plans (ESMP). According to ESS 4, the client will have to evaluate the risks and impacts of the project on
                      the health and safety of the affected communities, risk of illness and death from water borne diseases in case of
                      municipal wastewater contamination. As needed, the borrower will be required to prepare: security risk assessment
                      and security management plan during project implementation and prior to work start in conflict affected areas, in
                      case they are selected among the beneficiary municipal councils.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                   Relevant

                      ESS5 is relevant to this project. The extension or rehabilitation of water supply and/or sanitation in rural areas, small
                      towns, Yaounde and Douala are not expected to involve a substantial number of physical displacements, resulting in a
                      low anticipated resettlement compensation. The project will focus more on the rehabilitation of existing water supply
                      systems, which are no longer functional and/or no longer adapted with the production capacity of the national water


                    Mar 26, 2025                                                                                                       Page 9 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Cameroon Water Security Project (P180321)



                      service provider (CAMWATER). Potential extensions of water supply systems are not also expected to induce
                      significant resettlement compensation as they will be installed within the right-of-way of existing roads. This
                      arrangement is not specific to the current operation but is part of the deployment strategy of CAMWATER. The risk
                      associated with resettlement compensation is significantly reduced. A Ressettlement Framework, will be prepared ,
                      consulted upon, cleared by the Bank, publicly disclosed prior to project appraisal. A RAP will be prepared, consulted
                      upon, cleared by the Bank, publicly disclosed and compensation paid prior to works start. There is a real
                      improvement in the capacity of Cameroon government in the management of land acquisition and resettlement
                      compensation. The government of Cameroon has reinforced the national legal framework with the signing of the
                      circular letter N00002/MINDCAF/CAB/LC of February 09, 2024, instituting a certificate of possession of
                      administratively recognized customary land rights (CPDFC- AD) as part of the procedure for processing applications
                      for direct registration of occupied and/or exploited land of the national domain with a view to obtaining land title.
                      This is a real progress as customary land right is now recognized by the Government of Cameroon. Moreover, in a
                      view to facilitating resettlement process, the Prime Minister, Head of Government, signed the decree N0
                      097/CAB/PM of November 02, 2021, on the creation, organization and operation of the inter ministerial committee
                      responsible for speeding up procedures for preparation of compensation decrees. With the Involvement of this inter
                      ministerial committee, the timeline for the preparation and signing of compensation decrees has been significantly
                      reduced. This improvement is illustrated by the signing of compensation of compensation decrees under the
                      Cameroon - Chad Power Interconnection Project (168185) which took less than twelve (12) months. In the past this
                      process could take more than three (03) years. The recent improvement in these administrative procedures which
                      contribute to the mitigation of risks associated with resettlement compensation.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                    Relevant



Public Disclosure
                      Resources

                      The proposed Project is not expected to negatively impact protected areas and natural or critical habitats, but some
                      project activities will be implemented in rural and peri-urban areas that may have high biodiversity conservation
                      value and/or ecosystem services that may be impacted by the Project. As the specific locations of the project
                      activities are not yet known and the three regions targeted by the Project have several protected areas (National
                      Parks of Bouba Ndjidda , Benoue and Faro in the North region, Waza and Kalamaloue national parks in the Far North
                      region; Tchabal Mbabo, vallée du Mbéré Lobeke and, part of Mbam et Djerem National Park in the Adamawa region),
                      the environmental and social management framework (ESMF) includes criteria and procedures to ensure that all
                      sensitive ecosystems identified and treated accordingly .. Watershed Management Plans will pay attention to
                      biodiversity surveys and will include a Biodiversity Management Plans.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      The project is not covering geographical areas where indigenous people are located.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                         Relevant

                      ESS8 is relevant to the Project. Project activities will involve small civil works. The risks associated with cultural
                      heritage is minimized. The EMSF has set out an exclusion criteria list. As a first step, all proposed activities must be
                      screened to ensure that they fall within the eligible activities of the project and do not fall within the environmental


                    Mar 26, 2025                                                                                                      Page 10 of 13
                              The World Bank
                              Cameroon Water Security Project (P180321)



                      and social exclusion list set out in the EMSF. In line with ESMF provisions, any activity affecting the physical cultural
                      heritage, including tombs, temples, churches, historical remains, archaeological sites or other cultural buildings will
                      be excluded from the project. A complete site-specific inventory of cultural heritage will be conducted as part of the
                      ESIAs and the mitigation hierarchy will be applied on the management of the project's potential risks and impacts.
                      Graves structures and other cultural heritage in the project right-of-way, which may be affected and must be
                      relocated and will be included in the RAP to be prepared for the project. However, “Chance Find Procedures” has
                      been included in the ESMF and chance find clause will be included in civil engineering companies’ contracts requiring
                      contractors to stop construction if cultural heritage is encountered during construction and to notify and closely
                      coordinate with relevant mandated country authority for the salvaging and restoration of such cultural heritage.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                   Not Currently Relevant

                      This standard is not relevant. No financial intermediary will be used in this project.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                          Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                    No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features




Public Disclosure
                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                               No
                       Areas where “Use of Borrower Framework” is being considered: None

                       Areas where “Use of Borrower Framework” is being considered: None

                       The World Bank's Environmental and social Framework will apply to the proposed project. The latter will be
                       implemented in accordance with the requirements of the environmental and social standards (ESS) of the ESF and in
                       accordance with the national regulatory and legal requirements applicable at the national and state level. The
                       borrower (Ministry of Energy and Water Resource) does not have experience implementing projects under the ESF.
                       The E&S systems assessment (ESSA) carried
                       out within the framework of the Cameroon Power Sector Reform Program (PfoR _P178136) identified MINEE needs
                       and proposed capacity building plan. The Bank will provide guidance on preparing and implementing a capacity
                       building plan. Subcomponent A2.2 includes a capacity building program for CAMWATER. The World Bank will provide
                       solid ESF training before implementation starts.
                       The project intend to work with decentralized authorities. At the local level, there are Divisional Committees for the
                       technical and administrative supervision of ESMP. These committees will also benefit from the trainings.
                       As part of the implementation of the ESSA action plan, a special unit in charge of Environmental and Social risk
                       management has been created at MINEE and the World Bank is providing solid ESF training to MINEE staff appointed
                       in that unit. The country has stable E&S institutions, namely the Ministry of the Environment, Nature Protection and
                       Sustainable Development (MINEPDED), which is the central ESIA authority on impact assessment. Another key
                       (governmental) party involved in ESIA impact assessment is the inter-ministerial Committee on the Environment (CIE),



                    Mar 26, 2025                                                                                                      Page 11 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Cameroon Water Security Project (P180321)



                       who gives an opinion on the quality of reports prior to their approval by the Minister. At the local level, there are
                       Divisional Committees for the technical and administrative supervision of ESMP.

                       The current project is not anticipated to induce significant resettlement, the government of Cameroon has reinforced
                       the national legal framework with the signing of the circular letter N00002/MINDCAF/CAB/LC of February 09, 2024,
                       instituting a certificate of possession of administratively recognized customary land rights (CPDFC- AD) as part of the
                       procedure for processing applications for direct registration of occupied and/or exploited land of the national domain
                       with a view to obtaining land title. Moreover, in a view to facilitating resettlement process, the Prime Minister, Head
                       of Government, signed the decree N0 097/CAB/PM of November 02, 2021, on the creation, organization and
                       operation of the inter ministerial committee responsible for speeding up procedures for preparation of compensation
                       decrees.

                       The Ministry of social affairs (MINAS) is responsible for government policy on prevention, assistance
                       assistance and protection of Socially Vulnerable People. Prime Minister’s Decree No.2022/5074/PM of July 04, 2022
                       putting in place a national brigade on social compliance of projects give the mandate of Social risk management of
                       projects to MINAS.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                  No
                       None.




Public Disclosure
                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     Under Component B and compenent C, In line with ESF requirements the following instruments will be prepared prior
                     to project appraisal: ESMF, RFP, LMP, SEP including a GRM. At this stage, the borrower has provided a long list of
                     municipal councils to be selected based on specific criteria. This screening will take place during the first phase of
                     project implementation. The following site specific instruments will be preprared consulted upon, cleared by the Bank
                     and publicly prior during project implementation and prior to work start : ESIA, ESMP, RAP, and SRA/SMP as needed.
                     The ESMF include a dedicated Section on the CERC. Cumulative impacts as well as climate change related impacts will
                     be address in the ESIAs.

                     Under component C, an initial screening will be conducted for the selection of 120 communities out of 150 proposed by
                     the borrower. Apart from the selection of communities, the screening will also allow site identification. The above
                     mentioned ESMF and RFP are mainly for for Component C, where most of the activities with potential E&S risks and
                     impacts are likely to be generated from.

                     Security Risk Assessment (SRA) and Security Management Plans (SMP) will be prepared as needed if selected
                     communities located in areas affected by security risks. This instrument shall be prepared during project
                     implementation and prior to work start. .




                    Mar 26, 2025                                                                                                      Page 12 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Cameroon Water Security Project (P180321)



                     Watershed Management Plans will pay attention to biodiversity surveys and will include a Biodiversity Management
                     Plans (BMPs) . This will be prepared during project implementation.

                     Chance Find Procedures” has been included in the ESMF and will be inserted in civil engineering companies’ contracts.
                     This will be done during project implementation.


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Thierry Davy                        Title:            Senior Water Specialist

                      Email:                  tdavy@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects



Public Disclosure
                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                            Thierry Davy

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                                   Albert Francis Atangana Ze

                     ADM Social Specialist:                                          Aime Bertrand Nkouemou




                    Mar 26, 2025                                                                                                Page 13 of 13
