Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Rwanda Disaster Risk Management Development Policy Credit with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option
                                   (P181603)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprdpfcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                               Program Information Document (PID)

                                               Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 07-Aug-2025 | Report No: PIDDA00136




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                                Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Rwanda Disaster Risk Management Development Policy Credit with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option
     (P181603)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprdpfbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID               Operation Name
                                                          Rwanda Disaster Risk Management Development Policy
Rwanda                         P181603
                                                          Credit with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option
Region                         Estimated Approval Date    Practice Area (Lead)          Financing Instrument
EASTERN AND SOUTHERN                                                                    Development Policy
                               26-Sep-2025                Urban, Resilience and Land
AFRICA                                                                                  Financing (DPF)
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
MINECOFIN                      MINEMA

Proposed Development Objective(s)
The development objective of this operation is to strengthen Rwanda’s preparedness and response to disaster and
health emergencies, while strengthening resilience of its built environment and natural resources.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
Financing (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?

SUMMARY
  Total Financing                                                                                          141.00

DETAILS
  Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                         141.00
    World Bank Lending                                                                                     141.00

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprdecision#doctemplate
Decision
The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate



                                                                                                                  Page 1



                                                                                                        Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Rwanda Disaster Risk Management Development Policy Credit with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option
        (P181603)



 Explanation




 B. Introduction and Context
 Country Context
1. The proposed Disaster Risk Management (DRM) Development Policy Credit with Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown
Option (Cat DDO) is a stand-alone operation in the amount of US$141 million. The development objective of this Cat
DDO is to strengthen Rwanda’s preparedness and response to disaster and health emergencies, while strengthening
resilience of its built environment and natural resources. This proposed operation, fully aligned with the Government of
Rwanda’s (GoR) program, seeks to integrate disaster, climate and public health risk management as central elements of
public policies. The proposed Cat DDO is structured around three pillars with eight prior actions, which were all agreed
jointly with relevant GoR ministries, departments and agencies. Likewise, the results indicators are consistent with the
associated policy reforms, bolstering government ownership of the program.
2. Rwanda is at risk of numerous natural hazards, including droughts, floods, earthquakes, landslides, storms
(windstorms, lightning, rainstorms, and thunderstorms), wildfire, diseases, and epidemics. Since the early 2000s, the
frequency and severity of disasters, particularly caused by floods, landslides, and droughts, have significantly increased,
with increasing human casualties as well as economic and environmental losses.1 Heavy rains during the night of May 2–
3, 2023 alone, caused floods and landslides, accounting for 131 fatalities, 104 injuries, and more than 18,000 left homeless.
Total physical damages and economic losses of these heavy rains were estimated at US$193.32 million, and total recovery
needs at US$451 million. The transport sector was the worst affected, with damages estimated at US$115.3 million (72%
of total damages), followed by the housing, environment, and water resources management sectors (each accounting for
12% of damages). The May 2023 disaster was estimated to reduce the country’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth
rate by 0.4 percentage points.2 In Rwanda, approximately 40% of the population is exposed to landslides due to residing
in vulnerable areas in the highlands of the western, southern, and northern provinces.3 During the past decade, Rwandans
have been among the world’s most affected by landslides. Drought hazard is also of concern to the eastern province which
is considered the most vulnerable to climate impacts as dry spells are increasing in length, leading to food shortages. In
the west, rising temperatures are likely to force valuable tea and coffee production (which account for more than 20% of
export earnings) into higher, less productive lands4.
3. More than 80% of disaster impacts in Rwanda are climate-related5. From January 2015 to October 2022, the country
recorded 633 deaths, 225 people injured, 6,173 houses destroyed, and a loss of 11,893.79 ha of crops due to disasters.6
Heavy rainfall events are especially common in northern and western provinces, and cause flooding, flash flood events
and can trigger landslides and mudslides, leading to infrastructure damage and death.7 As climate change worsens, women
are likely to be impacted more significantly due to pre-existing gender gaps, such as women’s limited access to resources,


1 Ministry of Disaster Management and Refugee Affairs (2016). National Contingency Matrix Plan.
2 Government of Rwanda (2023). Floods and Landslides Rapid Damage and Needs Assessment.
3 Ministry of Disaster Management and Refugee Affairs (2015). National Risk Atlas of Rwanda.
4 United States Agency for International Development (USAID, 2019). Climate Change Risk Profile Rwanda.
5 Ministry of Disaster Management and Refugee Affairs (2015). National Risk Atlas of Rwanda.
6 Government of Rwanda (2023). Floods and Landslides Rapid Damage and Needs Assessment.
7 The World Bank Group (2021). Climate Risk Profile: Rwanda.



                                                                                                                         Page 2



                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Rwanda Disaster Risk Management Development Policy Credit with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option
        (P181603)


networks, and skills, including in emergency situations.8 Additionally, and due to the African Rift Valley, nearly 70% of
Rwanda’s population is exposed to magnitude 6.0 earthquakes, while 30% is exposed to magnitude 5.0 earthquakes.9 In
terms of intensity, the population in all the districts in the western province are exposed to earthquake intensity VII
including some districts in the southern and northern provinces. The rest of the country is also exposed to earthquakes at
intensity MMI VI.10
  Relationship to CPF
4. The proposed operation is aligned with the World Bank Group’s WBG Country Partnership Framework (CPF) (FY21–
FY26) (Report No. 148876-RW). As stated in the CPF, sustaining Rwanda’s growth trajectory and gains requires enhanced
resilience by improving adaptive capacity against climate‐related risks such as floods. The imperative to enhance resilience
is reflected in the CPF pillars and objectives, in particular Objective 5 which aims to increase urban agglomeration as
vulnerability to climate change, notably urban flood risks have been exacerbated by unmanaged urban growth. This
proposed Cat DDO helps to reduce risk (including from natural hazards and health emergencies) that can threaten overall
poverty reduction prospects. In addition, it supports policy reforms which contribute to each of the three main domains of
engagement in the CPF. The operation also supports key interventions that are needed in Rwanda to strengthen climate
resilience, as outlined in the 2022 World Bank Rwanda Climate Development Report. Further, the operation is aligned with
the new WBG Corporate Scorecard that is in line with the World Bank’s vision of a world free of poverty on a livable planet.

 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
 5. The development objective of this Cat DDO is to improve Rwanda’s preparedness and response to disaster and
 health emergencies, while strengthening resilience of its built environment and natural resources.
  Key Results
6. The eight prior actions (PAs) under the proposed Cat DDO set the stage for broader reforms that will enable the GoR
to strengthen its program for reducing climate and disaster risk. The proposed reform program has been structured
around a set of legal and policy instruments, including a Law (forestry), three national policies (energy, urbanization, and
water supply and sanitation), two sectoral plans (DRM and health), and two sets of guidelines (DRM and transport). Rwanda
has considerably advanced its legal and policy frameworks for climate and disaster resilience and these frameworks provide
legal binding and overall policy guidance. Consequently, most of the prior actions focus on implementation of these
frameworks. For instance, the 2015 DM Law and subsequent Prime Minister’s Orders (No 98/03 of 17/07/2018, and No
005/03 of 16/05/2022), assigned the Ministry in Charge of Emergency Management the responsibilities of developing
policies, laws and strategies for managing emergencies; and developing, disseminating and coordinating the
implementation of policies, strategies and programs related to disaster management (Prior Actions 1 and 2). Similarly, Law
42/2023 Governing Land and Waterways Transport provides for the Minister of Infrastructure to define technical and
service standards for roads (Prior Action 5). In addition, these policy instruments fit under NST2 (2024-2029), which is the
national development guiding document of Rwanda. Regarding the NHEROP (Prior Action 3), its development is in line with
the World Health Organization (WHO) and its Member States’ commitments within the framework of the 2005 International
Health Regulations (IHR), to detect, verify, assess and report events that may pose a risk to international public health. The
IHR are an instrument of international law, adopted pursuant to Article 21 of the WHO Constitution, and are legally-binding
on their 194 Member States, including Rwanda. The Cat DDO’s pillars and associated results outlined below are aligned



8 Global Green Growth Institute (2021). Gender Assessment of Stakeholders Report for GCF National Adaptation Plan Project on Building Flood

Resilience Capacities in Rwanda.
9 Ibid.
10 Ministry of Disaster Management and Refugee Affairs (2015). National Risk Atlas of Rwanda



                                                                                                                                              Page 3



                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Rwanda Disaster Risk Management Development Policy Credit with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option
       (P181603)


with the government’s commitment to further develop the country’s institutional and technical capacities to manage
disaster, climate change and public health risks.

 D. Project Description
7. The Cat DDO proposes to support policy reforms across three pillars. The first pillar will support the GoR’s to improve
disaster risk information and institutional coordination for multi-hazard disaster preparedness, response and recovery,
including health emergencies. Pillar 1 is fully aligned with the 2023 National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management
(DRRM) Policy pillar ‘Strengthening institutional governance to manage disaster risks. The second pillar will strengthen
climate and disaster resilience of the built environment. The policy reforms and associated RIs under this Pillar 2 will
contribute to reinforcing the country’s capacity to mainstream DRM and climate change with a focus on the urban,
transport, and energy sectors. This is in alignment with the National DRRM Policy pillar ‘Investing in disaster resilience
across sectors in planning and implementation’. The third pillar will enhance natural resources management for resilience.
The policy reforms and associated RIs under this Pillar 3 will support the management of protective state forests, and of
water-related disasters to reduce communities’ vulnerability to climate and disaster risk. This is consistent with ‘Building
resilience to climate change and sustainable management of the environment and natural resources’, which is one of the
priorities of the 5-year Government Program NST2 (2024-2029) to guide national development.
8. Cat DDO drawdown trigger: The proposed operation will follow the World Bank’s disbursement procedures for a DPF
with Cat DDO. Funds may be drawn in response to a declaration of Category 3 or Category 4 disasters, which as defined by
the Disaster Management Law No. 41/2015, Category 3 is a disaster which occurs in any District and is managed using
resources from the Ministry and its partners, while Category 4 is a disaster which is beyond the country’s means. The
National Disaster Management Committee (NADIMAC), which is chaired by the Minister in charge of Emergency
Management (MINEMA) declares Category 3 and Category 4 disasters. The specific criteria for declaration of Category 3
and Category 4 for natural disasters are detailed in the 2024 National Guidelines for Disaster Emergency Response and
Recovery. In addition to natural hazard risks, a disaster may include public- health related emergencies, such as the threat
or outbreak of fatal or highly infectious diseases including endemics, epidemics, or pandemics. The 2024 National Health
Emergency Response Operations Plan (NHEROP) includes four levels of emergency response, with level 4 identified as
national disaster. The declaration of a national disaster referred to under the NHEROP falls under the same legal framework
of the 2015 Disaster Management Law. For the purposes of the Cat DDO, a disaster does not include any emergency that is
predominantly political, technological, security, military, or fiscal in nature.
9. Cat DDO drawdown period and renewal: The drawdown period for this operation will be three years. The Borrower can
renew it one time for an additional three-year period during which the Cat DDO can be disbursed (in whole or in part). The
World Bank will monitor the implementation of the DRM program (see Annex 1). If it is not being implemented satisfactorily,
the Borrower may not be eligible to submit a disbursement request. The adequacy of the macroeconomic framework is
assessed at effectiveness and reconfirmed at renewal, but it is not required for drawdown. The extension would require
the approval of the Regional Vice President of the World Bank. The renewal will need to take place no earlier than one year
and no later than six months before the expiration date.

 E. Implementation
 Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

10.    In Rwanda, disaster management is governed by Law No. 41/2015 of August 29, 2015. As stated by this Law,
primary responsibility for disaster management shall rest with the Government. This Law established disaster




                                                                                                                       Page 4



                                                                                                               Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Rwanda Disaster Risk Management Development Policy Credit with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option
        (P181603)


management organs and their organization, responsibilities, and functions. Further, it introduced four disaster categories11,
which are based on the government’s capacity to manage them. It also gave provisions for disaster risk reduction, disaster
preparedness and response, rehabilitation and recovery from disasters, and sources of resources allocated to disaster
management. The responsibilities, organizational structure and mission of the Ministry in Charge of Emergency
Management (MINEMA) are stipulated in the Prime Minister's Order No 005/03 of 16/05/2022. The organization and
functioning of disaster management organs at national, district (yet to be operationalized and strengthened) and sectoral
levels, were further determined through the Prime Minister’s Order No 98/03 of 17/07/2018. The highest level of these
organs is the National Disaster Management Committee (NADIMAC), chaired by the Minister in charge of Emergency
Management (MINEMA) and comprised of ministers whose portfolios involve DRM activities, including response. The
disaster management Law gives NADIMAC the role to provide disaster management leadership, advise on the prevention
of, response to, and recovery from disasters. NADIMAC coordinates relief efforts within all institutions and takes necessary
decisions on which actions to be taken in case of categories 3 and 4 disasters.

 F. Poverty and Social Impacts, and Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects

  Poverty and Social Impacts
11.      The policies supported by this operation are expected to have either neutral or small indirect positive effects
on poverty. Considering 46 percent of poor households in the country report their plots being affected by environmental
issues, including floods, erosion, landslides, change of climate, destructive rains, and loss of soil fertility, compared to only
26 percent of households in the highest quintile,12 strengthening institutional governance to manage disaster risks (prior
action 1), and enhancing preparedness (prior action 1) to respond to disasters are likely to benefit households, especially
the poor and most vulnerable groups that include women, youth and the elderly.
12.     The COVID-19 pandemic had devastating effects on the labor market and on household welfare in Rwanda.
More than 170,000 jobs were lost between 2020 and 2021, and the number of unemployed increased by almost 530,000
between the last quarter of 2019 and the last quarter of 2022. Even before the pandemic, among the 47 percent of poor
students who report missing school days, 12 percent missed classes due to poor health. In comparison, only 30 percent of
students in the highest quintile report missing school days13. Health issues are also the main reason why people are absent
from work, according to the labor force survey. This is why ensuring an adequate response to health emergencies from
infectious disease outbreaks to natural disasters (prior action 3) is expected to have positive effects on household welfare.
 Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects
13.     The series of prior actions outlined collectively demonstrate Rwanda's commitment to enhancing disaster
preparedness, response, and resilience while considering environmental sustainability. These actions encompass
strategic plans, policies, and legal frameworks aimed at improving institutional coordination, promoting climate and
disaster resilience, and enhancing natural resources management. These initiatives underscore Rwanda's commitment to
integrating environmental considerations into disaster preparedness and response efforts, aligning with constitutional
requirements for environmental protection and the institutional framework outlined by the Ministry of Environment.



11 Category 4: a disaster which is beyond the Country’s means; Category 3: a disaster which occurs in any District and is managed using resources
from the Ministry and its partners; Category 2: a disaster which occurs in any District and which is managed using resources available in the District
in collaboration with its partners; Category 1: a disaster which has occurred in a Sector and is managed using resources available in the Sector in
collaboration with its partners.
12 Based on the Integrated Survey of Living Conditions 2016/17 (EICV5), which is the most recent living conditions survey available.
13 Based on EICV5 data.



                                                                                                                                                 Page 5



                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Rwanda Disaster Risk Management Development Policy Credit with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option
       (P181603)


14.      Initiatives such as the approval of MINEMA’s Strategic Plan and the NHEROP recognize the importance of
integrating environmental considerations into disaster preparedness and response efforts. While some initiatives, such
as the NHEROP, may have potential negative environmental impacts, mitigation measures are proposed, such as waste
management protocols and incorporating environmentally friendly practices. Similarly, the approval of the National
Energy Policy highlights Rwanda's proactive approach towards sustainable energy development. This prior action has
potential positive environmental impacts through enhancing disaster response capacity and reducing disaster-related
effects on energy supply infrastructure, while promoting renewable energy adoption. Further, efforts to improve disaster
resilience in the built environment and natural resources management demonstrate Rwanda's commitment to promoting
sustainable development practices, including sustainable building standards, urbanization policies, and forest
conservation laws. Notably, the approval of the Law on Protective State Forests under PA7 reinforces the legal framework
for sustainable forest management, particularly through the designation of protective state forests in high-risk zones.

 G. Risks and Mitigation
15.     The overall residual risk rating for this operation is substantial. The only two substantial risks to achieving the
development objective of this Cat DDO relate to the technical design of project or program, and institutional capacity for
implementation and sustainability.
16.      Technical design of project or program. The substantial risk rating is driven by the multi-sectoral design of the
operation which includes a diverse set of sub-sectors and thematic areas in which actions are to be taken in parallel across
a total of eight MDAs including MINECOFIN, MINEMA, MININFRA, RTDA, Ministry of Health, RBC, Ministry of Environment
and Rwanda Water Board. To mitigate the risk the Program will make use of supporting donor funding through, for
example, the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery, and relevant ongoing Bank financed operations to
provide targeted technical assistance to participating government entities.
17.     Institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability. This substantial risk rating is driven by an identified
implementation challenge for successfully mainstreaming reforms in sectoral policies in Rwanda. The Program aims to
mitigate this risk by strengthening MINEMA’s role to provide increased support and coordination to other MDAs. This will
be supported through an inter-ministerial steering committee chaired by the Permanent Secretary of MINEMA to provide
implementation oversight, and to ensure adequate budget and staff are allocated to deliver on defined activities and
associated indicators.




                                                                                                                         Page 6



                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Rwanda Disaster Risk Management Development Policy Credit with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option
     (P181603)




@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
CONTACT POINT

World Bank
 Saurabh Suresh Dani
 Senior Urban Development Specialist

 Augustin Maria
 Lead Urban Specialist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 MINECOFIN

Implementing Agencies
 MINEMA
 Aldabert RUKEBANUKA
 DG Policy, Planning and Risk Reduction
 arukebanuka@minema.gov.rw

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                      Saurabh Suresh Dani, Augustin Maria

Approved By




                                                                                                          Page 7



                                                                                                  Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Rwanda Disaster Risk Management Development Policy Credit with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option
     (P181603)



Practice Manager/Manager:             Peter D. Ellis                       07-Jan-2025

Country Director:                     Sahr John Kpundeh                    07-Aug-2025




                                                                                                          Page 8



                                                                                                  Official Use Only
