Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Optimization Of Dam Safety And Resilience Of Irrigation Systems In The Context Of Climate Change (P181046)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                             Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                       (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                         Date Prepared/Updated: 12/19/2024 | Report No: ESRSC04681




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Jan 15, 2025                                                                                                 Page 1 of 7
                               The World Bank
                               Optimization Of Dam Safety And Resilience Of Irrigation Systems In The Context Of Climate Change (P181046)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                   Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P181046                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)        AL-Dam Safety                2025

                     Operation Name            Optimization of Dam Safety and Resilience of Irrigation Systems in the Context of Climate
                                               Change

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries            Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Albania                   Albania                                  EUROPE AND CENTRAL            Water
                                                                                        ASIA

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                 Estimated Board Date

                     Ministry Agriculture      Ministry of Agriculture and Rural        31-Jan-2025
                     and Rural                 development
                     Development




Public Disclosure
                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date

                     20-Nov-2024               1,612,903.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The objective of the project is to assist the Albanian Government in developing an investment program in dam safety
                     and modernization to increase water storage capacity and climate resilience of irrigation systems.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The project aims to support the GoA in conducting pre-feasibility studies of more than 400 existing dams. The overall
                     goal is to reveal and address the climate risk to water management and agriculture and dilapidated water infrastructure
                     with a focus on increasing the water storage capacity of reservoirs for adaptation to a changing climate. Specifically, the
                     project intends to prepare grounds towards increasing the safety and water availability of dams to irrigate an area of
                     180,000 ha of agricultural land mostly located in the western–coastal part of Albania from Shkodra to Vlora, enabling


                    Jan 15, 2025                                                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Optimization Of Dam Safety And Resilience Of Irrigation Systems In The Context Of Climate Change (P181046)



                     200,000 farms to increase yields and farm income. The rehabilitation, modernization of dams, and improvements of
                     dam safety will need to include structural and non-structural measures, hydrological assessment, structural
                     strengthening of dams and improvement of the water storage in the reservoirs, sediment management, modernization
                     of control and monitoring, and other measures that would improve the safety and operation of the dams. Increasing the
                     dam’s safety would provide socio-economic and environmental benefits in Albania.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     According to the OESRC Advisory Note Technical Assistance and the Environmental and Social Framework (May 21,
                     2019), TA under this Project will be of Type 1: Supporting the preparation of future investment projects (whether or not
                     funded by the Bank. The TA to be provided through a Recipient Executed Trust Fund (RETF) will support the Ministry of
                     Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD) to carry out pre-feasibility studies to assess/evaluate dam safety for 431
                     dams all around the country. Due to the uneven spatial and temporal distribution of rainfall and climate change,
                     irrigation is one of the most important investments with a direct impact on the sustainable growth of agricultural
                     production in the country, making the rehabilitation of agriculture dams and increasing water storage capacity a priority
                     intervention. An estimated 360,000 hectares have been equipped for irrigation, 280,000 hectares for drainage, and
                     130,000 hectares for marine flood protection. More than 55% of irrigated agriculture’ land is located in the western part
                     of the country. About 626 agricultural reservoirs provide 0.56 billion m3 of water for irrigation purposes mainly during
                     the hot and dry summer season for 180,000 ha. With World Bank support under the now closed Water Resources and
                     Irrigation Project, 40,000 ha of agricultural land was improved through the application of new irrigation and drainage
                     practices, while 13 dams were rehabilitated to meet international dam safety standards and lower the risk of severe



Public Disclosure
                     flooding. The GoA has requested continued World Bank support while receiving a grant from the Western Balkan
                     Investment Fund for pre-feasibility studies for 431 dams and associated irrigation networks. All reservoirs are for
                     irrigation use. As per MARD, approximate 35% of all dams are large. These are These are earth dams ranging in height
                     between 3.2m and 42m, majority between 16-20m. Most benefits will go to rural communities heavily relying on
                     agriculture.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The MARD will be the implementing institution for the proposed operation. Ministry has already implemented WB
                     financed projects. Water Resources and Irrigation Project (WRIP P121186) which was implemented between 2013-2021
                     and invested in improving irrigation canals in Divjaka and Saranda regions. The Climate Resilience and Agriculture
                     Development (CRAD) Project (P178715) will further, invest in modernization of irrigation schemes already invested
                     under WRIP. The respective MARD staff is familiar with the previous environment and social safeguards requirements.
                     CRAD project, became effective in February 2024, is the first project of the Ministry under the new Environmental and
                     Social Framework (ESF). MARD is committed to hiring one part-time environmental and one part-time social expert,
                     both experienced in environmental and social risk management, to be part of the PIU and ensure incorporation of
                     Environmental and social requirements in the pre-feasibility studies as per the Bank's ESF and Albanian regulatory
                     framework. The specialists hired under the CRAD, will also support the present Project and will help the Recipient make
                     informed decisions on sites selection and minimize potential adverse impacts. REFT will support studies while physical
                     activities will be undertaken in the future with the support of other funding sources. Arrangement pertaining CRAD
                     PIU’s environmental and social experts contributing to the project implementation will be reflected in the
                     Environmental and Social Commitment Plan of the project. Terms of Reference (ToR) for the studies will specify that the
                     consultant team to be hired for this task shall include experienced environmental and social specialists to assess and

                    Jan 15, 2025                                                                                                     Page 3 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Optimization Of Dam Safety And Resilience Of Irrigation Systems In The Context Of Climate Change (P181046)



                     mitigate environmental and social risks and potential impacts associated with works to be carried out downstream using
                     other sources of funding.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                           Moderate


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                    Moderate
                     The Project will not finance any physical works. It will support pre-feasibility studies assessing the actual situation of
                     431 dams of irrigation reservoirs in the country. These are earth dams with the height ranging between 3.2m and
                     42m. Around 35% all dams are large, majority of them 16-20m high. The studies will inform the dam investment
                     program by identifying the functional dams in Albania that would be covered by the Feasibility Study later on, beyond
                     the scope of this Project. Among other aspects, pre-feasibility the studies will: (i) Undertake irrigation network multi-
                     criteria analysis and pre-feasibility quality assessment of downstream irrigation network; (ii) Identify environmental
                     risks of future investments on biodiversity, soil fertility, health of freshwater ecosystems, and ecological status of
                     freshwater bodies in the surrounding command areas aimed for the improvement of irrigation water availability, and,
                     (iii) Assess institutional sustainability. Relevant ESSs will be adhered to while assessing various criteria of dams,
                     reservoirs, and irrigation canals downstream. Climate change impacts and competition for water use that may
                     emerge in case of future downstream developments will also be factored into the feasibility studies. The pre-
                     feasibility studies will consider environmental assessment when suggesting specific dams for potential interventions.
                     The interventions themselves to be detailed in the next phase, will aim an increase in water storage capacity, increase



Public Disclosure
                     of dams' safety, efficiency on water use and resilience to protect people and natural environment. These technical
                     studies and all other outputs of the TA will be consistent with World Bank ESF requirements. MARD will rely on the
                     existing CRAD PIU with sufficient capacity on the ground. Considering all the above and potential downstream
                     impacts, the Environmental Risk is assessed as Moderate.
                                                                                                                                      Moderate
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The operation involves TA to support the preparation of prefeasibility studies that will, as output, help the MARD to
                     carry out prioritization for future investments in dam safety. The proposed Social Risk Rating is Moderate. Even
                     though this is TA operation that will only inform future, more detailed analysis, there are still potential social risks
                     that need to be managed. The risks relating to the operation are mostly of a Public Concern nature and possible
                     opposition to the studies that would be carried with follow up TF or IPF. Communities living near may become
                     worried about the potential findings and safety assessments leading to fear about safety. Opposition might arise from
                     the surrounding communities concerned that their livelihoods and assets might be affected by potential dam repairs.
                     This TF that will finance the prefisibility studies. This study will mark the structure weather it is priority for
                     investment, but not what type of retrofitting, will also mark those structures for retrofitting with information weather
                     the structure could be associated with cultural heritage, tangible and or intangible PCR (physical cultural resources)
                     links . . Clear information should be provided on how the findings will be used and what steps will be taken to ensure
                     public safety and address future concerns. Collaboration with environmental and cultural experts to address any
                     potential impacts on ecosystems and heritage sites would also be key to address the social risks based on perception.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                    Jan 15, 2025                                                                                                        Page 4 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Optimization Of Dam Safety And Resilience Of Irrigation Systems In The Context Of Climate Change (P181046)



                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                   Relevant

                      The pre-feasibility studies will consider impacts on biodiversity, soil health and other sensitive environmental and
                      social receptors, including health and safety of surrounding communities and include recommendations for
                      addressing said potential Environmental and Social impacts that are consistent with ESSs 1-10.The studies should
                      include recommendations for mitigating the impacts found as per the OESRC Advisory Note. The project will be
                      implemented with robust stakeholder engagement both during the studies and dissemination of their findings. This
                      will be achieved by including relevant ESF requirements in all ToRs and studies supported by the Project, and will be
                      enforced through integrating such requirements into the ESCP and the POM. The project will use the services of a
                      consultant, including environmental and social experts, to carry out Pre-Feasibility assessment and advise on the
                      need of additional in-depth studies to be undertaken later, at the feasibility assessment phase.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                        Relevant

                      Given that main social risks for the activities are related to improper engagement and information sharing with
                      affected and interested parties, the counterparts will engage stakeholders early in the process and prepare a robust
                      Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) prior to Appraisal. Interested parties for the activities would be from private and
                      the public sector, local and central level. Disadvantaged groups will be those communities living near the most
                      remoted dams from the regional centers, Farmers and farmers associations, food processors, agro-tourism and agro-
                      business holdings would be direct beneficiaries and interested parties due to dependence on reliable irrigation. The
                      SEP will be prepared in interaction with the listed stakeholders, and the final draft will be consulted and disseminated



Public Disclosure
                      to all stakeholders and interested parties before Appraisal. SEP will describe also the preparation and establishment
                      of the appropriate GRM for the activity.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                              Relevant

                      The standard is relevant. The project workers would be direct workers, and these would be consultants hired to
                      implement the activities, the PIU of the project and the contracted workers, who would be the consultants defining
                      and preparing the pre-feasibility studies. The respective riks for the problems is low as the contracts of all consultants
                      engaged are reviewed by the bank and later the performance is monitored . Potential labor management issues
                      mostly related working conditions and safety (including the SEA/SH) will be defined in the POM and adeuqate
                      reference to this will be introduced in the ESCP. Measures, with specific timelines and monitoring measures and
                      appropriate channels to receive potential labor-related grievances will be included in the POM.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                               Relevant

                      Pre-feasibility studies to be carried out under the project may identify a need of reconstructing several dams. Such
                      works would generate waste, emissions, noise, and may have other impacts that will have to be assessed later,
                      beyond the scope of the project. However, the project will identify main types of pollution that may be associated
                      with future civil works and provide an outline of impact mitigation approach. The pre-feasibility studies will also
                      consider actions for optimizing the functionality of water reservoirs and increasing dam safety. Relevant provisions of
                      this ESS will be included in the technical studies through adequate provisions of the ESCP and the POM.



                    Jan 15, 2025                                                                                                        Page 5 of 7
                              The World Bank
                              Optimization Of Dam Safety And Resilience Of Irrigation Systems In The Context Of Climate Change (P181046)



                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                               Relevant

                      Pre-feasibility studies will propose solutions for optimizing the functionality of irrigation reservoirs and increasing
                      dam safety aimed at reducing health, safety, and security risks and impacts on project-affected communities and
                      describe responsibilities of the Recipient to avoid or minimize such risks and impacts. Groups of population that are
                      likely to be particularly vulnerable to the risks of future woks on irrigation dams will also be identified for more
                      detailed study at a later stage. Overall, pre-feasibility studies will include recommendations on incorporated dam
                      safety aspects into the next phase of the program, comprising feasibility studies and investments.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                    Not Currently Relevant

                      The TA will select the structures weather to be retrofitted or not. Interventions will be specified with follow up
                      operation

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                    Relevant
                      Resources

                      The project will include an assessment of reservoir sedimentation rates, irrigation needs, flood holding capacities,
                      opportunities to use irrigation reservoirs for other purposes such as recreational, fisheries, etc. It will also identify
                      potential impacts of future investments on biodiversity, soil fertility, health of freshwater ecosystems, and ecological
                      status of freshwater bodies in the surrounding command areas aimed for the improvement of irrigation water
                      availability. ToRs and outputs of pre-feasibility studies will be aligned with the relevant requirements of ESS6.
                      Capacity of MARD to undertake quality control of pre-feasibility and feasibility studies and to provide oversight of



Public Disclosure
                      future works from biodiversity conservation perspective will be assessed during project implementation.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                          Not Currently Relevant

                      The TA will select the structures weather to be retrofitted or not. Interventions will be specified with follow up
                      operation.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                   Not Currently Relevant



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                            No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                     No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                                No
                       N/A


                    Jan 15, 2025                                                                                                        Page 6 of 7
                               The World Bank
                               Optimization Of Dam Safety And Resilience Of Irrigation Systems In The Context Of Climate Change (P181046)




                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                           No



                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     Environmental and Social Commitment Plan, Stakeholder Engagement Plan, will be developed, disclosed and consulted
                     with stakeholders before Appraisal.


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Raimund Mair                        Title:         Senior Water Resources Management
                                                                                                 Specialist

                      Email:                  rmair@worldbank.org




Public Disclosure
                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                                             Raimund Mair

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                                                    Erion Istrefi

                     ADM Social Specialist:                                                           Bekim Imeri




                    Jan 15, 2025                                                                                                 Page 7 of 7
