Public Disclosure Authorized
                                    The World Bank
                                    Rwanda Disaster Risk Management Development Policy Credit with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown
                                    Option(P181603)




                               Note to Task Team: The following sections are system generated and changes must be made in Data Sheet(s). Delete
                               this note when finalizing the document.


                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidcondpfcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Program Information Document (PID)

                                                 Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 27-Jun-2024 | Report No: PIDIC00094




Public Disclosure Authorized
      The World Bank
      Rwanda Disaster Risk Management Development Policy Credit with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown
      Option(P181603)


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@piddpfbasicinformation#doctemplate
 BASIC INFORMATION


 A. Basic Project Data

 Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                Operation Name
                                                            Rwanda Disaster Risk Management Development Policy
 Rwanda                         P181603
                                                            Credit with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option
 Region                         Estimated Approval Date     Practice Area (Lead)         Financing Instrument
 EASTERN AND SOUTHERN                                                                    Development Policy
                                29-Nov-2024                 Urban, Resilience and Land
 AFRICA                                                                                  Financing (DPF)
 Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
 MINECOFIN                      MINEMA

Proposed Development Objective(s)
 The development objective of the proposed operation is to improve the country’s capacity to reduce climate and
 disaster risk, including health-related emergencies.

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
 Financing (US$, Millions)


 Maximizing Finance for Development

 Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?
 Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?

 SUMMARY
   Total Financing                                                                                           142.00

 DETAILS
   Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                          142.00
     World Bank Lending                                                                                      142.00

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@piddpfdecision#doctemplate
Decision
The review did authorize the preparation to continue



                                                                                                                  Page 1
       The World Bank
       Rwanda Disaster Risk Management Development Policy Credit with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown
       Option(P181603)




 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context

The proposed Disaster Risk Management (DRM) Development Policy Financing with Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown
Option (DPF with Cat DDO) operation, valued at US$142 million, is set to support Rwanda's reform program to improve
the country’s capacity to reduce disaster, climate risks and improve management of the socioeconomic and fiscal
impacts of disasters. Rwanda's economic landscape has been marred by natural hazards such as droughts, floods, and
earthquakes, with a notable increase in frequency and severity since the early 2000s. The catastrophic events of May 2023
alone resulted in 131 deaths and economic losses estimated at US$193.32 million, with a projected 0.4 percentage point
dip in GDP growth. Over 80% of Rwanda's disaster impacts are climate-related, with significant losses in lives, housing,
and crops recorded between 2015 and 2022. The country's rapid urbanization, aimed at economic growth, is challenged
by unplanned land-use changes and increased vulnerability to climate and disaster risks, which are compounded by
persistent poverty levels. Regarding health-related emergencies, epidemics and climate change pose significant health
risks in Rwanda, with the COVID-19 pandemic and severe weather events disrupting healthcare services and
infrastructure. The changing climate is also expected to escalate the spread of diseases like malaria and dengue,
particularly in areas previously unaffected.
Despite these challenges, Rwanda has experienced robust economic growth and improvements in living standards, with
ambitions to transition from a low-income to a middle-income country by 2035. However, the economy's dependence
on climate-sensitive sectors poses a risk to this growth trajectory. Climate change threatens to disrupt agricultural
production, damage physical capital through flooding, reduce labor productivity, and affect tourism demand. Projections
suggest that without intervention, Rwanda's GDP could fall 5–7% below the baseline by 2050, with severe floods
potentially exacerbating this reduction by an additional 4.4 percentage points. The GoR's policy reforms, as part of the
DRM operation, seek to mitigate these risks, enhance sustainable development, and reduce extreme poverty, aligning
with the country's long-term urbanization and economic goals.


 Relationship to CPF

The proposed operation is aligned with the World Bank’s Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) completed in June 2019
and the World Bank Group Country Partnership Framework (CPF) (FY21–FY26) (Report No. 148876-RW). The SCD
emphasized building climate resilience as a key development priority to address the structural constraints that could
prevent Rwanda from realizing its development objectives. As stated in the CPF, sustaining Rwanda’s growth trajectory
and gains requires enhanced resilience by improving adaptive capacity against climate‐related risks such as floods as
Rwanda’s exposure to climate change and the associated disaster risks can undermine its growth prospects and slow down
poverty reduction efforts. The imperative to enhance resilience is reflected in the CPF pillars and objectives, in particular
Objective 5 which aims to increase urban agglomeration as vulnerability to climate change, notably urban flood risks have
been exacerbated by unmanaged urban growth. This operation helps to mitigate risks (including from natural hazards and
health emergencies) that can threaten overall poverty reduction prospects. In addition, it supports policy reforms which
contribute to each of the three main domains of engagement in the CPF.



                                                                                                                        Page 2
       The World Bank
       Rwanda Disaster Risk Management Development Policy Credit with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown
       Option(P181603)


 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

 The proposed Project Development Objective is to improve Rwanda’s institutional coordination and financial
 capacity to reduce climate, disaster, health-related risk. This DPF with Cat DDO, fully aligned with the Government’s
 program described in Section 3, seeks to integrate disaster, climate and public health risk management as central
 elements of public policies. The proposed DPF is structured around three pillars with 10 prior actions, which were all
 agreed jointly with relevant GoR ministries, departments and agencies. Likewise, the results indicators (RIs) are aligned
 with the associated policy reforms, bolstering government ownership of the program.

  Key Results

The expected results of Pillar 1 are: (i) number of national disaster risk profiles developed; (ii) number of simulation
exercises to enhance preparedness and response procedures for selected hazards conducted; (iii) Public Health Emergency
Operations Center operational; and (iv) number of farmers covered by agricultural climate risk insurance schemes. The
expected result for Pillar 2 are: (i) vulnerability assessment to climate and disaster risk of the electricity infrastructure
undertaken; (ii) km of roads developed, upgraded, or rehabilitated in accordance with the new guidelines; (iii) number of
bridges developed, upgraded, or rehabilitated in accordance with the new guidelines; (iv) number of building permits
issued in compliance with the updated building code; (v) ha. of urban land developed in adequate locations through the
implementation of detailed physical plans; and (vi) number of students (of which 50% female) benefitting from resilient
and inclusive education buildings. The expected result for Pillar 3 are: (i) number of ha. of Protective State Forests under
improved management; (ii) number of water-related disaster hazard maps developed; and (iii) number of river
catchments/people covered by enhanced early warning systems.

 D. Concept Description

The proposed program supports reforms under three pillars, namely to: (i) improve institutional coordination and financial
capacity for preparedness and response; (ii) increase climate and disaster resilience of the built environment; and (iii)
improve natural resources management for resilience.

The first pillar will support the GoR’s to improve institutional coordination for multi-hazard disaster preparedness and
response, including health emergencies, and to promote diversification of disaster related financial instruments and
enhance capacity to respond to disasters. Pillar 1 is fully aligned with the 2023 National Disaster Risk Reduction and
Management (DRRM) Policy pillar ‘Strengthening institutional governance to manage disaster risks’. The second pillar will
increase climate and disaster resilience of the built environment. The policy reforms and associated RIs under this Pillar 2
will contribute to reinforce the country’s capacity to mainstream DRM and CC with a focus on the urban, transport, energy,
and education sectors. This is in alignment with the National DRRM Policy pillar ‘Investing in disaster resilience across
sectors in planning and implementation’. The third pillar will improve natural resources management for resilience. The
policy reforms and associated RIs under this Pillar 3 will support the management of protective state forests, and of water-
related disasters to reduce communities’ vulnerability to climate and disaster risk.




                                                                                                                        Page 3
          The World Bank
          Rwanda Disaster Risk Management Development Policy Credit with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown
          Option(P181603)


    E. Poverty and Social Impacts, and Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects

    Poverty and Social Impacts

The policies supported by this operation are expected to have either neutral or small indirect positive effects on poverty
and most vulnerable populations. Considering environmental issues1 affect 46% of poor households plots compared to
only 26% of households in the highest quintile38, strengthening institutional governance to manage disaster risks (prior
action 1), and enhancing preparedness (prior action 1) and capacity (prior action 3) to respond to disasters are likely to
benefit households, especially the poor and most vulnerable groups that include women, youth, and the elderly. The
COVID-19 pandemic had devastating effects on the labor market and on household welfare in Rwanda. More than 170,000
jobs were lost between 2021 and 2020, and the number of unemployed increased by almost 530,000 between the last
quarter of 2019 and the last quarter of 2022. Even before the pandemic, health issues are also the main reason for work
and school absenteeism. This is why ensuring an adequate response to health emergencies from infectious disease
outbreaks to natural disasters (prior action 2) is expected to have positive effects on household welfare. Migration to
Kigali has spurred Rwanda's economic growth and poverty reduction, accounting for 15% of the decline in poverty from
2010/11 to 2016/17. Migrants' higher consumption and remittances have also supported this trend. The national
urbanization policy (NUP, prior action 7) aims to improve the quality of life of urban residents by enhancing access to basic
and social services, increasing productivity, and facilitating access to better employment opportunities. Increased
availability of more and better jobs in urban areas is expected to contribute to improved standards of living for both urban
residents and migrants from rural areas.

    Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects

The series of prior actions outlined collectively demonstrate Rwanda's commitment to enhancing disaster
preparedness, response, and resilience while considering environmental sustainability. These actions encompass
strategic plans, policies, and legal frameworks aimed at improving institutional coordination, promoting climate and
disaster resilience, and enhancing natural resources management. These initiatives underscore Rwanda's commitment to
integrating environmental considerations into disaster preparedness and response efforts, aligning with constitutional
requirements for environmental protection and the institutional framework outlined by the Ministry of Environment.
Initiatives like MINEMA's Strategic Plan and the NHEROP emphasize the need to consider the environment in disaster
readiness and response. Although the NHEROP might negatively impact the environment, it includes mitigation measures
such as waste management and eco-friendly practices. The National DRF Strategy and the National Energy Policy reflect
Rwanda's commitment to financial diversity and sustainable energy, aiming to improve disaster response and energy
infrastructure resilience while fostering environmental sustainability and renewable energy use. Additionally, Rwanda's
focus on disaster-resilient construction and natural resource management, through sustainable building codes, urban
policies, and forest conservation, shows its dedication to sustainable development.




    @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate


1
    Environmental issues include floods, erosion, landslides, change of climate, destructive rains, and loss of soil fertility.

                                                                                                                                  Page 4
     The World Bank
     Rwanda Disaster Risk Management Development Policy Credit with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown
     Option(P181603)


CONTACT POINT

World Bank
 Eric Dickson
 Senior Urban Specialist

 Augustin Maria
 Senior Urban Specialist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 MINECOFIN

Implementing Agencies
 MINEMA
 Aldabert RUKEBANUKA
 DG Policy, Planning and Risk Reduction
 arukebanuka@minema.gov.rw

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                      Eric Dickson, Augustin Maria

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:                 Peter D. Ellis                   04-Jun-2024

Country Director:                         Sahr John Kpundeh                27-Jun-2024




                                                                                                      Page 5
The World Bank
Rwanda Disaster Risk Management Development Policy Credit with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown
Option(P181603)




                                                                                                 Page 6
