Public Disclosure Authorized   Public Disclosure Authorized   Public Disclosure Authorized   Public Disclosure Authorized
               GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
             MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
             Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond

                                 TABLE OF CONTENTS
                                       CONTENT                                            Page
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ………………………………………………………….                                         3
I.      EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ………………………………………………………………...                                      4
II.     PROJECT SUMMARY ……………………………………………………………………                                         5
II.1.   Objective …………………………………………………………………………………...                                       7
III.    STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT AND INFORMATION DISCLOSURE ……………                            8
IV.     STAKEHOLDERS IDENTIFICATION AND ANALYSIS ………………………………                              9
IV.1.   Methodology for Stakeholder Engagement ………………………………………………..                       9
IV.2.   Affected Parties and other Interested Parties ……………………………………………….                  9
IV.3.   Disadvantaged and Vulnerable Individuals or Groups ……………………………………..               10
IIV.4. Communities Profile ……………………………………………………………………….                                   11
V.      STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PROGRAM …………………………………………                                   11
VI.     PUBLIC CONSULTATIONS/COMMUNITY MEETINGS/INFORMATION SESSIONS                      12
VI.1. Institutional Arrangements for Plan Implementation ………………………………………                  15
VI.2. Stakeholders Mapping ……………………………………………………………………..                                   16
VI.3. Documents to Disclose and Availability of Information …………………………………..               19
VI.4. Disclosure of the Event …………………………………………………………………….                                 19
VI.5. Development of the Public Consultation Process …………………………………………..                   19
VI.5.1. Consulting with Indigenous People (IP’s) …………………………………………………                      20
VI.6. Publication on the GOB Website …………………………………………………………..                             20
VI.7. Consultation Report ………………………………………………………………………..                                   21
VII.    GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM (GRM) ………………………………………...                              22
VII.1. GRM Guidelines …………………………………………………………………………...                                     22
VII.2. Management of the GRM …………………………………………………………………..                                  23
VII.3. Scope ………………………………………………………………………………………                                            23
VII.4. Dissemination of the Grievance Redress Mechanism ……………………………………                    23
VII.5. Receipt and Registration of Claims ………………………………………………………...                        23




                                           Page 1 of 49
               GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
              MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
              Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond


                                      CONTENT                                              Page

VII.6. Claims Evaluation ………………………………………………………………………….                                      23
VII.7. Grievance Closure and Monitoring Mechanism ……………………………………………                         24
VII.8. Conflict Resolution ………………………………………………………………………...                                   25
VII.9. Deadlines for Response to Claims ………………………………………………………….                             25
VII.10. Monitoring and Documentation ……………………………………………………………                                25

VII.11. Monitoring of the GRM………………………………………………………………………                                    25
VII.12. Implementation Timeline …………………………………………………………………..                                 26
VII.13. Addressing Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment Incidents ……………      26
VIII.   PUBLIC AWARENESS CAMPAIGN ……………………………………………………                                      29
IX.     MONITORING AND REPORTING ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE SEP ……                        29
IX.1. Reporting back to the Stakeholder Groups …………………………………………………...                       29
X.      CONCLUSIONS …………………………………………………………………………..                                          30
XI.     REFERENCES …………………………………………………………………………….                                           31
ANNEX 1. STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PLAN FOR BELIZE BLUE CITIES AND
         BEYOND PROJECT ……………………………………………………………........                                     33
ANNEX 2. AGENDA FOR PUBLIC CONSULTATIONS FOR THE PROJECT: BELIZE BLUE
          CITIES AND BEYOND (BBCB) ……………………………………………………                                     34
ANNEX 3. GRIEVANCE FORM FOR THE WORLD BANK PROJECT P181064 - BELIZE BLUE
         CITIES AND BEYOND PROJECT …………………………………………..                                       35
ANNEX 4. GRIEVANCE DATABASE FOR PROJECT P181064 - BELIZE BLUE CITIES AND
          BEYOND (BBCB) ……………………………………………………………………                                          36
ANNEX 5. EXAMPLE OF PROJECT BROCHURE ……………………………………………..                                    37
ANNEX 6. EXAMPLE OF PRESS RELEASE/PUBLIC NOTICE ……………………………….                               39
ANNEX 7. STAKEHOLDERS’ LIST THE PROJECT P181064: BELIZE BLUE CITIES AND
         BEYOND …………………………………………………………………..................                                 40
ANNEX 8. STAKEHOLDERS ENGAGEMENT PLAN (SEP) BUDGET ………………………                                49




                                            Page 2 of 49
            GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
           MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
           Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond

                         ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
ABB.                                                EXPLANATION
BBCB           Belize Blue Cities and Beyond
BFD            Belize Fisheries Department
BTB            Belize Tourism Board
CERC           Contingent Emergency Response Component
CEU            Central Executing Unit
CITCO          Belize City Council
COAST          Caribbean Oceans and Aquaculture Sustainability Facility
CSOs           Civil Society Organizations
CZMAI          Coastal Zone Management Authority and Institute
DOE            Department of the Environment
EA             Executing Agency
ESCP           Environmental and Social Commitment Plan
ESF            Environment and Social Framework
ESMP           Environmental and Social Management Plan
ESS-WB         Environmental and Social Standards for the World Bank
ESS-CEU        Environmental and Social Specialist at the Central Executing Unit, MED
GEF            Global Environmental Facility from the United Nations
GOB            Government of Belize
GRM            Grievances Redness Mechanism
IP’s           Indigenous People
MIDH           Ministry of Infrastructure Development and Housing
MED            Ministry of Economic Development
MFEDI          Ministry of Finance, Economic Development and Investment
MRTCDLLG       Ministry of Rural Transformation, Community Development, Labour, and Local Government
NGOs           Non-Government Organizations
PAI            Project Area of Influence
PIU            Project Implementation Unit
SEP            Stakeholders Engagement Plan
SEA            Sexual Exploitation and Abuse
SH             Sexual Harassment
SPTC           San Pedro Town Council
SWAMA          Solid Waste Management Authority
WB             World Bank



                                             Page 3 of 49
                 GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
               MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
              Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond

I.      EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The Government of Belize (GOB)’s, with the support of the World Bank (WB), Belize Blue Cities and
Beyond (BBCB) Project (P181064) aims to improve Belize's management capacity for sustainable
development of its blue economy and to increase access to climate resilient and sustainable water and
sanitation services in targeted coastal areas of Belize.
This Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) is a strategic communication plan. It is a step-by-step process
outlining how the BBCB project team will communicate with their stakeholders to increase the likelihood
of positive project outcomes. This SEP is an effective and actionable strategy to help ensure successful
project execution. This SEP is being implemented through the following activities:
 Public consultations, community meetings and focus group meetings.
 Grievance mechanism.
 Public awareness campaigns, etc.
The public consultations, community meetings, information sessions and focus group meetings are
important steps to identify and evaluate the project's environmental and social risks and impacts, perceived
by the main project stakeholders. During the consultation process, the project team was able to:
1. Disclose information on the project and the results of the environmental and social aspects.
2. Assess the level of risk as perceived by stakeholders.
3. Identify challenges and limitations.
4. Identify priorities, needs, and investment opportunities in the communities.
A total of 155 Stakeholders participated in the seven focus group meetings (5 of them face -to -face and
two online), and the two face-to-face public consultations in the 2 places where this project will be
implemented. The stakeholders included, 84 were males (54%) and 71 were females (46%). The
stakeholders include 5 different age groups and 6 different ethnic groups(Creole, Garifuna, Mayas,
Mestizos, mixed and White/Europeans), demonstrating the inclusivity of this project. Also, stakeholders
from the three different groups identified during the stakeholders’ mapping exercise participated: Group
1: implementing entities; Group 2: supporting entities; and Group 3: affected parties and beneficiaries.
The overall outcome of these public consultations was positive. Stakeholders welcomed the project since
it will allow for the improvement of the access to water and sanitation services and better waste
management practices such as the implementation of new policies and the update the existing ones. Also,
the need for capacity building was identified. Stakeholders raised concerns about the required inter-
institutional cooperation for the success of the project, especially at the local government level, and the
proper planning to minimize any possible damage from tropical storms.
One of the main risks identified was the low inclusion of vulnerable groups. It was recommended that a
proper public awareness campaign be implemented along with continued consultation process during the
project execution.
In the case of San Pedro, the impact on mangroves was extensively discussed. It was explained that this
project has no biodiversity threat. So, mangroves in the area are not at risk.




                                               Page 4 of 49
                GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
              MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
              Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond

One of the main challenges identified was the lack of enforcement capabilities from central GOB
Departments like DOE, BFD, BTB, etc. The need for capacity building and training to the local
enforcement officers at municipal level was then recommended. Also, the implementation of a
comprehensive and cohesive master plan with its complementing guiding legislation for San Pedro and
Belize City was advised.
The stakeholders were also informed about the implementation of the grievance mechanism that will allow
them to raise any complaint or concern during the execution of the project activities. Care was taken to
ensure that even though the public consultations were open to the general public, the appropriate audience
was targeted and encouraged to attend.

II.     PROJECT SUMMARY
The Government of Belize requested the World Bank support of the project through a Specific Investment
Loan in the post-COVID-19 context. The project identified as P181064 - Belize Blue Cities and Beyond
Program will be executed by the Central Executing Unit from the Ministry of Finance, Economic
Development, and Investment (MFEDI) with the main stakeholder, the Belize Water Services (BWS). The
project is being prepared under the World Bank’s Environment and Social Framework (ESF).
The proposed Project Development Objective is to improve Belize's management capacity for sustainable
development of its coastal areas and blue economy, increase safe water supply, reduce land-based
pollution discharges at targeted coastal areas, and provide immediate and effective response to an eligible
emergency. The project will support four components: i) Policy Development and Capacity Building; ii)
Water, Sanitation, and Waste Management; iii) Project Management; and iv) CERC.
Component 1: Policy Development and Capacity Building will support four subcomponents:
Subcomponent 1.1. Policy Development will support Belize to refine its land-use planning, sustainable
tourism development, and environmental policies. Subcomponent 1.2. Capacity Building will support
Belizean stakeholders to develop their technical capacity in blue economy related topics like blue asset
monitoring, sustainable financing, sustainable tourism, knowledge exchange, and other blue economy
topics. Subcomponent 1.3. Carbon Market Readiness will include regulations, standards, digital
infrastructure and guidelines to respond to carbon market readiness. Subcomponent 1.4. Blue Economy
Investment Program will support the identification of critical investments needed for the sustainable
development of key blue economy sectors in Belize, including but not limited to i) monitoring and
surveillance infrastructure, ii) green, blue and grey infrastructure for water, sanitation, DRM, and
ecosystems restoration, iii) sustainable tourism infrastructure, and iv) sustainable fishery infrastructure
and alternative livelihood investments.
Component 2: Water, Sanitation, and Waste Management will support three subcomponents.
Subcomponent 2.1. Belize City Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP) upgrade will help renovate the
existing and only WWTP of Belize City. Subcomponent 2.2. Expansion of Water Supply in South San
Pedro will expand the existing drinking water distribution system to meet current and future potable water
demand for the residents and businesses of South San Pedro area. Subcomponent 2.3. Waste Management




                                               Page 5 of 49
                 GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
               MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
              Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond

Pilot in San Pedro will support San Pedro Town Council to pilot a Waste Separation and Recycling
Program.
Component 3. Project Management will support the Central Executing Unit (CEU) of the Ministry of
Economic Development (MED) to coordinate overall project implementation and manage the
implementation of project activities under Component 1 and Subcomponent 2.3. Belize Water Services
(BWS) will manage Subcomponents 2.1 and 2.2 as a part of its own investment program and will not
request specific project financing for its project management activities.
Component 4. Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) will allow for rapid reallocation of
uncommitted project funds in the event of an eligible emergency as defined in OP 8.00.
Stakeholder Engagement is an inclusive, continuous, and iterative process that takes place throughout the
project lifecycle (preparation, implementation, and closure). The process must be properly designed and
carried out, sustained by the establishment of solid, constructive, and responsive relationships that are
important for the satisfactory management of the environmental and social risks and impacts of the project.
The nature, scope and frequency of stakeholders’ engagement is commensurate with the nature and scale
of each project, its development and implementation schedule, and its potential risks and impacts. The
Ministry of Finance, Economic Development, and Investment (MFEDI) will be responsible for defining
and evaluating the necessary instances of participation and dissemination of the works.
This Stakeholders Engagement Plan (SEP) aims to guide the overall implementation of this project and
was developed as part of the socialization process of the project. This plan sets out the general principles
of participation and a collaborative strategy to identify stakeholders and plan a participatory process in
line with World Bank Environmental and Social Standards (ESS) #10: “Stakeholder Engagement and
Information Disclosure” along with ESS#1 “Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social
Risks and Impacts”. The summary of the World Bank Environmental and Social Standards (ESS-WB)
relevant to this project is presented in Figure 1.
The entire participation process must be properly documented. The MFEDI shall take steps to maintain
confidentiality where required and where necessary to protect personal data. It is in this context that the
following Stakeholder Engagement Plan is proposed, which presents the minimum guidelines and criteria
to carry out the consultation process.




                                               Page 6 of 49
                GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
              MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
              Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond

Figure 1. Summary of World Bank Environmental and Social Standards (ESS-WB) relevant for BBEP

                          ESS1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social
                          Risks and Impacts


                          ESS2: Labor and Working Conditions



                          ESS3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management



                          ESS4: Community Health and Safety


                          ESS5: Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary
                          Resettlement


                          ESS6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of
                          Living Natural Resources


                          ESS7: Indigenous Peoples/ Sub-Saharan               African    Historically
                          Underserved Traditional Local Communities


                          ESS8: Cultural Heritage



                          ESS10: Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure



II.1. Objective
The overall objective of this SEP is to define a program for stakeholder engagement, including public
information disclosure and consultation throughout the entire project cycle. The scope and level of detail
of the SEP should be commensurate with and proportionate to the nature and scale, potential risks, and
impacts of the project and the concerns of the stakeholders who may be affected by or are interested in
the project. This SEP should be part of the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP).
This SEP is a strategic communication plan. It is a step-by-step process outlining how the BBEP Team
will communicate with their stakeholders to increase the likelihood of positive project outcomes. This



                                               Page 7 of 49
                GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
              MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
              Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond

SEP is an effective and actionable strategy to help ensure successful project execution. This SEP will be
implemented through the following activities:
 Public consultations, community meetings, information sessions and focus group meetings.
 Grievance mechanism.
 Public awareness campaigns.
The public consultations, community meetings, information sessions and focus group meetings are an
important step to identify and evaluate the project's environmental and social risks and impacts. These
consultations aim to:
1. Disclose information on the project and the results of the environmental and social aspects.
2. Assess the level of risk as perceived by stakeholders.
3. Identify challenges and limitations.
4. Identify priorities, needs, and investment opportunities in the farmer and tourism sectors within the
   scope of the proposed project.

III.    STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT AND INFORMATION DISCLOSURE
The main stakeholders for this BBEP are the Government of Belize (GOB), Belize Water Services (BWS),
s municipalities, and non-governmental stakeholders where this project will be implemented. This SEP
outlines the following:
a) Who are the key stakeholders.
b) How key stakeholders are to be engaged.
c) How often the engagement will occur throughout the project implementation.
d) How feedback will be solicited, recorded, and monitored over the project.
e) Who will be responsible with this engagement.
f) Timeline for this engagement, and so on.
The World Bank will review the adequacy of the SEP which, as an Environmental and Social instrument,
must be cleared by appraisal. The process of stakeholder engagement will begin during preparation and
continue into implementation. Prior to appraisal, the following measures will be implemented:
1. Stakeholder identification and analysis.
2. Planning how the engagement with stakeholders will take place.
3. Disclosure of information and
4. Consultation with stakeholder.
The draft SEP is expected to be updated from time to time if necessary. The draft SEP will also describe
the measures that will be used to remove obstacles to participation, and how the views of differently
affected groups will be captured. The draft SEP will include differentiated measures to allow the effective
participation of those identified as disadvantaged or vulnerable. Dedicated approaches and an increased
level of resources may be needed for communication with such differently affected groups so that they
can obtain the information they need regarding the issues that will potentially affect (positively or
negatively) them. A grievance mechanism will also be proposed as part of this SEP and implemented to
receive and facilitate the resolution of concerns and grievances.



                                               Page 8 of 49
                 GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
               MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
               Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond

This SEP outlines the ways in which the project team will communicate with stakeholders and includes a
mechanism by which people can raise concerns, provide feedback, or make complaints about project
activities or any activities related to the project.

IV.      STAKEHOLDERS IDENTIFICATION AND ANALYSIS
The Belize Blue Cities and Beyond is being prepared under the World Bank’s Environment and Social
Framework (ESF), using the Environmental and Social Standard ESS#10 on Stakeholder Engagement and
Information Disclosure. The overall objective of this SEP is to define a program for stakeholder
engagement, including public information disclosure and consultations throughout the entire project cycle.
It is important to note that sometimes projects may have different sets of stakeholders for each component.
Those different stakeholders should be considered in preparing the SEP.
For the purposes of effective and tailored engagement, stakeholders of this project can be divided into the
following core categories:
 Affected parties.
 Other interested parties.
 Disadvantaged and vulnerable individuals or groups.
IV.1. Methodology for Stakeholder Engagement
To meet best practice approaches, this project will apply the following principles for stakeholder
engagement:
 Openness and life-cycle approach: Public consultations for the project will be arranged during the
    whole life cycle, carried out in an open manner, free of external manipulation, interference, coercion,
    or intimidation.
 Informed participation and feedback: Information will be provided to and widely distributed among
    all stakeholders in an appropriate format; opportunities are provided for communicating stakeholder
    feedback, and for analyzing and addressing comments and concerns.
 Inclusiveness and sensitivity: Stakeholder identification is undertaken to support better
    communication and build effective relationships. The participation process for this project is inclusive.
    All stakeholders are always encouraged to be involved in the consultation process. Equal access to
    information is provided to all stakeholders. Sensitivity to stakeholders’ needs is the key principle
    underlying the selection of engagement methods. Special attention is given to vulnerable groups that
    may be at risk of being left out of project benefits, particularly women, the elderly, persons with
    disabilities, displaced persons, and migrant workers and communities, and the cultural sensitivities of
    diverse ethnic groups.
 Flexibility: If social distancing, cultural context, or governance factors inhibit traditional forms of
    face-to-face engagement, the methodology should adapt to other forms of engagement, including
    various forms of internet- or phone-based communication.
IV.2. Affected Parties and other Interested Parties
Affected parties are considered persons, groups, and other entities within the Project Area (PA) that are
directly influenced (actually or potentially) by the project and/or have been identified as most susceptible


                                                Page 9 of 49
                 GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
               MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
               Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond

to change associated with the project, and who need to be closely engaged in identifying impacts and their
significance, as well as in decision-making on mitigation and management measures.
Other interested parties are comprised of individuals, groups, or organizations with an interest in the
project. This interest may be because of the project location, its characteristics, its impacts, or matters
related to public interest. These parties may include regulators, government officials, the private sector,
the scientific community, academics, unions, women’s organizations, other Civil Society Organizations
(CSOs), and cultural groups. Given the nature of this project, other potential stakeholders are subsumed
within this grouping. The WB guidance note for ESS#10 defines other potential stakeholders as
government authorities, local organizations, non-government organization (NGOs), and companies, and
nearby communities, politicians, religious groups, national social and environmental public-sector
agencies, and the media.
IV.3. Disadvantaged and Vulnerable Individuals or Groups
Vulnerable Groups are persons who may be disproportionately impacted or further disadvantaged by the
project(s) compared with any other groups due to their vulnerable status , and that may require special
engagement efforts to ensure their equal representation in the consultation and decision-making process
associated with the project.
It is particularly important to understand whether project impacts may disproportionately fall on
disadvantaged or vulnerable individuals or groups, who often do not have a voice to express their concerns
or understand the impacts of a project, and to ensure that awareness raising and stakeholder engagement
be adapted to take into account such groups’ or individuals’ particular sensitivities, concerns, and cultural
sensitivities and to ensure a full understanding of project activities and benefits. Engagement with
vulnerable groups and individuals often requires the application of specific measures and assistance aimed
at the facilitation of their participation in the project-related decision making so that their awareness of
and input into the overall process are commensurate with those of other stakeholders. Vulnerable groups
may include:
a) Women: it must be ensured that: community engagement teams are gender-balanced and promote
    women’s leadership within these, design online and in-person surveys and other engagement activities
    so that women in unpaid care work can participate; consider provisions for childcare, transport, and
    safety for any in-person community engagement activities; and there may also be women who face
    multiple challenges, for example, indigenous women, women with disabilities, etc.
b) Indigenous Peoples: consult IPs, the Maya and Garifuna, on the cultural appropriateness of policies
    to be developed (under component 1) and identify and address any economic or social constraints
    (including those relating to gender) that may limit opportunities. to benefit from these. See section
    V.5.1 of this SEP which addresses the principles to apply when consulting with IPs.
c) Elderly and people with existing medical conditions: develop information on specific needs and
    explain why they are at more risk and what measures to take to care for them; tailor messages and
    make them actionable for living conditions (including assisted living facilities), and health status; and
    target family members.




                                               Page 10 of 49
                 GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
               MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
               Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond

d) People with disabilities: provide information in accessible formats, such as braille or large print; offer
   multiple forms of communication, such as text captioning or signed videos, text captioning for the
   hearing impaired, and online materials for people who use assistive technology.
e) LGBTI+: The CEU will implement differentiated measures, for example, creating safe and
   confidential spaces to allow the effective participation of sexual and gender minorities (for example
   for the development of policies,) ensuring that their voices are heard, and their concerns are addressed.
f) Children: information and communication materials must be designed in a child-friendly manner and
   provide parents with skills to handle their own anxieties and help manage those in their children.
IV.4. Communities Profile
Table 1 shows the general information for the 3 urban areas included in this Belize Blue Cities and Beyond
Project.
Table 1. General information for the 2 urban areas included in Belize Blue Cities and Beyond Project.
   City/Town/                                 Major Ethnicity/
                     District Population                              Major Economic Activities
      Village                                  Demographic
                                                                   market workers, construction workers,
                                                                   stevedores at Port of Belize, call
                      Belize                     Garifuna, Creole,
Belize City                         71,461                         center agents, customer services and
                      District                       Mestizos
                                                                   sales agents, tourism workers, service
                                                                   industry workers, etc.
San Pedro Town, Belize                              Mestizos,       tourism workers and tourism related
                                    22,755
Ambergris Caye  District                         Garifuna, Creole                  services.
                       Source of Data: Statistical Institute of Belize (SIB) Census 2022.
Belize City is the largest city in Belize. The city is the country’s principal port and its financial and
industrial hub. Belize City’s boundaries extend to Mile 6 on the George Price Highway and Mile 5 on the
Philip Goldson Highway (Haulover Bridge). Politically, Belize City is divided into ten constituencies.
San Pedro Town is located on the island of Ambergris Caye in the Belize District. The town’s boundaries
cover the entire island, but the current population is concentrated in the southern part of the island. San
Pedro's inhabitants are known as “San Pedranos.” The original settlers were refugees from southern
Mexico; most of them speak both Spanish and English fluently. San Pedro Town was originally
predominantly a mestizo community but with the growth of tourism the population is now comprised of
people from all major ethnicities and areas of the country.

V.     STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PROGRAM
Project information will be disclosed using the following procedures/activities: public consultations,
community meetings, public notices, press releases, notes on GOB websites, information leaflets and
brochures; and focus group meetings with vulnerable groups, etc. The details of all these activities will be
described below. Table 2 summarizes the main activities included in this Stakeholders Engagement Plan.
A comprehensive summary of the stakeholders program by components is presented in Annex 1.



                                                 Page 11 of 49
                   GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
                 MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
                 Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond

        Table 2. Summary of the main activities included in this Stakeholders Engagement Plan (SEP).
            Estimated             Topic of
 Project                                                                         Target
             Date/Time          Consultation/          Method Used                              Responsibilities
  Stage                                                                       Stakeholders
               Period             Message
                            The purpose, nature
                               and scale of the                               Local
                             project and receive                        Communities &
                             feedback. Potential                       Vulnerable Groups
                                                                                            Project Manager,
                              risks and impacts         Public          IPs participation
              Sept/23 –          including on                                                Environmental
 Design                                           consultations, focus will be relevant for
              June /24     vulnerable groups, and group discussions.                            & Social
                                                                         component 1 of
                            suggested mitigation                                               Specialist
                                                                       the project: Policy
                           measures. Stakeholder
                                                                       Development and
                            engagement process,
                                                                       Capacity Building
                                  GRM, etc.
                                                Community
                                              Meetings, formal         Relevant
                         Relevant ES docs:        meetings,          stakeholders.
           Permanent
                                                                  Local  communities Project Manager,
          consultation SEP, LMP, Potential        traditional                          Environmental
                        RAPs, ESIA/ESMP,     notifications, one-     & vulnerable
           on project                                                                     & Social
                             GRM,   etc.     on-one   interviews,     groups. IPs
          progress will                                                                  Specialist,
Execution                Inform on project      and letters to     participation will
           be twice a                                                                 contractors and
                        progress and receive   village leaders.     be relevant for
            year with                                                                     potential
                             feedback.           Roundtable         component 1 of
             relevant    Disclosure of other                                           subcontractors
                                                discussions.      the project: Policy
          stakeholder. project documentation                                          (For the ESMP)
                                             Outreach Activities,  Development   and
                                                      etc.        Capacity Building


  VI.   PUBLIC CONSULTATIONS, COMMUNITY MEETINGS, INFORMATION SESSIONS
        AND STRATEGY TO INCORPORATE THE VIEWS OF VULNERABLE GROUPS
  The project will seek the views of vulnerable or disadvantaged groups. The main objective of this
  consultation process (public consultations, community meetings, and information sessions, etc.) is to
  present to the affected population and other interested parties the description of the project, its potential
  environmental and social impacts and the mitigation measures planned to ensure adequate environmental
  and social management during the execution of the works, and their subsequent operation.
  This instance of participation aims to respond to the doubts and concerns that may arise, and to collect
  suggestions which will be evaluated to determine the possibility of incorporating them into the design of
  the project, when appropriate.




                                                 Page 12 of 49
                 GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
               MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
               Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond

Stakeholders will be kept informed as the project develops, including reporting on project environmental
and social performance and implementation of the stakeholder engagement plan and grievance
mechanism, and on the project’s overall implementation progress.
Public consultations are an effective way to make people aware about project execution, project activities
and other relevant project information. All consultations should be fully documented, this includes the
number of consultations held, attendance sheet detailing participants information, logistics and all
arrangements and agreements made. Picture evidence must be included with all documentation. An
evaluation of each consultation should be made with a view to implementing lessons learned in subsequent
consultations. Evaluations and the particulars of such evaluations must also be documented.
The tentative schedule for public consultations through online focus group sessions is presented in Table
3. The list of the stakeholders is also presented in Annex 7.
 Table 3. Schedule for the Public Consultation Sessions for this Belize Blue Cities and Beyond Project.
        Area/Zone                          Date                 Stakeholders         Town/Village
                                                                                    San Pedro Town
 Northern Belize (1 day)     Monday May 20th, 2024 at 6pm             30           (Ambergris Caye)
  Central Belize (1 day)     Tuesday May 21st, 2024 at 3pm            30              Belize City


The 55 Stakeholders that participated in both public consultations in San Pedro town and Belize City
welcomed, supported and endorsed project idea.
The discussion about the policy component was extensive and supported by several examples of facts
currently affecting the environment in San Pedro.
During the presentations, participants stressed the need for enforcement by GOB in terms of compliance
with the established laws and regulations. An example of environmental damage done in Cayo Rosario by
filling areas on the sea was extensively discussed.
The need for coordination between the different GOB bodies was also highlighted for the success of this
project to avoid duplication of efforts and proper allocation of funds. The management of Sargassum was
also discussed. The work done by SPTC was commended. The need of additional funds to continue
battling this plague was also highlighted.
The Deputy Mayor of Belize City Mr. Allan Polard highlighted the need to upgrade the wastewater
treatment plant that was built in 1979. It has been neglected since its construction and no major investment
has been made since this year. He also commented that this plant serves about 50% of the entire city,
which has a population of around 70,000 people. Hence the expansion of these services is imperative.
The discussion about the policy component was extensive and supported by several examples of facts
affecting the environment in Belize City.




                                               Page 13 of 49
                 GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
               MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
               Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond

The need for coordination between the different GOB bodies was also highlighted for the success of this
project. The CITCO Mayor, his Worship Mr. Bernard Wagner, insisted about the need for more funds
allocation to the municipalities to battle coastal erosion and climate change consequences.
Mayor Bernard Wagner also proposed that since this project is still into the designing stage, additional
discussion with CITCO is recommended to identify if funds could be allocated for the water expansion in
Belama Area of the City and for the expansion of the waste-water collection in other areas of the cgity. It
was advised that a focus roup discussion must be set up in the next few weeks with MED and WB to
discuss these issues.
A new mission was scheduled on May 27th to 31st to further analyze the situation in San Pedro and Belize
City, searching for potential partnerships to invest in blue spaces that are susceptible to climatic events.
The WB Team, along with local stakeholders explored some nature-based solutions for potential
investments in coastal areas that are vulnerable to climatic events in both San Pedro and Belize City.
Pictures 1 and 2 bellow show the visit to San Pedro Town guided by the SPTC member Valentine Rosado.




  Pictures 1 & 2. World Bank visit to San Pedro Town guided by the SPTC member Valentine Rosado.

The management of Sargassum in San Pedro Town was also discussed.The need of additional funds to
continue battling this plague was also highlighted.
The World Bank team also visited some areas of possible intervention in Belize City and met with Deputy
Mayor Allan Pollard and other representatives from the Belize City Council. Together, they assessed areas
within the blue space that are significantly impacted. The objective is to identify resilience measures and
investment opportunities to enhance the climate resilience of these areas. Pictures 3-7 were taken during
the meeting with CITCO and the visit to vulnerable areas.




                                               Page 14 of 49
                GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
              MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
              Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond




 Pictures 3-5. WB visit to vulnerable areas in Belize City guided by the Deputy Mayor Allan Pollard.




                    Pictures 6 & 7. World Bank meeting with Belize City Council.

VI.1. Institutional Arrangements for Plan Implementation. Resources and Responsibilities for
        implementing this Stakeholders Engagement Plan
The CEU Director/Team Leader from the MFEDI, as the Executing Agency, has the overall responsibility
for leading and implementing the project Stakeholder Engagement Plan. The PIU director of the BWS as
co-implementor of project activities will be responsible for stakeholder engagement related to the
implementation of activities for subcomponent 2.1: Belize City Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP)
upgrade and subcomponent 2.2: Expansion of water supply in South San Pedro. The ESS of the CEU at
MED and the PIU at the BWS will oversee all the stakeholder engagement activities.
The budget estimate for preparing and implementing this SEP is 300,000 USD for the life of the project,
assuming 6 consultations per year, at a price tag of 2,500 USD per activity, and costs related to the
communication consultants, communication outreach, surveys, and managing the Grievance Redress
Mechanism, among others. A defined project budget and a breakdown will follow the structure of Annex
9.
The contact information in case people have comments or questions about the project or the consultation
process is the following:
• Email: info.ceu@med.gov.bz                             Phone number: +501 822-4106
• Website: www.med.gov.bz
• Address: Habet Building. Constitution Dr. Belmopan, Cayo District
• Title of responsible person: Environmental and Social Specialist.


                                             Page 15 of 49
                 GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
               MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
               Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond

The programming and dissemination of the consultation should be carried out in such a way as to ensure
the participation of stakeholders. Every effort will have to be made to involve groups likely to be affected
by the activities of the project, and those groups that have been identified as stakeholders, regardless of
whether they do not belong to the affected population. It is important to recognize the reduced accessibility
to these consultation spaces by populations with greater vulnerabilities such as women, aboriginal
(Indigenous) communities, in situations of immobility, in street situations, LGBTIQ + populations
(lesbian, gay, bisexual, trans, intersex, queer), among others. With this, it must be ensured that the call is
made considering the obstacles that these populations may face for participation. The consultation process
shall consider at least the following elements:
• Stakeholder mapping.
• Documents to disclose and availability of information.
• Dissemination of the consultation process through the website, social media, and other means.
• Development of content and documentation to be socialized.
• Public consultation procedures.
• Report on the public consultation process.
Below is a brief description of the requirements to be considered at each stage of the consultation process.
VI.2. Stakeholders Mapping
Stakeholder mapping consists of identifying the directly affected population and organizations relevant to
the consultation. From a preliminary identification, it emerges that, at a minimum, the stakeholders groups
presented Table 4 should be included in the process.
It is important to note that the proposed stakeholder mapping is preliminary, and that the final selection of
the stakeholders can be adjusted by the MFEDI and the municipalities. Therefore, any other stakeholders
that the authorities consider appropriate to invite to contribute to guaranteeing a broad, representative, and
meaningful participatory process may then join.
         Table 4. Stakeholders Groups for the Belize Blue Cities and Beyond Project.
GROUP # TYPE               DESCRIPTION OF THE STAKEHOLDERS                          AMOUNT
                  This group supports the direct implementation of the project and
                  may include but are not limited to line ministries and other GOB
  G1    Internal agencies: CEU from the MFEDI (Executing Agency); MBEDRM;             20
                  MTDRM; MNRPM; MIDH; MRTCDLLG; CITCO; SPTC; BTB;
                  BWS; CZMAI; DOE; SWAMA; and Fisheries Department, etc.
                  Other GOB Bodies (UB, CITO, Police, Transport, NCCO);
        External
  G2              Service Providers (Contractors); Academia; Representatives of the   10
        Support
                  Financial Institutions, etc.
                  Potential beneficiaries of the program (market vendors; Belizean
        Project
                  professionals; business owners; and civil society members;
  G3    affected                                                                      30
                  fisherfolks; cooperatives and independent fishers’ groups);
        parties
                  recyclers; and NGO’s for Natural Resources Conservation; etc.



                                                Page 16 of 49
                GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
              MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
              Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond

Figures 2-5 Summarizes the Stakeholders Groups for this Belize Blue Cities and Beyond Project.


         Ministry of Finance, Economic Development and Investment (MFEDI)


              Belize Water Services


                 Ministry of Blue Economy and Civil Aviation (MBECA)


                  Ministry of Tourism and Diaspora Relations (MTDR)


                 Attorney General's Ministry


              University of Belize


         Central Information Technology Office, MFEDI

      Figure 2. Stakeholders for Group 1 for this Belize Blue Cities and Beyond Project.


       Solid Wastes Management Authority (SWAMA)

           Fisheries Department, MBECA

             Department of the Environment

              Belize City Council

             San Pedro Town Council

           Placencia Village Council

       Village Water Board Authorities
                              Figure 3. Other Stakeholders for Group 1.



                                            Page 17 of 49
 GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond




                              Page 18 of 49
                 GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
               MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
               Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond

VI.3. Documents to Disclose and Availability of Information
Below are the documents to be consulted on, which must be published on EA’s website and other means,
and available to the public for at least 14 days prior to the consultation events.
     Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA).
     Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP).
     Summary information on the Project (description, works, etc.).
     A timeframe for consultations with locations.
     Grievances Redress Mechanism (GRM).
Once the information is available on the website, the consultation process will be disseminated to
interested parties.
VI.4. Disclosure of the Event
The invitation to the event (public consultations, community meetings,/ information sessions, etc.) will be
made directly to the interested parties identified in the map of stakeholders, and to the public through
publication in relevant information media, such as radio, local TV, digital media, important newspapers,
and on the institutional website and social network profiles and the municipalities involved. Also, personal
email submissions and brochure handling can be used to ensure the adequate dissemination of the process.
The following information shall be detailed:
• Project Proponent and Project activities.
• Website with the publication of the documentation and as a space for the channeling of queries and
   concerns about the Project.
• Procedure of the consultation process.
• Duration of the consultation process.
• Topics to be addressed (including Project and main works to be carried out, benefits associated to the
   operation of the Project, parties involved and institutional responsibilities, outline of the applicable
   regulatory framework and relevant standards, main environmental and social impacts identified, main
   management measures, and existing mechanisms to address complaints and resolve conflicts).
• Documentation available, etc.
The estimated date for the consultation events is tentatively the week from January 22 nd-26th, 2024. To
ensure participation, the consultation events must be advertised in advance.
There will be three Online Consultation Events. The stakeholders will mostly consist of institutional
representation (GOB, village authorities, village water board authorities) business owners, and civil
society organizations. These consultation events will be complemented with community information
campaigns, to be conducted prior to the start of the work.
VI.5. Development of the Public Consultation Process
The consultation process will be carried out in person. The coordinator of the process will be the
Environmental and Social Specialist with experience in previous consultation processes.




                                               Page 19 of 49
                 GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
               MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
               Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond

VI.5.1. Consulting with Indigenous People (IP’s)
The implementation of Component 1 of the Project: “Policy Development and Capacity Building,” will
require the engagement of the Indigenous People of Belize: including their representations, specifically
in the process of reviewing and revising critical land-use and environmental management policies;
regulations to facilitate blue economy development in Belize; and during identifying critical investment
needs in key blue economic sectors. Regarding the above, consultations with IP’s will be carried out
following the requirements of ESS7:
1. For the development of policies and activities that could affect IP’s (whether positively or negatively),
    proactively engage with IP’s to ensure their participation in the development of such policies and
    activities.
2. Provide sufficient time for IP’s decision-making processes: Is based on the prior disclosure and
    dissemination of relevant, transparent, objective, meaningful and easily accessible information in a
    timeframe that enables meaningful consultations with stakeholders in a culturally appropriate format,
    in relevant local language(s) and is understandable to IP’s.
3. Consult with IPs as to the cultural appropriateness of the policies.
4. Gender and inter-generationally appropriate stakeholder engagement.
5. Involve IP representative bodies and organizations in the consultation processes and, where
    appropriate, other community members.
6. Allow for IPs’ effective participation in the design of related policies or mitigation measures that could
    affect them positively or negatively.
7. Since some IP’s in Belize like the Mayas have established consultation methodologies available, they
    will be followed as much as possible.
8. Is free of external manipulation, interference, coercion, discrimination, and intimidation; and
9. If documented and disclosed considers and responds to feedback.
VI.6. Publication on the GOB Website
This SEP along with other relevant Environmental and Social information must be published at MED
Website (www.med.gov.bz) for a minimum of two weeks prior to the consultation events. It should explain
the objective of the consultation, clarifying that, although it is not in itself binding, the questions and
proposals arising from the persons participating will be analyzed and answered and, where relevant, the
proposed amendments will be incorporated.
Then the context in which the consultation takes place will be explained, and the description of the Project
will be made, including its objectives, main characteristics and alternatives considered, the environmental
and social impacts both in the work and operation stages, as well as the mitigation measures designed for
an adequate environmental and social management of the Project. It should be ensured that the explanation
is clear, and that the language used allows the community to understand the main aspects of the project
and its impacts.
The Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) and the available channels for making complaints or
consultations on the Project will also be disclosed, regardless of those made within the framework of the
consultation process.



                                               Page 20 of 49
                GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
              MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
              Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond

VI.7 Public Consultations and Focus Group Meetings Report
A total of 155 Stakeholders participated in the scheduled public consultations and focus group meetings.
Representatives from the three stakeholder groups were present. Figure 6 below shows the attendance of
representatives from the different stakeholder groups for this project. The Attendance Sheets and pictures
of these Public Consultations are also provided in the public consultations report.




           Figure 6. Attendance of Representatives from the Different Stakeholders Groups.
This project's inclusivity was confirmed through the participation of various ethnicities, age groups,
genders, and different residences of the attendees. Figures 7 summarize the attendance by gender to these
activities.




        Figure 4. Attendance to the Public Consultations for the WB BRIES Project by Gender.



                                              Page 21 of 49
                GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
              MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
              Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond

The most relevant issue to stress is the attendance of the business community, the civil society members
and other stakeholders who actively participated in the discussion at the two planned public consultations
in San Pedro Town and Belize City.
In the case of San Pedro, it should he highlighted the participation of the Minister of Blue Economy and
Disaster Risks Management, Hon. Andre Peres who actively participated in the discussion apart from
provide the welcome address and the closing remarks.
The consultation report will be published at MED website, as communicated to the people participating
in the consultation meetings.

VII.       GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISM
The Program will have a feedback claims management system that includes their entry, reception, analysis,
monitoring, and resolution (see Grievance Database in Annex 4).
The principles of the GRM are:
 The interaction/claims management system will have mechanisms in accordance with the local context
   and the sociocultural characteristics of the groups involved in each project to be financed by the
   Project, with special consideration and respect for the most vulnerable groups (Youth, Women, people
   with disabilities, migrants, people belonging to indigenous communities, among others).
 The procedures for complaint, the process that will follow, the deadline and the resolution mechanisms
   will be widely disseminated for the knowledge of interested parties and complainants.
 In all cases, a record will be kept of the reception, analysis and resolution of claims and conflicts.
VII.1. GRM Guidelines
In general, the Grievance Redress Mechanism will follow the following guidelines:
 Proportional: The Mechanism will proportionally consider the level of risk and possible negative
    impacts on the affected areas.
 Culturally appropriate: The Mechanism will be designed to consider the local customs (Indigenous
    communities) of the area and will address the requirements of ESS7. The GRM of the Updated SEP
    (as identified in the ESCP) will reflect the requirements of ESS7.
 Accessible: The Mechanism will be designed in a clear and simple way so that it is understandable to
    all people. There will be no cost related to it.
 Anonymous: The complainant may remain anonymous, as long as it does not interfere with the
    possible resolution of the complaint or problem. Anonymity is distinguished from confidentiality in
    that it is an anonymous complaint, the personal data (name, address) of the complainant are not
    recorded.
 Confidential: The Project will respect the confidentiality of the complaint. Information and details
    about a confidential report will only be shared internally, and only when it is necessary to report or
    coordinate with the authorities.
 Transparent: The process and operation of the mechanism will be transparent, predictable, and
    readily available for use by the population.



                                              Page 22 of 49
                 GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
               MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
               Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond

VII.2. Management of the GRM
The procedure begins with the presentation of the consultation, claim, complaint and/or suggestions
(orally or written) by any person linked or affected by the actions of the Project. The process ends with
the closure and agreement in the resolution of both parties. The process will be documented by means of
a record (in a physical and digitized file: grievances forms and grievance database). Complaints received
by phone or email must be addressed and classified.
Complaints received at the level of individual projects to be financed by the Project (via the contractors
or municipal agencies) must be redirected to Environmental and Social Specialist ESS from the CEU
(ESS-CEU) for management and follow-up.
VII.3. Scope
The GRM applies and may be used by any person (general population) who expresses any type of claim,
complaint or query related to the activities to be financed by this Project.
VII.4. Dissemination of the Grievance Redress Mechanism
For the reception and registration of claims, a specific email address and a complaints mailbox will be
available at the respective Municipalities and at the facilities of the contractors of individual projects under
Component 2 of this Project.
Information on these means of receiving complaints must be disseminated through the different
dissemination channels used by the Project, among which are:
1.   Signs at Worksites: Each project will include the contact details of the Executing Agency (EA) for
     receiving complaints (telephone, email, and website)
2.   Formal and informal meetings in places close to the works of the projects, for the dissemination
     and communication of activities related to environmental preservation and conservation defined in
     the project, as well as to disseminate the means to address concerns and claims. In these meetings,
     Executing Agency contact details for receiving complaints (telephone, email and/or website) will be
     disseminated.
3.   Social networks of EA and Municipalities (WhatsApp, Instagram, Facebook, etc.).
4.   Others (to be agreed with the community)
The specific dissemination mechanisms should be detailed based on the information collected on the
specific communities to be impacted by the benefits of the Project.
VII.5. Receipt and Registration of Claims
The following mechanisms and channels will be available for the reception of concerns:
•    Email: info.ceu@med.gov.bz
•    Phone number: +501 822-4106
•    Website: www.med.gov.bz
VII.6. Claims Evaluation
All claims/concerns related to the works will be managed and responded to by the Executing Agency, the
Central Executing Unit (CEU) from the MFEDI.



                                                 Page 23 of 49
                GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
              MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
              Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond

If the claim or complaint is rejected by the Grievance Committee, the complainant will be informed of the
decision and the reasons for it. To this end, relevant and understandable information will be provided in
accordance with the sociocultural characteristics of the claimant.
Complaints received will be categorized according to the following:
 Not admissible: Complaints or claims that do not meet one or more of these requirements:
   It is not directly related to the work, its contractors, and the actions of the project.
   Its nature exceeds the scope of GRM.
   There is no real cause of the action.
   There are other formal mechanisms and institutions for filing complaints according to the nature
      of the complaint.
   Related to labor issues must be addressed to the corresponding instances of the construction
      company.
   Low importance: This category corresponds to complaints that do not require resolution, but only
    require information or a certain clarification that must be provided to the complainant. This category
    includes complaints that have been previously evaluated and received a definitive response from the
    Project.
   Medium importance: Complaints and claims related to health, the environment, transportation, and
    contractors and subcontractors.
   High importance: Includes complaints related to the safety of personnel, as well as those related to
    the health and safety of construction workers.
Within a period not exceeding ten working days, the ESS-CEU will have to evaluate the documentation
presented by the claimant. Where possible, if additional information is required for the proper evaluation
of the complaint, CEU will contact the complainant within a maximum of ten working days, to obtain the
necessary information. Once the complaint is completed and reviewed, ESS-CEU will proceed to register
the complaint. The file should include, along with the complaint, a summary and the name of the person
who received and processed it. Registration information will be updated periodically to reflect the status
of the case until the complaint has been finalized (See GRM Database in Annex 4).
VII.7. Grievance Closure and Monitoring Mechanism
The resolution of claims will be carried out through two instances:
1.   Internal: the management of reception of claims and resolution of conflicts is the responsibility of
     CEU and will be referred to the competent agency in the subject according to the complaint/claim.
2.   Mediation: cases of claims and conflicts not resolved in the first instance will be dealt with under
     the mediation mechanism. The person in charge of this instance must have sufficient authority to
     mediate for the resolution of claims and conflicts, and sufficient independence to project credibility
     in the parties.




                                              Page 24 of 49
                GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
              MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
              Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond

VII.8. Conflict Resolution
If there is no agreement between CEU and a complainant, either because of a rejected concern or because
there is no agreement on the solution to be implemented, the means to reach a joint agreement between
the parties must be arbitrated. This may include, among others: promoting the participation of technical
third parties, inviting dialogue tables, mediations, conciliations, etc. The CEU shall ensure that claims
handling and dispute resolution are conducted in an appropriate and comprehensive manner.
VII.9. Deadlines for Response to Claims
All complaints must be registered, and your proposed solution must be communicated to the interested
party within the following deadlines: low importance complaints will be dealt with within a maximum
period of 30 calendar days, medium-importance complaints will be dealt with within 15 calendar days,
and high importance complaints will be dealt with within a maximum period of 7 calendar days. The
deadlines set can be adjusted by the CEU.
In all cases, a complaint response report will be drawn up and signed by the person who filed the complaint
in accordance with the attention of the complaint. The CEU will systematize the complaint records and
the minutes of attention to these. The information provided will be relevant and understandable according
to the sociocultural characteristics of the person who consults. Likewise, it will oversee supervising the
process, detecting deviations, and ensuring its solution.
VII.10. Monitoring and Documentation
The ESS-CEU will be responsible for maintaining an up-to-date Grievances Database with all
documentation and information related to complaints submitted. It will also be responsible for following
up on the complaint processing process, in coordination with the areas involved, and for facilitating the
complainant's participation in the process. A follow-up form will be completed for each case. Once an
agreement is reached, follow-up will be followed up to confirm that the relevant resolution measures are
being implemented. The complaint registry must demonstrate that all these actions and processes were
carried out in accordance with this document. It will include:
•     Date on which the complaint was registered.
•     Person responsible for the complaint.
•     Information on the remedies proposed/communicated by the complainant (if applicable).
•     Date on which the complaint was closed; and
•     The date of the response was sent to the complainant.
In the Semi-annual Compliance Reports, the CEU will report to the WB on the status and follow-up of the
management of complaints and grievances received in the framework of the execution of this Project.
VII.11. Monitoring of the GRM
Any complaint closed with conformity by the complainant must be monitored for a reasonable period to
verify that the reasons for the complaint or claim were effectively resolved. The estimated period for this
purpose is 6 (six) months from the response and/or solution of the claim.




                                              Page 25 of 49
                 GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
               MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
               Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond

VII.12. Implementation Timeline
Project teams must keep in mind that the handling of a complaint must start at the local level to be eligible
at the next level. The grievance mechanism will be available throughout the duration of the Project.
VII.13. Addressing Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment Incidents
The specific nature of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA) and of Sexual Harassment (SH) requires
tailored measures for the reporting, and safe and ethical handling of such allegations. A survivor-centered
approach aims to ensure that anyone who has been the target of SEA/SH is treated with dignity, and that
the person’s rights, privacy, needs, and wishes are respected and prioritized in all interactions.
The GRM will specify an individual who will be responsible for dealing with any SEA/SH issues, should
they arise. A list of SEA/SH service providers will be kept available by the project. The GRM should
assist SEA/SH survivors by referring them to Services Providers for support immediately after receiving
a complaint directly from a survivor. The list of SEA/SH service providers will available after the project
effectiveness and before the start project activities.
To address SEA/SH, the Project team will follow the guidance provided on the World Bank Technical
Note: Addressing Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) in Investment Project
Financing Involving Civil Works. The GRM will follow the official WB definitions described on the
Technical Note as shown below:
• Sexual Abuse (SEA) is an actual or threatened physical intrusion of a sexual nature, whether by force
   or under unequal or coercive conditions
• Sexual Exploitation (SE) refers to any actual or attempted abuse of a position of vulnerability,
   differential power, or trust, for sexual purposes, including, but not limited to, profiting monetarily,
   socially, or politically from the sexual exploitation of another.
• Sexual harassment (SH) is any unwelcome sexual advance, request for sexual favor, verbal or
   physical conduct or gesture of a sexual nature, or any other behavior of a sexual nature that might
   reasonably be expected or be perceived to cause offense or humiliation to another, when such conduct
   interferes with work, is made a condition of employment, or creates an intimidating, hostile or
   offensive work environment.
• Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) service provider: An
   organization offering specific services for SEA/SH survivors, such as health services, psychosocial
   support, shelter, legal aid, safety/security services, etc.
• Survivor-centered approach: It is based on a set of principles and skills designed to guide
   professionals, regardless of their role, in their engagement with survivors (predominantly women and
   girls but also men and boys) who have experienced sexual or other forms of violence. The survivor-
   centered approach aims to create a supportive environment in which the survivor´s interests are
   respected and prioritized, and in which the survivor is treated with dignity and respect. The approach
   helps to promote the survivor´s recovery and ability to identify and express needs and wishes, as well
   as to reinforce the survivor´s capacity to make decisions about possible interventions.
The SEA/SH Grievances can be received through any of the available channels and will be considered as
“high-profile grievances”, that if not resolved promptly may represent significant risks to the


                                               Page 26 of 49
                GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
              MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
              Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond

environment or community. A list of SEA/SH service providers will be kept available by the Project.
Additionally, if an incident occurs, it will be reported as appropriate, keeping the anonymity and
confidentiality of the complainant, and applying the survivor-centered approach. The survivor-centered
approach is based on a set of principles and skills designed to guide professionals —regardless of their
role— in their engagement with survivors (predominantly women and girls but also men and boys) who
have experienced sexual or other forms of violence. The survivor centered approach aims to create a
supportive environment in which the survivor’s interests are respected and prioritized, and in which the
survivor is treated with dignity and respect. The approach helps to promote the survivor’s recovery and
ability to identify and express needs and wishes, as well as to reinforce the survivor’s capacity to make
decisions about possible interventions). Any cases of SEA/SH brought through the GRM will be
documented but remain closed/sealed to maintain the confidentiality of the survivor. The WB will be
notified as soon as the Project Manager and the E&S specialist learn about the complaint.
If a SEA/SH related incident occurs, it will be reported through the GRM, as appropriate and keeping the
survivor information confidential. Specifically, following steps will be taken once an incident occurs:
A) Action 1: Complaint Intake and Referral
If the survivor gives consent, the CEU Environmental and Social Specialist (ESS) o other designated
Specialist, fills in a complaint from excluding any information that can identify the survivor:
• The nature of the allegation (what the complainant says in her/his own words without direct
    questioning)
• If the alleged perpetrator was/is, to the survivor’s best knowledge, associated with the project (yes/no)
• The survivor’s age and/or sex (if disclosed); and,
• If the survivor was referred to services.
If the survivor does not want to provide written consent, her consent can be verbally received. If needed
or desired by the survivor, the CEU ESS refers her/him to relevant SEA/SH service providers, identified
in the mapping of SEA/SH service providers and according to pre-established and confidential referral
procedures. The survivor’s consent must be documented even if it is received verbally. The service
providers will be able to direct survivors to other service providers in case the survivor wishes to access
other services. The CEU ESS will keep the survivor informed about any actions taken by the perpetrator’s
employer. If the survivor has been referred to the relevant SEA/SH service providers, received adequate
assistance, and no longer requires support; and if appropriate actions have been taken against the
perpetrator or if the survivor does not wish to submit an official grievance with the employer, the CEU
ESS can close the case.
B) Action 2: Incident Reporting
The ESS from the CEU needs to report the anonymized SEA/SH incident as soon as it becomes known,
to the Project Manager who will in turn inform the World Bank Task Team Leader (TTL) or directly to
the TTL.
Complaint Forms and other detailed information should be filed in a safe location by the CEU ESS.
Neither the CEU ESS nor the Project Manager should seek additional information from the survivor.



                                              Page 27 of 49
                 GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
               MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
              Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond

SEA/SH incident reporting is not subject to survivors’ consent but the CEU ESS needs to provide ongoing
feedback to the survivor at several points in time: (1) when the grievance is received; (2) when the case is
reported to CEU and WB; (3) when the verification commences or when a determination is made that
there is an insufficient basis to proceed; and (4) when the verification concludes or when any outcomes
are achieved or disciplinary action taken.
As long as the SEA/SH remains open the CEU ESS and/or Project Manager should update the World Bank
TTL on the measures taken to close the incident.
C) Action 3: Grievance Verification and Investigation
Each SEA/SH incident should be verified to determine if it was related to the WB financed project. The
CEU ESS should form a SEA/SH verification committee comprised by her/him, one member of the CEU,
one member of a local service provider and a representative of the contractor (if relevant). The CEU ESS
should notify the SEA/SH Committee of the incident within 24 hours of its creation. The SEA/SH
verification committee will consider the SEA/SH allegation to determine the likelihood that the grievance
is related to the project.
If after the committee review, SEA/SH allegation is confirmed and it is determined that it is linked to a
project, Project actors are:
a) People employed or engaged directly by the GOB, including the project proponent and the project
    implementing agencies to work specifically in relation to the project (direct workers).
b) People employed or engaged through third parties (Project staff, subcontractors, brokers, agents, or
    intermediaries) to perform work related to core functions of the project, regardless of location
    (contracted workers).
c) People employed or engaged by the Borrower’s primary suppliers (primary supply workers).
d) People employed or engaged in providing community labor such as voluntary services or participation
    in project activities and processes (community workers), the verification committee discusses
    appropriate actions to be recommended to the appropriate party—i.e., the employer of the perpetrator,
    which could be the CEU or a contractor. The CEU will ask contractors to take appropriate action. The
    committee reports the incident to the perpetrator’s employers to implement the remedy/disciplinary
    action in accordance with local labor legislation, the employment contract of the perpetrator, and their
    codes of conduct as per the standard procurement documents.
For SEA/SH incidents where the survivor did not consent to an investigation, the appropriate steps should
be taken to ensure the survivor is referred to/made aware of available services and that the project
mitigation measures are reviewed to determine if they remain adequate and appropriate or if they require
strengthening.
If the survivor is interested in seeking redress and wishes to submit an official complaint with the
employer, or with entities in the country legal system, the CEU ESS should provide linkages to the relevant
institutions. Ensuring due legal process is up to the police and the courts, not the SEA/SH verification
committee. Unlike other types of issues, the CEU Safeguards Specialist does not conduct investigations,
make any announcements, or judge the veracity of an allegation.



                                               Page 28 of 49
                 GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
               MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
               Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond

Any cases of SEA/SH brought through the GRM will be documented but remain closed/sealed to
maintain the confidentiality of the survivor. Here, the GRM will primarily serve to:
 Refer complainants to the SEA/SH services provider; and
 Record the resolution of the complaint.
The GRM will also immediately notify both the Implementing Agency and the World Bank of any
SEA/SH complaints with the consent of the survivor.

VIII. PUBLIC AWARENESS CAMPAIGN
A proper Public Awareness Campaign is essential to guarantee successful project execution. People in the
project execution area must be properly informed about project activities. To accomplish that, a consultant
could be hired to develop this campaign. Some ideas are the following:
• Printing of Project brochures (See Annex 5).
• TV and radio ads.
• Social media ads.
• Advertising on the MED website and BWS website.
• Public Notices and Press Releases, among other activities (See Annex 6).
The proposals of the brochures are presented in Annex 5 and an example of public notices / press releases
is presented in Annex 6. The budget for the implementation of the public awareness campaign will be
determined at later stages during this project preparation.

IX.     MONITORING AND REPORTING ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE SEP
The SEP will be monitored based on both qualitative reporting (based on progress reports) and quantitative
reporting linked to results indicators on stakeholder engagement and grievance performance.
SEP reporting will include the following:
(i) Progress reporting on the ESS10-Stakeholder Engagement commitments under the Environmental
      and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)
(ii) Cumulative qualitative reporting on the feedback received during SEP activities, in particular (a)
      issues that have been raised that can be addressed through changes in project scope and design, and
      reflected in the basic documentation such as the Project Appraisal Document, Environmental and
      Social Assessment, Resettlement Plan, or SEA/SH Action Plan, if needed; (b) issues that have been
      raised and can be addressed during project implementation; (c) issues that have been raised that are
      beyond the scope of the project and are better addressed through alternative projects, programs or
      initiatives; and (d) issues that cannot be addressed by the project due to technical, jurisdictional or
      excessive cost-associated reasons. Minutes of meetings summarizing the views of the attendees can
      also be annexed to the monitoring reports.
(iii) Quantitative reporting based on the indicators included in the SEP.
IX.1. Reporting back to the Stakeholder Groups
The SEP will be revised and updated as necessary during project implementation.




                                               Page 29 of 49
                 GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
               MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
              Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond

Semiannual summaries and internal reports on public grievances, inquiries, and related incidents, together
with the status of implementation of associated corrective/preventative actions will be collated by
responsible staff and referred to the project managers.
Specific mechanisms to report back to the stakeholders include focus groups, communal assemblies,
public meetings, etc. to be used by the project to report back to the stakeholder groups that have been/will
be consulted. This reporting back to the stakeholders will be at least on a semiannual basis and could be
in-person or virtual, prioritizing in-person events.

X.    CONCLUSIONS
1. Stakeholders have tremendous sway over the project’s success. This Stakeholder Engagement Plan
   (SEP) is the foundation for achieving a proactive communication strategy.
2. Community and stakeholder engagement is about relationship building. The many stakeholders all
   have different needs and wants, and their power and interest in the project are all unique, requiring
   specialized consultation requirements. Once the stakeholder engagement plans are put into action, the
   project management team is continuously updated regarding the status of each stakeholder.
3. This SEP outlines the communication and consultation requirements of each person (or group of
   people) impacted by this Project.
4. This SEP will allow the Project team at the CEU to manage expectations and deliver the right
   information to the right people at the right time during project execution. This SEP will also help to
   minimize negative perceptions, amplify positive impacts, and resolve conflicts before they escalate.
5. Public consultations are an adequate scenario to engage project affected people and other stakeholders
   related to this project on issues that could potentially affect them and to ensure that relevant
   environmental and social information are disclosed and disseminated.
6. Public consultations would help to identify potential gender-based risks and impacts that would allow
   the Project the introduction of effective measures to avoid, prevent, or mitigate such risks and impacts,
   thereby eliminating the possibility of reinforcing pre-existing inequalities or creating new ones.
7. A proper public awareness campaign will ensure that appropriate information on the project's
   environmental and social risks and impacts is disclosed to stakeholders in a timely, understandable,
   accessible, and proper manner and format.
8. Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) will provide stakeholders with accessible and inclusive means
   to raise questions, proposals, and concerns.
9. This SEP ensures an active engagement with stakeholders by understanding their needs and concerns,
   building trust, loyalty, and support. This plan also anticipates and addresses potential issues
   proactively, minimizing the chances of major grievances or work stoppages that could hinder project
   success.
10. This SEP will allow our Project team to easily coordinate and generate an institutional memory to
    empower future engagement efforts, getting a long-term view about strategic stakeholder engagement.




                                               Page 30 of 49
                 GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
               MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
               Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond

11. This SEP will be periodically revised and updated as necessary throughout the life cycle of this Project.
    Summaries and internal reports on public grievances, inquiries, and related incidents, together with
    the status of implementation of associated corrective/preventive actions, will be collated by
    responsible staff and referred to the senior management of the project. The quarterly summaries will
    provide a mechanism for assessing both the number and nature of complaints and requests for
    information, along with the Project’s ability to address those in a timely and effective manner.

XI.  REFERENCES
1. Belize City Council. Belize City History. Available at: http://belizecitycouncil.org/history
2.   CCCCC. (2014). National Change Policy, Strategy and Action Plan. Available at:
     https://www.climate-laws.org/geographies/belize/policies/national-climate-change-policystrategy-
     and-action-plan
3.   Government of Belize (2010). Horizon 2030 - National Development Framework for Belize
     20102030.     Available  at:  https://observatorioplanificacion.cepal.org/en/plans/horizon-2030-
     nationaldevelopment-framework-belize
4.   Government of Belize (2016). Belize’s Growth and Sustainable Development Strategy 2016-2019.
     https://observatorioplanificacion.cepal.org/sites/default/files/plan/files/BelizeGSDS.pdf
5.   Godfrey, G. Ambergris Caye History. https://ambergriscaye.com/pages/mayan/amberhistory.html
6.   IDB (2023). Climate Change Analysis for Project BL-1043: Belize Water Supply and Modernization
     Program. https://www.iadb.org/document.cfm?id=EZSHARE-1401741367-40. May 2023.
7.   IDB (2023). Environmental and Social Analysis for Project BL-1043: Belize Water Supply and
     Modernization Program. https://www.iadb.org/document.cfm?id=EZSHARE-4022580-25.
8.   IDB (2023). Environmental and Social Review Summary for Project BL-1043: Belize Water Supply
     and               Modernization              Program.              Available              at:
     https://www.iadb.org/document.cfm?id=EZSHARE1401741367-38. May 2023.
9.   IDB (2023). Environmental and Social Management Plan for Project BL-1043: Belize Water Supply
     and               Modernization             Program.               Available               at:
     https://www.iadb.org/document.cfm?id=EZSHARE1401741367-41. May 2023.
10. IDB (2023). Public Consultations Report for Project BL-1043: Belize Water Supply and
    Modernization Program. Available at: https://www.iadb.org/document.cfm?id=EZSHARE4022580-
    23. January, 2023.
11. Marsan, J. (2004). Private Lands Conservation in Belize. The University of Colorado Boulder.
    Natural Resources Law Center.
12. MBECA (2021). Annual Report 2021. Ministry of Blue Economy and Civil Aviation. Available at:
    https://edc.gov.bz/elibrary/uploads/bhnFCM4fDcsayLrmXL1gIKL9R5QlUDWO.pdf.
13. MBECA (2022). Belize Maritime Economy Plan. Ministry of Blue Economy and Civil Aviation.
     https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/
     1134627/Belize_Maritime_Economy_Plan_August_2022.pdf.


                                               Page 31 of 49
                GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
              MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
              Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond

14. Ministry of Human Development. (2019). Community Action for Public Safety II.
15. MSDCCDRM (2022). Statement by Hon. Orlando Habet, Minister of Sustainable Development,
    Climate Change and Disaster Risk Management at the 27 th Conference of the Parties to the United
    Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP-27). November 2022, Sharm El Sheikh,
    Egypt. https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/BELIZE_cop27cmp17cma4_HLS_ENG.pdf.
16. NCCO. (2016). Belize´s third National Communication to the United Nations Framework Convention
    on Climate Change.
17. Placencia History (2008). http://www.placencia.com/Informative%20_%20Page/experience.htm
18. SIB           (2013).        2010         Population         Data.            Available          at:
      http://sib.org.bz/wpcontent/uploads/2010_Census_Report.pdf
19. SIB. (2022). Abstract of Statistics of Belize Census. Statistical Institute of Belize, Available at:
    http://sib.org.bz/wpcontent/uploads/2022_Abstract_of_Statistics.pdf
20. SIB (2023). 2022 Population and housing census. Available at: https://sib.org.bz/census-2022/
    Statistical Institute of Belize, 2023
21. Villegas, P. J. (2024) Public Consultations Report for World Bank Project Belize Blue Cities and
    Beyond      (BBCB).     Ministry    of    Economic     Development,   Belize. Available       at:
    https://med.gov.bz/public-consultations-report/
22. World Bank (2023). Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary (ESRS) for Belize Blue
    Economy Program (P181064). Report No: ESRSC03887. November 2023. Available at:
    https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/099111723183531312/pdf/P181064021664d042080
    39077cdcdc4f1f7.pdf
23. World Bank (2023). Project Information Document (P181064) Belize Blue Economy Program.
    Report No: PID191. November 30th, 2023. Available at:
    https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/099113023161568426/pdf/P18106404e9da30009d1
    d060e2aaf7a41c.pdf.
24. World Bank (2023). Environmental and Social Standards (ESS).                        Available    at:
    https://projects.worldbank.org/en/projects-operations/environmental-and-
    socialframework/brief/environmental-and-social-standards
25. World       Bank    (2023).    Country       Partnership    Frameworks.     Available            at:
    https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/collections/5d713a66-3a73-5e53-9266-7bcf21b71a78
26. World Bank (2023). Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) for Belize Blue Economy
    Program (P181064). December 18th, 2023.




                                             Page 32 of 49
                                                                                                            GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
                                                                                                            MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
                                                                                                            Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond


                                                                   ANNEX 1. STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PLAN FOR BELIZE BLUE CITIES AND BEYOND PROJECT
                                                                                                                     Stakeholder                                                    Power/         Interest/                                                                Strategy
                  Project Result (Output)                                        Stakeholder                                          Goals/Motivations/Interests                                                 Attitude        Strategy        Specific Strategy                            Timeline
                                                                                                                     Classification                                                Influence        Stake                                                                    Owner
Component 1: Policy Development and Capacity Building

1.1: Policy Development (National Land Use Policy; National          MOFEDI, MBECA, MTDR, Fisheries                                       Improve Efficiency, Sustainability,                                                                     Communicate early and
Sanitation Master Plan; Integrated Fisheries Monitoring Policies    Department, Attorney General's Ministry               Internal        Positive Impact and reduce Risks             HIGH           HIGH             Ally      Manage closely         often                   CEU             Quarterly
and Procedures; Environmental Monitoring and Enforcement
                                                                    GOB Officers, Fisherfolks, Cooperatives,                                                                                                                                      Communicate early and
Standards and Procedures.                                                                                                External     Reach and engage more Stakeholders               LOW            HIGH            Neutral    Keep informed                                  CEU             Quarterly
                                                                        Independent Fishers’ Groups                                                                                                                                                     often
                                                                                                                                          Improve Efficiency, Sustainability,                                                                     Communicate early and
                                                                         MOFEDI, MBECA, CITO, UB                          Internal        Positive Impact and reduce Risks             HIGH           HIGH             Ally      Manage closely         often                   CEU             Quarterly
1.2: Capacity Building and Development (Blue Economy Topics;
GEF related Knowledge Management Events; etc.)                                                                                                                                                                                                    Communicate early and
                                                                                  GOB Officers                           External     Reach and engage more Stakeholders               LOW            HIGH            Neutral    Keep informed          often                   CEU             Quarterly

1.3: Blue Economy Investment Program (Grey/Green Infrastructure       MOFEDI, MBECA, MTDR, Fisheries                                      Improve Efficiency, Sustainability,                                                                     Communicate early and
for Water/DRM/Restoration; Tourism. Monitoring/Surveillance;                   Department                                 Internal        Positive Impact and reduce Risks             HIGH           HIGH             Ally      Manage closely         often                   CEU             Quarterly
Infrastructure; Fisheries; Blue Carbon; Sustainability Linked
Bonds; etc.)                                                                 Belizean Professionals                      External     Reach and engage more Stakeholders               LOW            HIGH            Neutral    Keep informed         Status Update            CEU             Quarterly

Component 2: Water, Sanitation and Waste Management
                                                                                                                                      Improve Efficacy, Relevance, Impact and                                                                     Communicate early and
                                                                               BWS, CITCO, DOE                            Internal             reduce Risks                            HIGH           HIGH             Ally         Monitor             often                   BWS             Quarterly
2.1: Belize City Wastewater Treatment Plant Upgrade
                                                                    Service Providers, NGO’s for Natural Resources                          Reach      and    engage        more
                                                                           Conservation                                  External       Stakeholders, Improve Positive                 LOW            HIGH            Neutral    Keep informed            Engage                BWS             Quarterly
                                                                                                                                      Improve Efficacy, Relevance, Impact and                                                                     Communicate early and
                                                                                   BWS, SPTC                              Internal             reduce Risks                            HIGH           HIGH             Ally         Monitor             often                   BWS             Quarterly
2.2: Water Network Expansion to South San Pedro
                                                                    Service Providers, NGO’s for Natural Resources                          Reach      and    engage        more
                                                                           Conservation                                  External       Stakeholders, Improve Positive                 LOW            HIGH            Neutral    Keep informed            Engage                BWS             Quarterly
                                                                                                                                      Improve Efficacy, Relevance, Impact and                                                                     Communicate early and
                                                                          CEU, SPTC, DOE, SWAMA                           Internal             reduce Risks                            HIGH           HIGH             Ally         Monitor             often                   CEU             Quarterly
2.3: Waste Management Pilot in San Pedro
                                                                    Service Providers, NGO’s for Natural Resources                          Reach      and    engage        more
                                                                           Conservation                                  External       Stakeholders, Improve Positive                 LOW            HIGH            Neutral    Keep informed            Engage                CEU             Quarterly



                           Strategy                                                Attitude                          Interest/Stake             Power/Influence                    Goals/Motivations/Interests                  Abbreviations                            Explanation
                      MANAGE CLOSELY                                Ally - Supports the project implementation            HIGH                         HIGH                                  Improve Effectiveness                   AGM          Attorney General's Ministry of Belize
                       KEEP SATISFIED                               Neutral - No support or against the project           LOW                          HIGH                                   Improve Efficiency                     BFD          Belize Fisheries Department
                       KEEP INFORMED                                     Opposite - Don't support project                 HIGH                          LOW                                  Improve Sustainability                  BWS          Belize Water Services
                           MONITOR                                               implementation                           LOW                           LOW                                    Improve Efficacy                      CEU          Central Executing Unit
                                                                                                                                                                                              Improve Relevance                      CITO         Central Information Technology Office, MFEDI
                                                                                                                                                                                           Improve Positive Impact                  CITCO         Belize City Council
                                                                                                                                                                                          Identify and Reduce Risks                  DOE          Department of the Environment
                                                                                                                                                                                           Increase Accountability                   GOB          Government of Belize
                                                                                                                                                                                   Reach and engage more Stakeholders              MBECA          Ministry of Blue Economy and Civil Aviation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MOFEDI         Ministry of Finance, Economic Development & Investment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MTDR          Ministry of Tourism and Diaspora Relations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NGO’s         Non-Governmental Organizations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SPTC         San Pedro Town Council
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SWAMA          Solid Wastes Management Authority
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      UB          University of Belize




                                                                                                                                                Page 33 of 49
                 GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
              MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
              Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond


ANNEX 2. AGENDA FOR PUBLIC CONSULTATIONS FOR THE PROJECT: BELIZE
                  BLUE CITIES AND BEYOND (BBCB)
    TIME                      TOPIC                                 PRESENTER
                                                       Hon. Andre Perez – Minister of Blue
6:00 – 6:10 pm      Welcome address
                                                       Economy, Disasters and Risk Management

                    Geospatial tools for the blue Alfred Cal, Deputy Commissioner of Lands
6:10 – 6:25 pm
                     economy and marine sector     and Surveys MNRPM
                                                       Kevin Gutierrez,     Principal   Surveyor,
6:25-6:40pm         Land use aspects of the Project
                                                       MNRPM
                    Overview of the blue economy Felicia Cruz, Director of Blue Economy Unit,
6:40-7:00pm
                     sector in Belize             MBEDRM
                                                       Stacey Alpuche and Ervin Flores,
                    Project components (BWS)
7:00 – 7:15 pm                                         Environmental and Technical Specialists,
                    Project advantages
                                                       Belize Water Services (BWS)
                    Project overview and rationale
                                                    Dr. Pedro Villegas, Environment and Social
                    Environmental and social
7:15-7:45pm                                         Specialist, Central Executing Unit (CEU),
                     aspects
                                                    Ministry of Economic Development (MED)
                    Grievances mechanism
                    Breaking      down    groups Central Executing Unit (CEU)
7:45 – 8:50 pm
                     questions and answers        BWS, MBEDRM, MNRPM, MTDR, BTB

8:50pm              Final remarks                     Mayors of the Town Council/City Council
Note: The Master Ceremony will be someone from the Municipality/Village




                                             Page 34 of 49
                GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
              MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
               Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond


  ANNEX 3. GRIEVANCE FORM FOR THE WORLD BANK PROJECT P181064 -
             BELIZE BLUE CITIES AND BEYOND PROGRAM
Name:                                                 Grievance Number: P-181064 -
Email:                                                Phone Number:
Address:
Gender:                               Date:                             Time:

               □ Resident      □ Local Business      □ Village/Municipal Leader
Complainant
Category    □ GOB Worker     □ Fisherfolk    □ Farmer       □ Belizean Professional
                  □ Tourism Employee      □ Employer       OTHER ________
Description of the Grievance
What happened?
Where did it happen?
Who did it happen to?
What is the result of the problem?

                                     □ One time Incident/Grievance (Date: __________________________)
Date of the
Incident/Grievance                   □ Happened more than one time (How many times? ______________)
                                     □ On-going (currently experiencing the problem)
What would you like to see
happen to resolve the
problem?

Grievant Signature:
                                              Date:
(if applicable)
Indicate how you prefer                       Preferred language for
to be contacted                               communication:
Received by:                                  Date:
                                     □ Email             □ In Person          □ Telephone Call
Grievance Received by:
                                □ Grievance Box             Other _____________________________
                                         FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Grievance will proceed. If the reason

 Action to be taken to address this
 grievance and timeline implementation:
                                                  Has the Grievance been
 Date for GRM Meeting:                            resolved: (if yes include close
                                                  date, if no include reason
Name of Responsible Body:                        Signature:




                                                Page 35 of 49
                                         GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
                                      MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
                                      Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond


ANNEX 4. GRIEVANCE DATABASE FOR PROJECT P181064 - BELIZE BLUE CITIES AND BEYOND (BBCB).
            GRIEVANCE MECHANISM DATABASE FOR WORLD BANK PROJECT P181064 - BELIZE BLUE ECONOMY PROGRAM
Nu. Date Submitted   Full Name   Sex Phone Number   Address    Complaint Description   Status   Grievance Resolution Deadline   Resolution Proposal

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15




                                                                       Page 36 of 50
                                    GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
                                  MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
                                  Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond


                                          ANNEX 5. EXAMPLE OF PROJECT BROCHURE
The Grievances Redress Mechanism
(GRM) will be in place to address
                                              systematic identification of emerging issues
                                              and trends, facilitating corrective and pre-
                                                                                                   GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE
stakeholders’ concerns and complaints. The    emptive engagement.
Grievances cycle is summarized below:      4. To build trust and goodwill as an integral
                                              component of the stakeholder’s relation
               1. Submit                      activities, and promote trust and respect
               Grievance                      with stakeholders, particularly at a
                                              community level.


 5. Communicate                                                                                    MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC
  Responses to             2. Grievance                                                            DEVELOPMENT, AND INVESTMENT
   Stakeholders            Notification




                                                   For the success of this BBEP Project, an
                                                   effective Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)
                              3. Record
  4. Generate
                              Received
                                                   is required; this is a comprehensive approach       World Bank Project P181064 -
  Responses                                        that includes ongoing communication,
                             Grievances                                                                Belize Blue Economy Program
                                                   listening and collaboration.                       “The resources may be limited, but with proper
                                                                                                    planning, determination to improve the lives of our
 The GRM has been designed to:                                                                      people and a good team, anything is doable. We are
1. To provide a simple, fair, and transparent                                                         blessed at the MOFEDI with all hands-on deck
   process for all external stakeholders.                                                            mentality, and together we have been able to work
2. To provide a simple process to address any                                                       for our people across the country. All we do for our
   issues and concerns raised by stakeholders                                                                people is not too big or too small.”
   in a methodical and time efficient manner.
3. To mitigate risks and impacts to all external
   stakeholders due to project operations,
   demonstrating GoB care for the wellbeing        “One Country, One Climate, One Future –
   of its stakeholders. To enable for the                         Together”



                                                                   Page 37 of 50
                                   GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
                                 MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
                                 Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond


The Ministry of Finance, Economic Component 1: Policy Development and b) Leakages and emissions of greenhouse
Development and Investment informs that the Capacity Building. This component will                 gasses (GHG’s) from the wastewater
World Bank funded Project P181064 - support the Policy Development in Belize like:                 treatment plant upgrades.
Belize Blue Economy Program (BBEP) is Nacional Land Use Policy; National Sanitation c) Adverse impacts to water quantity and
being executed in partnership with the Belize Master Plan; Integrated Fisheries Monitoring         quality of groundwater systems in case
Water Services (BWS) and other Ministries Policies and Procedures; Environmental                   water supply activities lead to significant
and GoB Entities and Departments.               Monitoring and Enforcement Standards and           water use.
This BBEP Project aims to improve Belize's Procedures, etc. Also, it will support Capacity d) Generation and disposal of hazardous
management capacity for Sustainable Building and Development activities in Blue                    wastes.
Development of its Blue Economy and Economy Topics; GEF related Knowledge e) Construction stage risks such as
increase access to Climate Resilient and Management Events, etc. Additionally, will                Occupational Health and Safety (OHS),
Sustainable Water and Sanitation Services in fund Blue Economy Investment Program like:            cultural heritage risks, and waste
targeted Coastal areas of Belize.               Grey/Green      Infrastructure    for   Water/     management.
                                                DRM/Restoration; Tourism; Monitoring and
This Project will also identify critical Surveillance; Infrastructure; Fisheries; Blue The Social Risks rating for this BBEP Project
investment needs in key blue economic sectors Carbon; Sustainability Linked Bonds, etc.        is moderate. There are no impacts on
of the Country; promote coordinated                                                            Indigenous lands. There are some social risks
interventions     across    Ministries     and  Component     2: Water,  Sanitation and Waste  that should be closely monitored to ensure they
jurisdictions and develop a financing plan to Management. This component will focus on are mitigated. The principal social risk then
mobilize resources from the public and private the upgrading of Belize City Wastewater would be around communication and ensuring
sectors and development partners. This Treatment Plant; the expansion of the Water that communities surrounding the project
program is expected to serve as a coordination Network at South San Pedro Island such as the implementation areas are properly informed
platform to support Belize’s Blue Economy North Placencia Peninsula and finally, the according to the respective World Bank
development beyond this project. As part of the installation of a Waste Management Plant in standards.
proposed financing plan, sustainable financing San Pedro Town.                                 The Environmental and Social risks are likely
mechanisms such as blue carbon, sustainability The Environmental Risks of this BBEP to be temporary, short-term, and limited in
linked bonds, and parametric insurance under Project are classified as Substantial. The key extent and can be managed through routine
the Caribbean Oceans and Aquaculture environmental risks include:                              preventive and mitigation E&S measures and
Sustainability Facility (COAST) will be a) Soil, water, and air pollution that may result by applying known technologies. GOB will
explored along with bilateral and multilateral     from desludging of facultative ponds and prepare appropriate assessments to manage the
donor financing mechanisms. The main               septage disposal.                           Environmental and Social risks and implement
projects components are:                                                                       a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM).



                                                                 Page 38 of 50
              GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
              MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
              Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond

          ANNEX 6. EXAMPLE OF PRESS RELEASE/PUBLIC NOTICE
                  GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE
                     Ministry of Finance, Economic Development, and
                                          Investment
                   Ground Floor, Right Wing, Sir Edney Cain Building, Belmopan City,
                                     Belize, Central America
                         PUBLIC NOTICE/PRESS RELEASE
   World Bank Project P181064 - Belize Blue Cities and Beyond Project
Belmopan. May 26, 2024, 3:00 PM.
The Ministry of Finance, Economic Development and Investment informs that the Project
P181064 - Belize Blue Cities and Beyond Project will be executed in partnership with Belize
Water Services (BWS) and other GOB Ministries and Departments.
This Project aims to improve Belize's management capacity for Sustainable Development of
its Blue Economy and increase access to Climate Resilient and Sustainable Water and
Sanitation Services in targeted Coastal areas of Belize.
The main projects components are Component 1: Policy Development and Capacity
Building. This component will focus on: (i) policy development; (ii) capacity building and
development and (iii) Blue Economy investment programs. Component 2: Water, Sanitation
and Waste Management. This component will support the following activities: (i) upgrading
of the Belize City wastewater treatment plant; (ii) expansion of the water network to south
San Pedro; and (iv) waste management plant in San Pedro.
This Project will also identify critical investment needs in key blue economic sectors of the
Country; promote coordinated interventions across Ministries and jurisdictions and develop
a financing plan to mobilize resources from the public and private sectors and development
partners. This project is expected to serve as a coordination platform to support Belize’s Blue
Economy development beyond this project. As part of the proposed financing plan,
sustainable financing mechanisms such as blue carbon, sustainability linked bonds, and
parametric insurance under the Caribbean Oceans and Aquaculture Sustainability Facility
(COAST) will be explored along with bilateral and multilateral donor financing mechanisms.
The Ministry invites the public to contact us in case of any additional information.
-END-
For further information, please contact:
Dr. Pedro Julio Villegas
Environmental and Social Specialist
Email: info.ceu@med.gov.bz
Phone: 822-4106


                                            Page 39 of 50
                    GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
                    MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
                    Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond


ANNEX 7. STAKEHOLDERS’ LIST THE PROJECT P181064: BELIZE BLUE CITIES AND BEYOND




                                                  Page 40 of 50
GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond




                              Page 41 of 50
GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond




                              Page 42 of 50
GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond




                              Page 43 of 50
GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond




                              Page 44 of 50
GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond




                              Page 45 of 50
GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond




                              Page 46 of 50
GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond




                              Page 47 of 50
GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond




                              Page 48 of 50
                GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE - CENTRAL EXECUTING UNIT
               MINISTRY OF FINANCE, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND INVESTMENT
               Stakeholders Engagement Plan for WB Project: Belize Blue Cities and Beyond


               ANNEX 8. Stakeholders Engagement Plan (SEP) BUDGET
                                                               Unit     Times/    Total
          BUDGET CATEGORIES                       Quantity                                  Notes
                                                               Costs    Years     Costs
1. Indicative Consultant fees
1a. Communications Consultant                           1     15,000       1     15,000
1b. Travel costs for consultants                        1      5,000       1     5,000
1c. Community Liaison Officers                          2     24,000       1     48,000
2. Consultations/ Participatory Planning, Decision-Making Meetings
2a. Public Consultations                                2      2,500       2     10,000
2b. Organization of focus groups                       12       500        2     12,000
                           3. Communication Outreach Meetings
3a. Posters, flyers                                    50       150        2     15,000
3b. E.g., Social media campaign                         2      1,000       2     4,000
4. Trainings
4a. Training on social/environmental issues             1      5,000       1     5,000
4b. Training on Gender-Based Violence (GBV)             1      5,000       1     5,000
5. Beneficiary surveys
5a. Perception survey                                   3     10,000       1     30,000
6. Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM)
6a. Training of GRM committees                          1      3,000       1     3,000
6b. Suggestion boxes in villages                        2       500        4     4,000
6c. GRM communication materials                         2      1,000       2     4,000
6d Grievance investigations/site visits                 2      1,500       4     12,000
6e. GRM Information System (setting up or
                                                        1      1,000       2     2,000
maintenance)
6f. Other GRM Logistical Costs (GRM
                                                        1       250       36     9,000
Committee Meetings)
7. Other expenses
7a. Travel expensed and DSA for ESS                    12      2,000       4     96,000
7b. Unexpected expenses                                 -        -         -     21,000
                                   TOTAL STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT BUDGET 300,000




                                              Page 49 of 49
