Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Green and Resilient Development for a Decarbonized Economy in Peru (P181263)



                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidcondpfcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized



                                               Program Information Document (PID)



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 16-May-2024 | Report No: PIDIC00063




Public Disclosure Authorized
       The World Bank
       Green and Resilient Development for a Decarbonized Economy in Peru (P181263)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@piddpfbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                 Operation Name
                                                            Green and Resilient Development for a Decarbonized
Peru                           P181263
                                                            Economy in Peru
Region                         Estimated Approval Date      Practice Area (Lead)          Financing Instrument
LATIN AMERICA AND                                                                         Development Policy
                               31-Oct-2024                  Energy & Extractives
CARIBBEAN                                                                                 Financing (DPF)
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
Ministry of Economy and        Ministry of Economy and
Finance                        Finance

Proposed Development Objective(s)
To support the Government of Peru’s (GoP) to: (i) strengthen climate change adaptation; (ii) promote decarbonized
development in selected sectors; and (iii) improve the enabling environment for resilient infrastructure and social
inclusion.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
Financing (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             Yes

SUMMARY
  Total Financing                                                                                             500.00

DETAILS
  Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                            500.00
    World Bank Lending                                                                                        500.00

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@piddpfdecision#doctemplate




                                                                                                                      Page 1
         The World Bank
         Green and Resilient Development for a Decarbonized Economy in Peru (P181263)



Decision
The review did authorize the preparation to continue




 B. Introduction and Context
 Country Context
Since 2014, Peru's growth potential has decelerated, shifting towards a new trajectory marked by stagnation in
convergence and poverty reduction. The aftermath of the commodity boom posed challenges for sustained growth, with
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growing at an annual rate of 3.5 percent between 2013 and 2019—half the pace of the
preceding decade. The COVID-19 pandemic led Peru into one of the deepest recessions in Latin America and increased
the national poverty rate by 10 percentage. The economy rebounded in 2021 to pre-pandemic levels, and, while poverty
declined to 25.9 percent in 2021, it remains above pre-pandemic levels, hampered by the lower quality of employment
and higher informality. El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO) along with political uncertainty have disrupted agriculture,
fishing, and manufacturing activities. Tightened financial conditions have also depressed private consumption and
investment. Over the medium term, GDP growth is expected to converge towards a rate of around 2.4 percent, below
pre-pandemic levels. The sluggish economic activity led to reduced government revenues and an increase in the fiscal
deficit beyond the fiscal rule in 2023.1 All of the above, underscores potential constraints on fiscal policy while emphasizing
its pivotal role in fostering a more growth within the context of meeting its National Determined Contributions (NDC).
The Government of Peru (GoP) remains committed to transition to a decarbonized economy and strengthen CC
adaptation. This is particularly important since in the absence of Climate Change (CC) mitigation actions, Peru’s
development will lead to a significant increase of its contribution to global greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 2050.2 In
addition, close to half of the national territory is classified as having high to very high vulnerability to natural hazards,3
which are expected to increase in frequency, severity, and impact due to CC. In the last two decades, the economic losses
linked to natural events reached more than US$ 4 billion dollars with the damages caused by ENSO exceeding US$ 3.1
billion, equivalent to 1.6 percent of the country’s GDP in 2017.4,5 Recognizing the challenge, in 2020, Peru reinforced its
climate commitments with the updated NDC, which was followed by the adoption of the Law on Climate Change (Law No.
30754, 2021). The country’s Strategic Plan for National Development (PEDN 2050), launched in September 2023, outlines
the GoP’s vision with a 2050 horizon, which aims at achieving a more sustainable management of the territory, natural
resources and, putting in place measures to tackle CC.
 Relationship to CPF
The proposed operation is aligned with the CPF for Peru (2023-2027). It makes a strong contribution towards achieving
CPF pillar on improving access to services by advancing investments in water infrastructure (PA3), energy infrastructure
(PA4), transport infrastructure (PA5), access to affordable housing (PA6), improving quality of land use planning (PA2), and
building institutional capacity for infrastructure development (PA8). The WBG’s Corporate Priorities are also central in the

1 The World Bank has been supporting the GoP in advancing structural reforms and maintaining fiscal stability for economic growth through the Enabling a Green and

Resilient Development DPF-DDO 2022-23 series and through a Fiscal Policy and Growth DPF-DDO currently under preparation.
2 Net emissions from the energy, transport, land use, land-use change, and forestry (LULUCF) sectors expected to increase by 83 percent over the next 30 years. World

Bank staff calculations using the World Bank Macro-Fiscal Model (MFMoD) with climate change module.
3 MINAM (Ministerio del Ambiente). 2016. El Perú y el Cambio Climático: Tercera Comunicación Nacional del Perú a la Convención Marco de las Naciones Unidas

sobre Cambio Climático (Peru and Climate Change: Third National Communication of Peru to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change).
4 RPP Noticias. 2017. “El Niño costero: Daños ya suman $3,124 millones según Macroconsult” (March 24).
5 World Bank. 2022. Peru Country Climate and Development Report.




                                                                                                                                                                 Page 2
         The World Bank
         Green and Resilient Development for a Decarbonized Economy in Peru (P181263)


operation by supporting reforms aimed at promoting increased adaptation and resilience to CC impacts through the
strengthening of the DRM system (PA1), strengthened territorial planning (PA2), and improving the resilience of water
infrastructure (PA3), addresses climate mitigation (PA4, 5, 6, 7, & 8), and the private capital mobilization agenda (PA4 &
6). In addition, it complements ongoing projects such as the Sustainable Growth and Finance DPF-DDO (P178591); Enabling
a Green and Resilient Development DPF I & II (P177765 & P179214); the Transmission Investment Plan (PIT) Project
(P174812); the National Urban Cadaster and Municipal Support Project (P162278); and the Peru Circular economy for
water supply and sanitation service delivery Project (P505093).
 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

To support the Government of Peru’s (GoP) to: (i) strengthen climate change adaptation; (ii) promote decarbonized
development in selected sectors; and (iii) improve the enabling environment for resilient infrastructure.
   Key Results
The policy program supported by the proposed operation are expected to support Peru’s sustainable low-carbon
growth path. Measures to strengthen disaster risk management, enable a risk-informed territorial planning and
incentivize the use of circular economy approaches to help strengthen the country’s ability to adapt to CC. Creating
incentives and instruments to promote renewable energy, safe and low-carbon transport, a more compact urban
development and forest control and surveillance system in the Amazon is expected to contribute to decarbonize the
Peruvian economy. An improved enabling environment for resilient infrastructure is expected through reforms to establish
the National Infrastructure Authority (ANIN).
 D. Concept Description
The proposed operation is aligned with the GoP’s program to enable a green, and resilient development. Examples
include the Strategic plan for National Development (PEDN) 2050, the 2020 NDCs,6 the National Climate Change
Adaptation Plan,7 the OECD Accession Core Principles for Peru and the government’s program “Con Punche Peru 2” (May
2023).8 Pillar 1 of the operation supports CC adaptation through strengthening the Disaster Risk Management (DRM)
System; enabling risk-informed territorial planning; and incentivizing circular economy approaches in the water supply
and sanitation (WSS) sector. Pillar 2 supports climate mitigation efforts in selected sectors by promoting renewable energy
development; safe and low-carbon transport; a more inclusive and compact urban development; and strengthening forest
control and surveillance in the Amazon. Pilar 2 aims to reduce GHG emissions and increase carbon sinks, hitting critical
mitigation levers identified by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). Pillar 3 aims to contribute to
improving the enabling environment for resilient infrastructure and social inclusion by supporting the establishment of
the National Infrastructure Authority (ANIN).
 E. Poverty and Social Impacts, and Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects
 Poverty and Social Impacts
The proposed policy actions are expected to indirectly contribute to poverty reduction and positively impact social
inclusion and climate resilience in various ways. These include mitigating the impact of natural disasters, creating jobs in
circular economies, enhancing transportation safety and infrastructure, improving access to affordable housing, and
promoting sustainable forestry and eco-tourism. However, the transition to a carbon-neutral economy may temporarily
increase poverty due to reduced activity and job losses in high-emitting sectors. To minimize these adverse effects,
workers can be reallocated to greener industries, provided with re-employment training, and potential conflicts with


6 Gobierno de Peru (2021) CONTRIBUCIONES DETERMINADAS A NIVEL NACIONAL DEL PERÚ: Reporte de actualización periodo 2021-2030.
7 Ministerio del Ambiente (2021) Plan Nacional de Adaptación al Cambio Climático del Perú
8 The “Con Punche Peru 2” includes measures aimed at increasing climate resilience of infrastructure & enhancing climate sustainability of the transport sector.




                                                                                                                                                                   Page 3
       The World Bank
       Green and Resilient Development for a Decarbonized Economy in Peru (P181263)


indigenous and local communities should be proactively addressed through engagement and effective conflict resolution
mechanisms.
 Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects
The policies and measures supported through this operation are expected to have an overall significantly positive impact
on Peru’s environment, forests, and other natural resources. In the event negative environmental impacts arise, Peru has
a robust system for their adequate management. Under Pillar 1, reforms to strengthen the national DRM system, risk
informed territorial planning and resilience in the provision of water supply and sanitation services are expected to
promote the protection and sustainable use of the territory and increase efficiency in the use of water resources. Under
Pillar 2, the decarbonization of the energy sector is expected to result in a reduction of GHG emissions and enabling a
more informed and supervised control of illegal forestry activities will contribute to the conservation of forest resources.
PA5 and PA6 are expected to result in neutral impacts on the environment. Under Pilar 3, PA8 is expected to result in
positive impact as the operationalization of ANIN, is expected to have a favorable impact on the environment as it
incorporates an environmental sustainability focus into its operations.


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Janina Andrea Franco Salazar
   Senior Energy Specialist

   Paula Restrepo Cadavid
   Lead Urban Specialist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient
  Ministry of Economy and Finance
  Maribel Amasifen
  Economista - Direccion de Creditos
  mamasifen@mef.gob.pe

 Implementing Agencies
  Ministry of Economy and Finance
  Maribel Amasifen
  Economista
  mamasifen@mef.gob.pe

 FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT




                                                                                                                        Page 4
     The World Bank
     Green and Resilient Development for a Decarbonized Economy in Peru (P181263)


The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                   Janina Andrea Franco Salazar, Paula Restrepo Cadavid

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:              Gabriela Elizondo Azuela               01-May-2024

Country Director:                      Pilar Maisterra                        16-May-2024




                                                                                              Page 5
