Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        SUSTAINABLE FINANCING FOR ROGUN HYDROPOWER PROJECT (P181029)




Public Disclosure Authorized

                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                      Concept Stage


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                 (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                     Date Prepared/Updated: 07/14/2023 | Report No: ESRSC03684




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Jul 14, 2023                                                                      Page 1 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               SUSTAINABLE FINANCING FOR ROGUN HYDROPOWER PROJECT (P181029)



                     BASIC INFORMATION

                     A. Basic Project Data

                     Country                       Region                           Project ID                     Parent Project ID (if any)

                     Tajikistan                    EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA          P181029

                     Project Name                  SUSTAINABLE FINANCING FOR ROGUN HYDROPOWER PROJECT

                     Practice Area (Lead)          Financing Instrument             Estimated Appraisal Date       Estimated Board Date

                     Energy & Extractives          Investment Project               10/26/2023                     1/31/2024
                                                   Financing

                     Borrower(s)                   Implementing Agency(ies)




                     Proposed Development Objective
                     The project development objective is to increase supply of affordable and clean energy for consumers in Tajikistan
                     and Central Asia region.



Public Disclosure
                     Financing (in USD Million)                                                                                          Amount

                       Total Project Cost                                                                                                2440.00



                     B. Is the project being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project [including overview of Country, Sectoral & Institutional Contexts and
                     Relationship to CPF]
                     Rogun HPP was designed in the mid-1960s and construction started in the 1970s. The Rogun Hydropower Project
                     (Rogun HPP), located on the Vakhsh River (upstream of the Nurek HPP) about 110 km East-Northeast of Dushanbe,
                     the capital of Tajikistan, is a large Project which intends to provide energy for domestic (Tajik) customers and export
                     revenues. At completion, the Project will have an installed capacity of 3,780 MW and a 335-meters high dam (will be
                     the tallest dam in the world). Rogun HPP is currently under construction with two temporary turbines already
                     operational, with a 400 MW capacity. Construction progressed with number of stop-and-resume cycles driven by
                     economic consequences of a major geopolitical event - dissolution of the Soviet Union - and the calamities caused by
                     the civil war in Tajikistan in 1990s. Small-scale construction activities resumed in 2008 with financing from the state
                     budget and accelerated in 2016 with selection of the contractor for the Main Dam - Salini Impregilo (Italy).

                    Jul 14, 2023                                                                                                        Page 2 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               SUSTAINABLE FINANCING FOR ROGUN HYDROPOWER PROJECT (P181029)




                     Following the government’s request to the Bank in 2011-2014, the Bank supported (i) preparation of TEAS for Rogun
                     HPP Project; (ii) development of E&S instruments e.g., E&S Impact Assessment (ESIA); (iii) two independent dam
                     safety and E&S Panels of Experts (ESPOE) to provide expert advice for the duration of the two studies. The assessment
                     study was undertaken in three phases started in 2011 and completed in 2014. Phase 0 was an assessment of the
                     potential impact of the salt wedge that exists at the Rogun site. It was concluded that this impact can be addressed by
                     appropriate mitigation measures to ensure the long-term safety of the proposed dam. Phase I was an assessment of
                     all previous work done to date on the Rogun HPP site. It was concluded that, with implementation of specified
                     remedial measures, the existing facilities and equipment were suitable for use in the project. Phase II was a detailed
                     techno-economic assessment of different alternatives of the Rogun HPP. Three full supply levels were studied
                     corresponding to dam heights of 335 m, 300 m and 265 m respectively. Three installed generation capacities were
                     studied for each FSL (ranging from 3,600 MW to 2,000 MW), resulting in a total of nine Rogun alternatives studied.
                     The Study concluded that, subject to specified design modifications and the implementation of the identified
                     mitigation and monitoring measures, any of the Rogun dam alternatives including the highest dam alternative at
                     1,290 meters above sea level (masl), could be built and operated at the Rogun site within international safety norms.
                     The analysis of environmental and social impacts of the three dam height alternatives showed that the environmental
                     and social impacts of all three alternatives could be adequately mitigated. The results of the economic analysis
                     showed that all Rogun dam height alternatives would have an overall beneficial impact on the Tajikistan electricity
                     system across all sensitivities, with the highest dam alternative generally showing the greatest benefit across most
                     sensitivities. Moreover, the sedimentation study estimated that the ultimate life span of the Rogun reservoir is in the
                     range of 115 years and the Rogun Reservoir will largely decrease the Nurek reservoir sediment filling rate, ensuring




Public Disclosure
                     continued river regulation for a significant additional period of time.

                     After the completion of the assessment studies, the Government proceeded with construction of the Rogun HPP for
                     the alternative with the highest dam (335 m) and largest generation capacity (3,600 MW ) using its own budget
                     resources. The development partners did not finance the project or provide other support to the Government after
                     completion of TEAS, in large part, because of the concerns raised by some of the neighboring countries regarding
                     Rogun HPP’s impacts on the availability of water once the Rogun dam is constructed. The Government was
                     undertaking significant efforts to address those concerns and significant progress was made in 2018-2020. Since then,
                     based on the information available to the Bank, the neighboring countries have not been objecting to construction of
                     Rogun HPP Project. Rogun OJSC drew upon the outputs from TEAS and relied on standard terms and conditions of
                     engineering, procurement, and construction (EPC) contracts of the Fédération Internationale des Ingénieurs-Conseils
                     (FIDIC) – the industry standard – to proceed with procurement of contractors for the project. In 2015, bidding
                     documents were prepared for four EPC lots: Electro-mechanical Equipment, Main Dam, Right Bank Structures, and
                     Left Bank Structures.

                     An optimized construction schedule developed during the Rogun assessment studies was based on a substantial
                     amount of works being completed and/or initiated prior to awarding the main construction contract(s) of the project.
                     These Pre-Contract Works included construction of a third Diversion Tunnel (DT3). Most of these works have already
                     been implemented through a number of different contractors (Russian, Iranian, Tajik). Procurement of the EPC
                     contactor started in early 2016 and the Contract for construction of the main dam (Lot 2) was awarded to Salini
                     Impregilo (now Webuild) in July 2016. A joint venture of Tractebel Engineering and Electroconsult were hired to
                     undertake further design work and supervision of the construction works of the main dam (Lot 2). Award of the other
                     three lots were delayed due to financing constraints. Through a competitive process and direct negotiations, the
                    Jul 14, 2023                                                                                                    Page 3 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               SUSTAINABLE FINANCING FOR ROGUN HYDROPOWER PROJECT (P181029)



                     contract for Lot 1 was awarded to Voith Hydro (Austria) in Jan 2021. The Contract for Lot 3 was awarded to a local
                     company - TajikGydroElectroMontaj (TGEM) in July 2021, whereas the contract for Lot 4 has not yet been awarded.
                     Important interface issues between lots, particularly between Lots 1 & 4 (e.g., power intake and powerhouse civil
                     works are under Lot 4) need to be carefully monitored.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1. Detailed project location(s) and salient physical characteristics relevant to the E&S assessment [geographic,
                     environmental, social]
                     D.1. Detailed project location(s) and salient physical characteristics relevant to the E&S assessment [geographic,
                     environmental, social]
                     Tajikistan is a landlocked country in southeast Central Asia. The Amu Darya, Central Asia’s largest river, is formed by
                     the confluence of the Panj (40%) and Vakhsh (26%). Flow pattern is highly seasonal, high in summer due to snow and
                     glacier melt and low in winter. The Rogun Hydropower Project (HPP) is located on the Vakhsh river, 70 km upstream
                     of the Nurek HPP, which has operated since the 1980s. . The site is about 110 km northeast of Dushanbe. The area of
                     the Rogun HPP is in the administrative region called “Districts of Republican Subordination” and is predominately
                     rural, depending on subsistence agriculture. The poverty rate was 13 percent in Tajikistan in 2022 and it is typically
                     higher in the mountainous regions.

                     Rogun HPP was intended to be the furthest upstream of a series of HPPs to provide regional irrigation and
                     hydropower that benefits all of Central Asia. The Vakhsh is characterized by a high sediment load due to intense
                     erosion in its catchment and water quality characterized by high salinity levels. Poor water quality has influenced the



Public Disclosure
                     quality of fish habitats and, according to the 2014 Rogun HPP Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), no
                     long-range fish migration takes place.

                     Rogun Dam, which is designed to be 335 m high, will be the highest rock-filled dam in the world. It will be the largest
                     HPP in Central Asia, with a 3,780 MW generation capacity and average annual generation of about 14,400 gigawatt
                     hour. Rogun dam is expected to have a useful life of 115 years, and, by intercepting sediment, will also extend the life
                     of Nurek HPP. Rogun will entail permanent inundation of a reservoir with gross storage of 13.3 cu km with the
                     reservoir surface area of about 110 sq km.

                     Tajikistan has reiterated that Rogun HPP operation will be consistent with existing regional water allocation
                     arrangements. The Interstate Coordinating Water Commission meets twice annually to set surface water withdrawal
                     quotas, taking into account the main river’s water flow prognosis for the October–March and April–September
                     seasons). Once the Rogun dam reaches the full supply level, it will become the regulating HPP for the entire Vakhsh
                     cascade. It will also provide flood protection against the Probable Maximum Flood to the entire downstream Vakhsh
                     cascade, which is designed for a lower extreme flood. The Rogun reservoir is expected to be filled by taking into
                     account the water withdrawal principles under the existing water-sharing arrangements.


                     D. 2. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity
                     Tajikistan established the Rogun Open Joint Stock Company (OJSC) to construct, own and operate the Rogun HPP and
                     the Projects Management Group (PMG) for Energy Facilities Construction under the President of the Republic of


                    Jul 14, 2023                                                                                                     Page 4 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               SUSTAINABLE FINANCING FOR ROGUN HYDROPOWER PROJECT (P181029)



                     Tajikistan. Rogun PMG is also responsible for and supervising environmental and social compliance and performance
                     of all contractors and sub-contractors engaged in the construction of Rogun HPP. The PMG is being supported by the
                     State Enterprise Directorate of the Flooding Zone of the Rogun HPP (DFZ), which is responsible for implementation of
                     the resettlement activities under the Project.

                     Under the ongoing Technical Assistance for Financing Framework for Rogun Hydropower Project (P178819), Rogun
                     PMG is undertaking an update of environmental and social instruments of the Rogun HPP, ensuring compliance with
                     national environmental and social legislation, the World Bank’s ESF, and relevant environmental and social
                     requirements of other potential financiers.

                     The ESIA and Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) for the Rogun HPP, in line with the then applicable
                     Safeguards Policies, was prepared with World Bank financing between 2011 and 2014. Following the disclosure and
                     Tajikistan’s approval of the ESIA, the Rogun JSC committed to implementing the mitigation measures specified in the
                     ESMP and to meeting international environmental and social standards during construction and operation. This
                     included appointment of contractors to continue construction of the dam, tunnels and underground works, and
                     associated facilities. Three Engineering, Procurement, and Construction (EPC) contractors have been appointed for
                     electromechanical works and for the dam and tunneling (with one EPC contractor for some tunneling works yet to be
                     appointed). A number of non-EPC contractors to prepare the site for major works and support ongoing operation of
                     the partially completed HPP have also been appointed.

                     In 2020, the World Bank completed an audit of the resettlement program and observed the site at the time of public




Public Disclosure
                     consultations on the ESIA. In 2021, the World Bank reviewed the ongoing construction to evaluate the adequacy of
                     the mitigation measures in the ESMP to reduce the potential impacts to acceptable levels and comply with the ESF,
                     and also to evaluate the extent to which Rogun JSC and its contractors were implementing the requirements of the
                     ESMP. The Rogun PMG is addressing shortcomings identified as a result of that review as part of the Rogun TA
                     (P178819).

                     The Rogun JSC’s and PMG’s capacity for delivering the Rogun HPP Project is being strengthened. Specifically, the team
                     of the existing PMC is being expanded to include experienced environmental, social, and Occupational Health and
                     Safety (OHS) specialists to allow for improved supervision of E&S performance of the Rogun HPP construction works.
                     Moreover, Rogun PMG has hired international and local environmental specialists and is in the process of hiring an
                     international OHS specialist to coordinate with PMC and ensure timely resolution of all issues. The Bank has also
                     advised DFZ to strengthen its capacity, so that the resettlement process will be complete before the impoundment of
                     the dam.

                     To further strengthen the overall E&S compliance of the Rogun HPP Project, Rogun PMG has already engaged
                     Independent Dam Safety and Environmental and Social Panels of Experts (POE), based on terms of reference
                     approved by the Bank. The have submitted two reports, providing guidance on managing environmental, social and
                     health and safety risks and impacts.




                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS


                    Jul 14, 2023                                                                                                  Page 5 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               SUSTAINABLE FINANCING FOR ROGUN HYDROPOWER PROJECT (P181029)



                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                             High


                     Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                          High
                     The environmental risks are High. The Rogun HPP involves significant civil works related to the completion of the
                     dam; right bank structures and spillways; left bank structures, headrace tunnel, and powerhouse; and access roads
                     and camps. Rogun will entail permanent inundation of a reservoir with gross storage of 13.3 km3 with the reservoir
                     surface area of about 110 km2. These are expected to have significant adverse and long term risks and impacts on the
                     biophysical and cultural environment. Risks and impacts due to Associated Facilities, like transmission lines and access
                     roads, also add another set of environmental issues that would need careful planning for appropriate environmental
                     management measures during design and construction as well as operation phases. Occupational and community
                     health and safety risks and impacts are also expected to be adverse and significant considering the large number of
                     workers to be deployed at the site during construction. Risks and impacts of pollution of local air and water would be
                     significant during constrution, given the scale of construction, need to remove cut material from hillside, and
                     significant movement of labour and vehicles. Rogun HPP also requires substantial security measures to protect the
                     large site. The works and inundation of the reservoir area are expected to have potential adverse risks and impacts on
                     both terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems and biodiversity, including potential cumulative and transboundary impacts.
                     Social Risk Rating                                                                                                 High
                     The social risks are High. Key direct social risks and impacts challenges include: (1) stakeholder and citizen
                     engagement in an HPP project that will have profound socio-economic impacts on project-affected peoples (PAPs) –
                     including vulnerable groups – due to economic and physical displacement, worker retrenchment, establishment of



Public Disclosure
                     new communities and restoration of livelihoods (e.g. agriculture, fisheries, light manufacturing, service occupations,
                     etc.); (2) large resettlement (some 47,000 people); (3) establishment of an effective grievance mechanism for
                     handling a potentially large volume of complaints; (4) labor management challenges, including working terms and
                     conditions, OHS, and the establishment of safe and effective work camps; (5) community health and safety issues,
                     including labor influx, with attendant risks related to social conflict, gender-based violence, sexual exploitation and
                     abuse/sexual harassment (GBV/SEA/SH), transmission of disease and security issues. The Rogun HPP may have some
                     adverse impacts on tangible and intangible cultural heritage. In addition to GBV/SEA/SH risks, the ban on women
                     participation in certain jobs and professions across various sectors of the economy has a direct implication for Rogun
                     HPP (Government Resolution No. 179). For example, there are several jobs related to power plants and network that
                     are banned for women. The management of social risks and impacts will be addressed in the updated environmental
                     and social instruments, namely the ESIA, Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), including a draft livelihood
                     restoration framework, Resettlement Action Plan and livelihood restoration plan, as well as the Labor Management
                     Procedures (LMP), Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), a Cultural Heritage survey, a gender gap assessment and
                     action plan, a benefit-sharing study and other plans and studies, as necessary.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESSs) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1. General Assessment

                     ESS1 Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     Overview of the relevance of the Standard for the Project:


                    Jul 14, 2023                                                                                                     Page 6 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               SUSTAINABLE FINANCING FOR ROGUN HYDROPOWER PROJECT (P181029)



                     Both environmental and social risks are rated High making the overall ES risk rating High. ESS's 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, and
                     10 are considered relevant and will be applied to identify mitigation measures required for the overall Rogun HPP.

                     Key impacts and risks to be managed going forward include: lack of E&S requirements in construction contracts;
                     insufficient staffing for E&S supervision; lack of supervision of labor management practices; inadequate management
                     of solid, liquid, and hazardous waste; inadequate reporting on E&S performance, including OHS; a lack of detailed
                     surveys of natural habitats, which might require a biodiversity offset strategy/plan; and, a lack of surveys on tangible
                     and intangible cultural heritage impacts. The assessment of cumulative impacts in the updated ESIA will include
                     impacts to both upstream and downstream PAPs, environmental flows, sediment transport and management,
                     ecosystem services, and the potential need for biodiversity offsets (and, if needed, a biodiversity offset strategy).

                     Social risks and impacts would include major land acquisition and resettlement, labor influx, occupational and
                     community health and safety, gender, GBV/sexual exploitation and abuse/sexual harassment (SEA/SH), etc.

                     These are being analyzed under the ongoing TA Project and the updated ESIA/ESMP and accompanying management
                     plans for key issues (e.g. Traffic Management, Waste Management, etc) will be prepared and disclosed in advance of
                     appraisal.

                     Associated Facilities are also being constructed to ensure that project infrastructure delivers the services it is
                     designed for. At this stage, these include two under-construction transmission lines to evacuate power from Rogun
                     HPP. The update to the ESIA/ESMP will identify any other such facilities, analyze the potential risks and impacts, and




Public Disclosure
                     recommend the necessary management measures in line with ESF requirements.

                     Areas where “Use of Borrower Framework” is being considered:
                     None


                     ESS10 Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure
                     The ongoing dam preparation and construction, as well as the Rogun TA Project, have already involved a wide range
                     of stakeholders at regional, national, oblast, and local levels, from public, private sector, NGOs, and local
                     communities. The stakeholders have been very supportive of the dam, but there have been various concerns about
                     environmental and social impacts, in particular impacts on the landscape, economic and physical displacement and
                     land-based livelihoods. Project workers are concerned about longer-term employment opportunities once
                     construction has been completed and operations commence. Another factor is legacy concerns related to the
                     periodic civil works related to the Rogun HPP. The project systems for stakeholder engagement, consultations and
                     disclosure, and grievance redress have been in place for several years, but the PMG and DFZ have not been
                     systematic in recording consultations and feedback and making the results widely available to affected communities.
                     These systems need to be strengthened so that there are consistent measures to manage social risks and impacts.
                     Proactive engagement and participation of the stakeholders during project preparation and implementation will be
                     critical. Citizen engagement in providing continuous feedback on the dam construction and operation will also be an
                     important social benefit of the project.




                    Jul 14, 2023                                                                                                        Page 7 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               SUSTAINABLE FINANCING FOR ROGUN HYDROPOWER PROJECT (P181029)



                     A SEP has been developed for the TA Project, as all aspects of TA Project implementation require intensive
                     engagement and consultation with national and local government stakeholders, PAPs, civil society (such as
                     community organizations and women’s groups), local businesses and other interested parties. The SEP includes a
                     description of the GRM, which will be established by the Effective date of the Project. The SEP will also include
                     measures and outcome indicators for citizen engagement.

                     The project will prepare a SEP, based on the SEP prepared for the TA. It will summarize consultations and stakeholder
                     engagement for the ongoing dam construction activities, resettlement and other related activities. The GRM will be
                     strengthened so that it is more systematic in tracking cases and their outcomes.


                     B.2. Specific Risks and Impacts

                     A brief description of the potential environmental and social risks and impacts relevant to the Project.
                     ESS2 Labor and Working Conditions
                     ESS2 Labor and Working Conditions

                     The project will involve direct, contracted and primary supply workers. At this stage the use of community workers is
                     not anticipated, but the relevance of this category of workers will be determined during project preparation.

                     Direct workers include: (i) employees of PMG Rogun assigned to work directly on the project; (ii) individual technical
                     consultants engaged to support project implementation. Contracted workers include: (i) workers engaged by the



Public Disclosure
                     construction contractors in 4 Lots to construct the Rogun HPP. While the Bank will finance works in Lot 1 and Lo1A,
                     other Lots are considered Associated Facility and hence ESS2 requirements will apply; (ii) workers engaged by firms
                     hired by PMG Rogun to provide various technical, engineering and consulting services. Contracted workers include
                     both Tajik and foreign workers. Primary supply workers include workers of primary suppliers firms, who on an
                     ongoing basis, provide goods or materials essential for the core activities of the project.

                     Overview of the current situation: The construction of the Rogun HPP is on-going, and currently about 12, 000
                     contracted workers (of which 600 female) are engaged in the construction. It is expected that about 23,000 workers
                     will be engaged at the peak of the works in 2024. Currently, the main contractor firms are from Italy, Iran and
                     Tajikistan. Foreign contracted workers are accommodated in dedicated workers’ camps which offer accommodation,
                     canteen and recreational facilities. At the moment, there are six worker camps. Tajik workers either stay at their
                     homes, rented accommodation or workers camps; they work 15-days shifts (15 days on site, 15 days off site) as
                     allowed by the national Labor Code. Accommodation and food are provided and are not deducted from workers’
                     salaries. The minimum working age is 18 years and the workers have contracts. Each Contractor and their employees
                     have signed a Code of Ethics and Conduct which sets out the obligations for their behaviors in the workplace, but also
                     describes the penalties for breach of the Code, including dismissal and criminal prosecution. It should be noted that
                     this Code does not include measures for addressing GBV/SEA/SH risks. Each Contractor has human resources and
                     OHS personnel. In May 2023, the World Bank team carried out a training on OHS and contractor management for
                     Rogun PMG and main contractors, also covering SH/SEA.




                    Jul 14, 2023                                                                                                    Page 8 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               SUSTAINABLE FINANCING FOR ROGUN HYDROPOWER PROJECT (P181029)



                     The rate of fatalities (four fatalities in 2019 and three in 2020) is far higher than should be acceptable although the
                     serious injury rate may be more in line with international averages (three major injuries in 2019 and four in 2020).

                     Overview of the national labor and OHS laws and context: Tajikistan has ratified 50 ILO conventions, including 9
                     fundamental conventions. The Labor Code requires workers to have written contracts. The legal workweek is 40
                     hours and the law mandates overtime payment, but there is no compulsory limit to overtime. The law provides for
                     the right to form and join independent unions and provides for collective bargaining. Collective bargaining
                     agreements covered 90 percent of workers in the formal sector. The law prohibits and criminalizes forced labor. The
                     minimum age for children to work is 15, although children may work at age 14 in exceptional circumstances. The law
                     prohibits discrimination with respect to employment because of race, sex, gender, disability, language, HIV-positive
                     status, other communicable diseases, or social status. The law does not expressly prohibit worker discrimination
                     because of skin color, religion, political opinion, national origin, citizenship, sexual orientation, or age.
                     The Labor Code, Article 216 prohibits women’s employment in: underground jobs, diﬃcult jobs, jobs in harmful
                     conditions, or jobs linked to manual lifting and moving of heavy loads. Women are excluded from numerous
                     professions and tasks perceived to be harmful or diﬃcult in around 27 sectors of the national economy, including
                     construction, mining, geological exploration and topography, railway transport and subways, and even agriculture.
                     This affects employment for women at the dam site.

                     OHS standards and regulations are appropriate in the main industries in the country but enforcement is lagging. The
                     law provides workers the right to remove themselves from hazardous working conditions without fear of loss of
                     employment. The State Inspectorate for Supervision of Labor, Migration, and Employment under the Ministry of




Public Disclosure
                     Labor, Migration, and Employment is responsible for the overall supervision of enforcing labor law in the country. It
                     normally conducts inspections once every two years and has the authority to make unannounced inspections and
                     initiate sanctions.

                     Key risks include: hazardous work, such as working at heights and in confined spaces, use of heavy machinery, use of
                     hazardous materials, dust, noise, exposure to chemical, fumes, electrocution; fatigue due to long working hours
                     leading to injuries or fatalities; lack of adequate rest period during the week; overtime work and payment for
                     overtime work; lack of workers’ awareness on occupational health and safety requirements such as the use of PPE
                     and safe workplace practices; presence of migrant workers and issues related to their terms of employment; labor
                     influx; sexual harassment in the workplace. Risks of child and forced labor are not expected within the scope of
                     Rogun HPP project and the project will not engage such workers.

                     Labor management procedures (LMP): Under the WB financed Rogun TA for Financing Framework for Rogun HPP
                     (P178819; the Rogun TA Project) the Rogun PMG engaged an experienced, international E&S consulting firm to (i)
                     carry out a labor audit of the existing labor practices in Rogun HPP and the EPC Contractors and any sub-contractors
                     that are working on-site. The audit will assess whether employers are meeting the requirements of the national Labor
                     Code and other applicable standards; (ii) prepare Labor Management Procedures for Rogun HPP. The project LMP will
                     include all ESS2 requirements, including terms and conditions of employment, procedures to ensure non-
                     discrimination and protection of vulnerable categories of workers, minimum working age and age verification
                     procedure, management of contractors, monitoring of primary supply workers, procedures to prevent sexual
                     harassment in the workplace (including suggested Code of Conduct), and grievance mechanism. Requirements for



                    Jul 14, 2023                                                                                                       Page 9 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               SUSTAINABLE FINANCING FOR ROGUN HYDROPOWER PROJECT (P181029)



                     OHS and workers accommodation will be included in both LMP and ESMP and will include general and sector specific
                     WBG Environmental Health and Safety Guidelines.

                     Workers’ grievance mechanism (GM): There is an existing GM for workers which will be further improved and
                     operationalized in the LMP. Currently, workers can submit complaints at the union offices and the mayor’s offices. All
                     complaints must be addressed in a set period of time. Under the project LMP, a separate process for handling
                     confidential and sensitive complaints, such as those related to sexual harassment will be developed.



                     ESS3 Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management
                     The Rogun HPP involves significant civil works and generates large volume of hill cutting waste for disposal. It will also
                     require large volume of resources and construction materials and will generate air and water pollutants during
                     construction. Project sites are also source of pollutant discharges from storage and use of hazardous chemicals and
                     wastes like fuel oils and lubricants.

                     All risks and impacts relevant to ESS 3 are being assessed during the update of the ESIA/ESMP and relevant measures
                     and plans will be developed accordingly. Key plans under development include, inter alia, new or improved
                     environmental flow requirement and related monitoring plan, a Residual Flow Monitoring Plan, outlines of a
                     Landslide Management & Monitoring Program Reservoir Sedimentation Management & Monitoring Program, and
                     Vakhsh/Amu Darya Hydrologic Monitoring program. Currently, issues related to legacy pollution at previous




Public Disclosure
                     construction camps from leaking /accidentally spilled fuel and related discharges have been observed to be
                     contaiminating soil and could find their way to water course. These will be assessed as part of the update of the ESIA
                     that is underway. Conceptual site model for potentially contaminated areas and preliminary results and
                     recommendations (with methodology) for further investigation and feasibility study will also be included in the
                     updated ESIA/ESMP.

                     As part of the modeling effort, assist Rogun HPP in evaluating the adequacy of the 2014 ESIA's cumulative impact
                     assessment in identifying and addressing potential cumulative impacts, and its consistency with the cumulative
                     impact guidelines in the applicable standards. As needed, conduct additional evaluations of cumulative impacts and
                     identify additional measures to mitigate potential impacts, if needed. GHG emissions/Carbon footprint analysis of the
                     project is also included in the TORs for updating the ESIA.


                     ESS4 Community Health and Safety
                     The construction of the Rogun HPP will have health and safety implications for communities in the project area from
                     the influx of workers, large-scale physical and economic displacement of PAPs, increased vehicle traffic, vibration
                     impacts, exacerbation of landslide hazard and prone areas, GBV/SEA/SH risks and possible security issues. These
                     impacts will be assessed and mitigated in the updated ESIA/ESMP in line with the requirement ESS 4, including
                     preparation of a community health and safety plan, emergency management plan, traffic management plan, security
                     management plan and measures to address GBV/SEA/SH issues.




                    Jul 14, 2023                                                                                                      Page 10 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               SUSTAINABLE FINANCING FOR ROGUN HYDROPOWER PROJECT (P181029)



                     Additionally, the relevant portions of plans, being prepared in line with recommendations of the Dam Safety Panel of
                     Experts (POE) for the Rogun HPP already in place, will be included in the management plans, and fuller plans will be
                     suitably referenced. The POE will continue to carry out due diligence and ensure international quality standards in the
                     design and construction; provide high level and professional independent advice and guidance to support objectivity
                     and credibility in the development and implementation of designs and in the construction of the project; share
                     technical expertise and knowledge and so contribute to dialogue amongst the various stakeholders.



                     ESS5 Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement
                     The Phase 1 RAP has been completed and audited, with some 7,000 people resettled. The audit reports note there
                     have been several challenges, including: maintaining an ongoing stakeholder engagement process; ensuring timely
                     and full compensation; providing adequate livelihood restoration measures; handling grievances; and, keeping track
                     of vulnerable PAPs. The project will conduct an audit of resettlement and livelihood restoration completed to date
                     under the Phase 2 RAP to identify areas where the program has and has not accomplished its goals and been fully
                     compliant with applicable standards. This will involve identifying and assessing the adequacy of measures in the RAPs
                     as implemented on the ground in replacing houses and land, restoring standards of living and livelihoods, and taking
                     measures to address any implementation gaps. The expected resettlement under Phase 2 is about 40,000 people (of
                     which 5000 are in the process of being resettled). It is noted the 2014 ESIA concluded that downstream communities
                     were not expected to be significantly affected, since operation of Rogun HPP was not expected to change flows
                     downstream in the lower river, which would continue to be controlled by Nurek HPP.




Public Disclosure
                     The Rogun TA Project is supporting the the PMG and DFZ in preparing a RPF which will set out the principles for land
                     acquisition, restrictions on land use, involuntary resettlement and livelihood restoration across the Rogun HPP area,
                     as well as summarizing the audit of the ongoing resettlement process. In addition, the TA project is financing the
                     completion of a full census of potentially affected households and individuals, updating the compensation matrix,
                     and revising their initial Phase 2 RAP to comply with applicable standards. This will involve, at a minimum, identifying
                     people and property that will be affected, developing an inventory of lost and affected assets, completing
                     socioeconomic surveys and studies of affected people, analyzing surveys and studies to update the, designing
                     appropriate income restoration and sustainable development initiatives, identifying baseline monitoring indicators,
                     and consulting with affected populations regarding mitigation of effects and development opportunities. This RAP
                     will also incorporate a Livelihood Restoration Plan. The project will also assess potential impacts on downstream
                     communities and households of reservoir filling, and account for any expected effects on their livelihoods in the
                     Livelihood Restoration Plan. The World Bank is planning to finance part of the resettlement costs, including cash
                     compensation to PAPs. This poses fiduciary risks to the project, and thus appropriate measures will be put in place to
                     identify eligible PAPs and ensure cash transfers and expenditures provided to them are properly tracked and
                     accounted. Throughout development of the RAPs, the project will also identify and evaluate opportunities for
                     equitable benefit-sharing based on robust and transparent governance and stakeholder engagement processes.



                     ESS6 Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources



                    Jul 14, 2023                                                                                                    Page 11 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               SUSTAINABLE FINANCING FOR ROGUN HYDROPOWER PROJECT (P181029)



                     The Rogun HPP is expected to have risks and impacts on terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems and biodiversity resulting
                     from civil works, inundation of the reservoir, and extraction of construction materials, among others. To address
                     these risks, updated to the ESIA/ESMP includes preparation of a Biodiversity Management Plan. The 2014 ESIA
                     identified two areas of natural habitat that will be flooded and recommended more detailed surveys to determine if
                     they are critical habitats. Surveys undertaken as part of the preparation of the updated ESIA/ESMP in order to make
                     the final determination have identified some riparian areas in the reservoir area and a stand of Juniper forests that
                     could potentially be classified as Natural terrestrial habitats, while the survey results for aquatic flora and fauna are
                     awaited. Further work as part of the update to the ESIA/ESMP will analyze the biodiversity values to confirm the
                     measures to meet ESS6 requirements, including no net loss, or if applicable, an offset strategy for loss of biodiversity.
                     These will be confirmed and finalized as part of the Biodiversity Management Plan. Rogun PMG will consult with
                     authorities responsible for the downstream Tigrovaya Balkan protected area to determine how best to contribute to
                     the management of this area and also to identify necessary environmental flows within the Vakhsh cascade and
                     whether artificial floods could help maintain and restore habitats degraded due to changes in flows resulting from
                     operation of Nurek HPP. The outcome of these consultations will be included in the recommendations developed for
                     the updated ESIA/ESMP.



                     ESS7 Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional Local Communities
                     There are no people in the project area that the meet the criteria of this standard.




Public Disclosure
                     ESS8 Cultural Heritage
                     The updated ESIA/ESMP will require a cultural heritage survey for the impoundment areato identify any potential
                     sites that may need to be studied and excavated prior to impoundment. Similar guidance for reconnaissance survey
                     of potential quarry areas identified in the project will be a part of the ESIA/ESMP. Although construction works are
                     not expected to have direct physical impact on any known heritage monuments, the updated ESIA/ESMP will cover
                     protection of Cultural Heritage as well as proper "chance find" procedures in compliance with ESS 8 in the form of a
                     memorandum with findings and recommendations concerning 2014 survey of physical cultural heritage.
                     For any potential non-tangible cultural heritage, the ESIA/ESMP requires ethnographic surveys to be completed in
                     villages that will be resettled in order to document oral traditions and to identify any sites of intangible cultural value.
                     The strategy for such surveys will be included in the memorandum with findings and recommendations concerning
                     ethnographic survey.




                     ESS9 Financial Intermediaries
                     This is not a FI operation.


                     B.3 Other Relevant Project Risks



                    Jul 14, 2023                                                                                                        Page 12 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               SUSTAINABLE FINANCING FOR ROGUN HYDROPOWER PROJECT (P181029)



                     The Vakhsh River is a part of the Amu Darya River, which is an International Waterway. Therefore, OP 7.50 is
                     triggered for the Project and riparian countries will be notified accordingly.

                     C. Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                     OP 7.50 Projects on International Waterways                                                                          Yes


                     OP 7.60 Projects in Disputed Areas                                                                                   No



                     III. WORLD BANK ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL DUE DILIGENCE

                     A. Is a common approach being considered?                                                                            Yes
                     Financing Partners
                     Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank
                     European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
                     European Investment Bank
                     Islamic Development Bank




Public Disclosure
                     B. Proposed Measures, Actions and Timing (Borrower’s commitments)
                     Actions to be completed prior to Bank Board Approval:
                     Disclosure of: the draft updated ESIA, including ESMP; Resettlement Policy Framework; Labour Management
                     Procedures; and, Stakeholder Engagement Plan.
                     Possible issues to be addressed in the Borrower Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP):
                     Institutional Arrangements for the implementation of the project activities, including those beyond the dam site;
                     Progress reporting on E&S issues for the construction of the HPP and Associated facilities;
                     Timeline for the revisions to contracts already in-force to confirm their compliance with ESF requirements;
                     Timelines and Institutional responsibilities for additional specialized studies to be undertaken during project
                     implementation as recommended in the ESIA/ESMP; and
                     Capacity-building on ESF requirements;



                     C. Timing
                     Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage ESRS                                             02-Oct-2023

                     IV. CONTACT POINTS

                     World Bank

                    Jul 14, 2023                                                                                                    Page 13 of 14
                               The World Bank
                               SUSTAINABLE FINANCING FOR ROGUN HYDROPOWER PROJECT (P181029)



                     Contact:           Christopher Philip Trimble          Title:            Senior Energy Specialist

                     Telephone No:      5220+4104 / 221-33-859 4104         Email:            ctrimble@worldbank.org

                     Contact:           Manuel Berlengiero                  Title:            Lead Energy Specialist

                     Telephone No:      5258+87824                          Email:            mberlengiero@worldbank.org

                     Contact:           Artur Kochnakyan                    Title:            Lead Energy Specialist

                     Telephone No:      +1-202-473-6302                     Email:            akochnakyan@worldbank.org

                     Borrower/Client/Recipient


                     Implementing Agency(ies)



                     V. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433




Public Disclosure
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     VI. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                 Manuel Berlengiero, Christopher Philip Trimble, Artur Kochnakyan

                     Practice Manager (ENR/Social)        Varalakshmi Vemuru Recommended on 14-Jul-2023 at 01:19:37 EDT

                     Safeguards Advisor ESSA              Abdoulaye Gadiere (SAESSA) Cleared on 14-Jul-2023 at 14:20:14 EDT




                    Jul 14, 2023                                                                                              Page 14 of 14
