Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Philippines First Energy Transition and Climate Resilience DPL(P181389)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidcondpfcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                Program Information Document (PID)


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                 Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 29-Apr-2024 | Report No: PIDIC00068




Public Disclosure Authorized
      The World Bank
      Philippines First Energy Transition and Climate Resilience DPL(P181389)


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@piddpfbasicinformation#doctemplate
 BASIC INFORMATION


 A. Basic Project Data

 Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                Operation Name
                                                            Philippines First Energy Transition and Climate Resilience
 Philippines                    P181389
                                                            DPL
 Region                         Estimated Approval Date     Practice Area (Lead)          Financing Instrument
                                                                                          Development Policy
 EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC          27-Mar-2025                 Energy & Extractives
                                                                                          Financing (DPF)
 Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
 Republic of the Philippines    Department of Energy

Proposed Development Objective(s)
 The Program Development Objective is to support Government of the Philippines reforms to: (1) scale up clean
 energy; (2) enhance electricity markets; and (3) improve climate resilience.

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
 Financing (US$, Millions)


 Maximizing Finance for Development

 Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                  Yes
 Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?            Yes

 SUMMARY
   Total Financing                                                                                              600.00

 DETAILS
   Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                             600.00
     World Bank Lending                                                                                         600.00

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@piddpfdecision#doctemplate
Decision
The review did authorize the preparation to continue




                                                                                                                   Page 1
       The World Bank
       Philippines First Energy Transition and Climate Resilience DPL(P181389)




 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context

The opportunity cost of climate change risks can stymie development objectives of the Philippines and its goal to
become a high-income country by 2045. The energy and transport sectors are key to development, but the cost of energy
in the country is among the highest in the region, eroding its competitiveness. They are also the largest GHG emitting
sectors. The Philippines Country Climate and Development Report (CCDR) estimates show that, without action, the
economic damages of climate change could reach up to 7.6 percent of the country’s gross domestic product (GDP) by
2030 and 13.6 percent of GDP by 2040. Many of the threats posed by climate change to economic growth and the
wellbeing of people are likely to act through water. Changes in rainfall patterns will affect water availability for irrigation,
industry, domestic use, and hydroelectric power (HEP) generation. The risks of floods and droughts will increase, and more
frequent and severe typhoons will damage water infrastructure, affecting water availability for various uses.

Energy transition - away from fossil fuel generation and import options towards indigenous renewable energy [RE]
combined with more efficient end-uses - can help the country lower electricity generation costs while increasing energy
security and lowering emissions. Reducing fossil fuel consumption, particularly by reducing the use of coal in power
generation and electrifying urban transport, would reduce ambient air pollution in urban areas, improving public health.
A transition would also help the country meet its commitments under the Paris Agreement.

Climate resilience through adaptation and mitigation in the water sector is critical for the Philippines, as most of the
impacts of climate change will be felt through water. The Philippines already confronts three challenges in different
spatial combinations – floods, droughts, and heightening poverty and inequality dynamics, due to infrastructure and
quality of service access gaps in the water supply and sanitation (WSS) sector. Water security is a socio-economic priority.
By some estimates, the Philippines will experience an average annual economic decline of 0.7 percent in annual GDP in
the years up to 2050 because of water risks. Water risks from flooding, droughts, and pollution also represent a threat to
food security. It will compound existing malnutrition and spatial inequities in the country. Water, sanitation, and hygiene
services are essential to households, industries, and the maintenance and development of urban areas.

The Proposed DPL series will support the climate action objective of the Philippines Development Plan (PDP) 2023-2028.
The PDP sets accelerating climate actions and strengthening disaster resilience as one of its main objectives and calls for
interventions to increase climate resilience and enable transition to low-carbon economy. At the core of the transition to
low carbon economy is the transition to clean and affordable energy. A central set of climate adaptation actions in the
Philippines revolves around water security, resilience to water hazards and integrated water resources management.

The macroeconomic policy framework is adequate for the proposed operation. The growth outlook is positive, anchored
on robust domestic demand, a recovering services sector, and a public infrastructure investment agenda that will gain
steam over the forecast horizon. The commitment to structural reforms will increase competitiveness and support growth.
The financial sector remains stable, while asset quality continues to improve, even with the removal of most pandemic
related forbearance measures. The credibility of both monetary policy and fiscal policy remains strong. The BSP remains
committed to its inflation-targeting objective and responsive to global interest rate movements. It is expected to maintain
a market-determined exchange rate regime as the first line of defense against external shocks. On fiscal policy, the

                                                                                                                           Page 2
        The World Bank
        Philippines First Energy Transition and Climate Resilience DPL(P181389)


authorities have publicly laid out its medium-term expenditure plan, reflecting a steadily declining share of expenditures
to GDP, and is expected to gradually raise revenues through tax reforms. The credibility of its medium-term fiscal program
is supported by the government’s history of fiscal prudence, and a legislative pipeline that supports fiscal consolidation.
Potential liabilities from the expansion of PPPs posed marginal risk to the country’s fiscal position and are managed by a
contingency allocation in the budget, the realization of sellable asset value in the event of default, and the decreasing risk
to projects in operation and those that are reaching completion within the portfolio.

 Relationship to CPF

The reforms supported by this DPL series are aligned with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) and the corporate
priorities. The main filters for the selection of the policy areas were government demand, robust analytical underpinnings,
reform impact, and availability of technical assistance to support implementation. The Prior Actions (PAs) contribute to
the World Bank Group’s 2019-2023 CPF objectives and supports the global challenge programs in energy, transport and
water. The PAs are aligned with the Paris Agreement, promote gender equality, promote climate mitigation and
adaptation, and enable private capital investment.

 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

 The Program Development Objective of the operation is to support Government of Philippines reforms to (1) scale up
 clean energy, (2) enhance electricity markets, and (3) improve climate resilience.


  Key Results

The DPL series is expected to achieve the following key results:

    •    Pillar 1: Increased private investment in renewable energy, particularly in offshore wind, and increased energy
         savings in the public sector, and increased share of electric vehicles in the motor vehicle fleet.
    •    Pillar 2: Increased flexibility of the electricity grid for integration of renewable energy and, increased competition
         for procurement of renewable energy, and increased competition in the retail electricity market.
    •    Pillar 3: Strengthened institutions for water resources management and water and sanitation services, improved
         funding mechanism for water sector investments; and improved resilience of agriculture and marine ecosystem.

 D. Concept Description

The proposed operation is the first in a programmatic series of two operations. It is structured around three pillars
corresponding to the development objectives:
    • Pillar 1 will support reforms to accelerate private sector investments in and delivery of RE projects, as well as
       engender EE market transformation and electrification of transport.
    • Pillar 2 will support reforms to increase the flexibility of the grid and competition in electricity markets, which are
       important to RE integration and keeping electricity affordable.
    • Pillar 3 will support reforms aimed at addressing the fragmentation of planning, financing, and implementation of
       climate resilience initiatives on water storage, water supply and sanitation, and resource diversification, as well
       as for resilience in agriculture and marine ecosystem.


                                                                                                                          Page 3
       The World Bank
       Philippines First Energy Transition and Climate Resilience DPL(P181389)




The reforms supported by this DPL series are well aligned with the Philippines Development Plan 2023-28. The PDP’s
strategic framework is guided by AmBisyon Natin 2040, the long-term development aspirations of the country organized
according to three objectives a) develop and protect capabilities of individuals and families; b) transform production
sectors to generate more quality jobs and produce competitive products; and c) foster an enabling environment
encompassing institutions, the physical and natural environment. Underlying these priorities is a commitment to expand
and upgrade infrastructure, accelerate climate action and strengthen disaster resilience among others.

 E. Poverty and Social Impacts, and Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects

 Poverty and Social Impacts

The reforms supported by the DPL series are generally expected to have a positive impact on poverty and inequality
reduction. The reforms will affect the income distribution through two main channels: first, changes in prices in goods and
services will affect household incomes, and second, transformations in the labor market will affect workers—both via
transitory churning and via structural change in the long run. Some of the proposed prior actions may have an adverse
short-term impact on poverty and thus complementary interventions will be needed to ensure that the long-term welfare
gains, especially in lower income households, are attained.

 Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects

A preliminary assessment suggests that the proposed DPL is unlikely to cause significant adverse effects on the
environment, forests, or other natural resources. The government’s existing policy framework provides an adequate
system to address these adverse environmental effects especially through the environmental impact assessment process.

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Bipulendu Narayan Singh
   Senior Energy Specialist

   Ralph Van Doorn
   Senior Economist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient
  Republic of the Philippines
  Ralph Recto
  Secretary of Finance
  osec@dof.gov.ph

 Implementing Agencies


                                                                                                                       Page 4
     The World Bank
     Philippines First Energy Transition and Climate Resilience DPL(P181389)


 Department of Energy
 Michael Sinocruz
 Director
 msinocruz@doe.gov.ph

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                     Bipulendu Narayan Singh, Ralph Van Doorn

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:                Jie Tang                              26-Mar-2024

Country Director:                        Ndiame Diop                           29-Apr-2024




                                                                                             Page 5
