Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Belize Blue Cities and Beyond Project (P181064)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                 Project Information Document (PID)

                                                Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 26-Aug-2024 | Report No: PIDIA00321




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     Belize Blue Cities and Beyond Project (P181064)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                     Operation ID                Operation Name
                               LATIN AMERICA AND                                      Belize Blue Cities and
Belize                                                    P181064
                               CARIBBEAN                                              Beyond Project
Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date   Estimated Approval Date     Practice Area (Lead)
                                                                                      Environment, Natural
Investment Project
                               02-Sept-2024               31-Oct-2024                 Resources & the Blue
Financing (IPF)
                                                                                      Economy
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency        GEF Focal Area
                               Ministry of Economic
The Government of Belize                                  Climate Change
                               Development

Proposed Development Objective(s)
To improve Belize's management capacity for sustainable coastal and blue economy development, increase safe water
supply and reduce land-based pollution discharges at targeted urban areas, and respond effectively in case of an
eligible emergency.

Components
Policy Development and Capacity Building
Water, Sanitation and Waste Management
Project Management
Contingent Emergency Response

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                 Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?           Yes

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                         30.96

  Total Financing                                                                                              30.96
              of which IBRD/IDA                                                                            23.20


                                                                                                                 Page 1
        The World Bank
        Belize Blue Cities and Beyond Project (P181064)



    Financing Gap                                                                                                                            0.00

 DETAILS
    World Bank Group Financing
      International Development Association (IDA)                                                                                          23.20
         IDA Credit                                                                                                                        23.20
    Non-World Bank Group Financing
      Trust Funds                                                                                                                            7.76
         Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                                                                   3.76
         PROBLUE MDTF                                                                                                                        4.00

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
Environmental And Social Risk Classification
Substantial


 Decision
 The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate



 B. Introduction and Context
 Country Context


1.       In 2023, Belize has a population of 410,825, a gross domestic product (GDP) of US$3.28 billion, and a per capita
GDP over US$7,988.1 Classified as an upper-middle-income country in Central America and a Small Island Developing State
(SIDS) in the Caribbean Region,2 Belize relies on its coastal and marine ecosystems for the protection of its cities, towns
and villages, the livelihoods of its fishing families, food security, and the development of its important economic sectors—
tourism, marine transport and fisheries.3 Despite these assets, Belize maintained a high poverty rate of 35.7 percent in
the same year, and infrastructure gaps are still identified as one of top constraints to the country’s economic growth.4 For
instance, the national water and sewerage utility, Belize Water Services Limited (BWS), provides water connection to


1 https://data.worldbank.org/.
2 For country group information, please see https://datahelpdesk.worldbank.org/knowledgebase/articles/906519-world-bank-country-and-lending-

groups. For population information, please see https://sib.org.bz/statistics/population/. For GDP information, please see
https://data.worldbank.org/country/belize.
Despite not being an island, Belize shares similar development challenges of a SIDS with close socioeconomic and political ties to the wider
Caribbean Region and is considered a Caribbean SIDS (see https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/topics/sids/list).
3 “Together, the coral reef and the extensive mangroves ecosystem shelter Belize’s extensive coast from storms and high velocity winds that cause

floods and coastal damage.” (World Bank Group. 2017. Country Partnership Framework for Belize).
4 International Monetary Fund. 2023. Belize: 2023 Article IV Consultation - Staff Report. The country’s official consumption poverty estimates from

2018 indicate that more than half of Belize’s population (52 percent) is poor, 10 percent is extremely poor, and 10 percent is vulnerable.

                                                                                                                                               Page 2
        The World Bank
        Belize Blue Cities and Beyond Project (P181064)


about 71% of the population but sanitation connection to only 18% of its water users.5 These infrastructure gaps reflect
the country’s low urbanization rate of 46.4%, which is low compared to the rates of over 80% for other Caribbean and
Central American countries, as well as Latin American and Caribbean Region as a whole.6

2.        Under a changing climate, Belize is exceptionally vulnerable to adverse impacts from climate-related shocks.
Ranked third in terms of disaster risk and fifth in climate change risk among all SIDS, Belize’s coastal areas are threatened
by hurricanes, storms, coastal erosion, and flooding, while the low-lying terrain of these areas exacerbates the effects of
flooding and sea level rise.7 Additionally, the degradation and bleaching of coral reefs due to ocean acidification and
warmer sea temperatures threaten biodiversity, coastal and marine food webs, and the livelihoods of vulnerable
communities dependent on these ecosystems. Beyond climate-induced shocks, Belize's vulnerability is further
compounded by its high poverty rates and limited capacity to respond to disasters. With over half of its population living
in rural areas and dependent on agriculture and fisheries, climate-induced disruptions such as prolonged droughts, erratic
rainfall, and intensified storms, could lead to significant socio-economic instability. Rapidly expanding urban areas are also
increasingly unprepared for frequent and severe climate events. These climate-related impacts pose threats to food
security and livelihoods and worsen poverty, making it harder for communities to recover and adapt. This leads to
substantial economic losses, health risks, and disruptions to daily life, especially for vulnerable groups like women, girls,
and the elderly. External shocks, such as increasing energy prices and the COVID-19 pandemic, have the potential to
weaken the country’s external position and reduce the purchasing power of its population. To address its climate and
socio-economic vulnerabilities, which disproportionally affect its rural, poor and vulnerable population, Belize has to
embark on an economic development and urbanization path that are environmentally sustainable, socially inclusive and
climate resilient.8 Recognizing unique challenges faced by Belize, the International Development Association (IDA) in its
December 2023 mid-term review granted Belize’s access to IDA financing under its Small Island Economy Exception Policy.
Belize receives its first IDA allocation in Fiscal Year (FY) 2025.

 Sectoral and Institutional Context


3.       Endowed with 386 km of coastline, the largest barrier reef in the northern hemisphere, offshore atolls, numerous
sand cays, mangrove forests, coastal lagoons and estuaries, Belize has fully embraced the concept of blue economy and
attached high importance to the conservation and sustainable uses of such blue assets.9 According to the Government of
Belize, “more than half of the population of Belize depends directly on marine activities”, and “the reef contributes more




5 PlanEHS, 2022. Belize Water Supply and Modernization Program (BL-1043): Environmental and Social Analysis, Environmental and Social

Management Plan (https://bws.bz/media/BL-L1043-ESA-ESMP-First-draft-FFD.pdf).
6 https://population.un.org/wup/Country-Profiles/.
7 Economically, the country has recently witnessed high loss caused by Hurricane Lisa in 2022, estimated at about 10 percent of Belize’s national

budget. (Statement by Hon. Orlando Habet, Minister of Sustainable Development, Climate Change and Disaster Risk Management at the 27th
Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/BELIZE_cop27cmp17cma4_HLS_ENG.pdf)
8 Bailey, S., and F. Ciardi. 2020. Case Study on Shock-Responsive Social Protection in Belize. Oxford Policy Management and World Food Programme.

https://docs.wfp.org/api/documents/WFP-0000118598/download/.
9 As a broad concept, blue economy (a) “seeks to promote economic growth, social inclusion, and the preservation or improvement of livelihoods

while at the same time ensuring environmental sustainability of the oceans and coastal areas” and (b) includes traditional sectors (such as fisheries,
tourism, and maritime transport), emerging sectors (such as offshore renewable energy, mariculture, seabed mining, and marine biotechnology),
as well as ecosystem services (such as carbon sequestration, coastal protection, waste disposal, and biodiversity). (World Bank and United Nations
Department of Economic and Social Affairs. 2017. The Potential of the Blue Economy: Increasing Long-term Benefits of the Sustainable Use of
Marine Resources for Small Island Developing States and Coastal Least Developed Countries. World Bank, Washington DC.)

                                                                                                                                                 Page 3
        The World Bank
        Belize Blue Cities and Beyond Project (P181064)


than a billion dollars [about 40 percent] to … national economy through tourism, fisheries, and shoreline protection.”10
Since 2011, the Government has incorporated the conservation and sustainable use of its blue assets into its national
development strategies.11 In 2022, Belize launched the country’s first Blue Economy Development, Policy and Strategy
with a high-level objective that “Belize’s Blue Economy, by year 2030, is productive, sustainable, resilient and vibrant,
contributing sustainably to the socioeconomic well-being of the country and its people” and its first Belize Maritime
Economy Plan with concrete recommendations on how to promote sustainable practices for the country’s main blue
economy sectors—coastal development, tourism, shipping and ports, fisheries—and underscoring the importance of
developing marine renewable energy, aquaculture and mariculture, and ecosystem services. It is noteworthy that Belize’s
Updated Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC, August 2021) incorporates crucial climate actions to cut greenhouse
gas (GHG) emissions by preserving and restoring ecosystems, enhancing waste and wastewater management, and
bolstering the resilience of the tourism and fisheries sectors.12

4.       As of 2024, Belize has two cities, Belmopan and Belize City, seven towns (mostly along its coast and in its cayes)
and 192 villages. Cities and towns are governed by an elected mayor and villages managed by village councils. Aside from
Belmopan and Belize City, Belize’s towns and villages rely on the national government’s financial support for investment
projects and the provision of essential public services such as waste disposal, roads, markets and parks. These local
authorities have limited capacity for regulating local planning and development activities, as well as for evaluating and
collecting property taxes and other local revenues. For instance, San Pedro Town Council has experienced a surge in
tourism development post-COVID within and beyond its administrative boundaries, yet it struggles to collect adequate
revenue to provide quality services to its population. At the institutional level, the Ministry of Rural Transformation,
Community Development, Labor, and Local Government (MRTCDLLG) is responsible for legislation related to city, town
and village councils. In an effort to improve urban management, the national government's 2023 #Plan Belize initiative
has set a goal to develop an Urban Development Strategy for the country by 2026.

5.       In 2024, Belize has underscored its commitment to the blue economy by restructuring the Ministry of Blue
Economy and Civil Aviation, established in 2020, into the Ministry of Blue Economy and Disaster Risk Management
(MBEDRM) as of April 2024. This ministry's mandate is to advance the blue economy and enhance the well-being of
Belizeans through the scientific stewardship of the nation's aquatic resources and spaces.13 Given its multisectoral nature,
Belize’s blue economy development involves various ministries such as the Ministries of Finance, Economic Development,
and Investment (overall development strategy and financing); the Ministry of Sustainable Development and Climate
Change (biodiversity/conservation, forest and environmental management, and climate change); the Ministry of Natural
Resources, Petroleum, and Mining (management of land and water resources); the Ministry of Tourism and Diaspora
Relations (tourism development); the Ministry of Health and Wellness (MoHW- drinking water quality and food safety);
the Ministry of Public Utilities, Energy, Logistics, and E-Governance (MPUELE - management of public utilities); the Ministry
of Infrastructure, Development and Housing (infrastructure development); and MRTCDLLG. In concert with these



10 Belize Ministry of Blue Economy and Civil Aviation, 2022. Belize Maritime Economy Plan.

(https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/63e1244ee90e0762692b96cd/Belize_Maritime_Economy_Plan_August_2022.pdf). In April 2024,
the ministry’s responsibilities were adjusted to manage both blue economy and disaster risk management portfolios of the government.
11 Such as the Horizon 2030 Vision in the National Development Framework of Belize (2010–2030), the Growth and Sustainable Development

Strategy (2016–2019), and most recently the 2023 #Plan Belize and its Medium-Term Development Strategy (2022–2026).
12 The NDC calls for the implementation of the National Solid Waste Management Policy to avoid emissions of up to 18,000 MT CO2e per year by

2030 and develop a legal and policy framework for sustainable solid waste management. However, NDC has not included specific actions on
wastewater management.
13 See Annual Report 2021 of the Ministry of Blue Economy and Civil Aviation. The ministry has a Blue Economy Unit, a Fisheries Department, a

Coastal Zone Management Authority and Institute, and a Belize Port Authority to coordinate the sustainable management and use of Belize’s
coastal and marine resources.

                                                                                                                                          Page 4
        The World Bank
        Belize Blue Cities and Beyond Project (P181064)


ministries, domestic and international nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) have actively worked with the Government
to manage and safeguard the country’s blue assets.14

6.       Belize has been working closely with multilateral and bilateral donors on various engagements to promote its blue
economy and urban development. The World Bank supported the Municipal Development Project (P111928) and Climate
Resilient Infrastructure Project (P127338) and the recently closed Marine Conservation and Climate Adaptation Project
(MCCAP, P131408). The Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) has been implementing a series of operations on
fisheries; sustainable livelihood and climate resilience project for micro, small, and medium enterprises; disaster
management; tourism; and solid waste management.15 Other key donors include the Caribbean Development Bank (CDB);
the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO); the European Union (EU); Central American Bank for
Economic Integration (CABEI); the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ); and the Caribbean
Community Climate Change Center (5C).16 Beyond conventional technical assistance and investment project financing,
Belize signed a debt-for-nature swap agreement with The Nature Conservancy (TNC) in November 2022.17 Currently, the
Government is working with TNC and the World Wildlife Fund (WWF) to design a coastal and marine Project Financing for
Permanence Initiative to mobilize sustainable financing for Belize’s marine protected areas and broader ecosystems.18 The
WWF and the government of Belize were also consulted to identify synergies with the Resilient Bold Belize child project
under the GEF-8 Integrated Program Blue and Green Island (BGI IP).

7.       Belize’s efforts on urban and blue economy development are facing several interconnected challenges. These
include rapid but uncoordinated urban development at its prime tourism destinations and coastal cities/communities.
Due to existing gaps in its land use and environmental policies and regulations, limited monitoring and enforcement of its
existing planning and environmental policies, lack of sustainable financing for key municipal infrastructure such as water
and sanitation and waste management, such rapid development has increased land-based pollution from its coastal
cities/communities, caused coastal erosion, and degraded its critical coastal and marine ecosystems.19 If this trend

14 One example is that after multiple years of lobby efforts of civil society organizations and the public, in December 2017, Belize made history by

placing an indefinite moratorium on offshore oil in Belize’s marine territory. Another example is that the Association of Protected Areas
Management Organizations with its 16 NGO members has been working across the country to invest in eco-tourism within protected areas such as
the Blue Hole Natural Monument, a popular diving spot with crystal clear water and diverse fish species.
15 IDB’s current operations related to blue economy include (a) Promoting Sustainable Growth in the Blue Economy Program (BL-L1042, July 2023

approval), (b) Water Supply and Modernization Program (BL-J0005/BL-L1043, May 2023 approval), (c) Sustainable and Inclusive Belize Project (BL-
L1041, September 2022 approval), (d) Contingent Loan for Natural Disaster Emergencies (BL-O0005, June 2019 approval), (e) the Climate
Vulnerability Reduction Program (BL-L1028, December 2017 approval), and (f) the Solid Waste Management Project II (BL-L1021, May 2016
approval).
16 Among others, CDB is implementing a Third Water - Ambergris Caye Project to support a safe, reliable, and climate-resilient supply of potable

water with a focus on southern part of the Caye. FCDO has supported the development of Belize Maritime Economy Plan and is developing its
bilateral activities in Belize under the Ocean Country Partnership and Sustainable Blue Economies Programmes. EU is co-financing IDB’s blue
economy operation and implementing programs to finance small-scale infrastructure at the community level in two southern coastal districts of
the country. GIZ is now supporting a study on the recycling sector of Belize in collaboration with the Central American Committee on Environment
and Development. 5C is working on a number of Green Climate Fund proposals.
17 For details of this blue bond transaction, please see https://www.imf.org/en/News/Articles/2022/05/03/CF-Belize-swapping-debt-for-nature and

https://www.nature.org/en-us/newsroom/blue-bonds-belize-conserve-thirty-percent-of-ocean-through-debt-conversion/. This agreement reduced
the country’s external debt by over 30 percent and in return Belize commits to, among others, double its marine protected areas to about 30
percent of its oceans, designate all remaining public lands within the Belize Barrier Reef Reserve System as strict mangrove reserves, allocate US$4
million annually on marine conservation until 2041, and facilitate blue carbon transactions. For blue carbon, the Government has received support
of the Pew Charitable Trusts, TNC, WWF, and the Smithsonian Institute to investigate the baseline of the country’s blue carbon assets and explore
the potential of marketing such assets in international carbon markets.
18 https://www.wwfca.org/en/?375845/Belize-to-develop-worlds-first-fully-Coastal-and-Marine-Project-Finance-for-Permanence-PFP-Initiative.
19 Take San Pedro, the top tourist destination of the country, as an example. The town and the Ambergris Cay where the town is located have

suffered from rampant and unplanned investments and property development beyond the administrative boundary of its town council. Tourism-
driven investments are implemented without essential municipal services planning, leaving gaps in municipal service provision, increasing costs of

                                                                                                                                                  Page 5
        The World Bank
        Belize Blue Cities and Beyond Project (P181064)


persists, it could jeopardize the long-term health of Belize's coastal and marine environments, and by extension, the
viability of its blue economy. The 2022 Report Card on the Health of the Mesoamerican Reef reveals that Belizean reef
health has dropped from the ‘Fair’ rating attained five years ago to a ‘Poor’ rating due to overfishing, critical habitat
destruction, and potential biodiversity loss.20 The report highlights that, after overfishing, nutrient pollution, mainly from
improperly treated sewage from urban and coastal settlements, is a leading contributor to the region's coral mortality.21

8.      Recognizing these challenges, the Government of Belize has requested the World Bank’s support to develop a
three-phase program aimed at fostering sustainable development and securing sustainable financing for critical blue
economy investments in key coastal cities and communities. The intention is to use the first operation to (a) enhance the
enabling environment, (b) finance priority infrastructure investments that are ready for investment, and (c) develop an
investment program with sustainable financing mechanisms that can be financed by the subsequent operations and other
donors. In response to this request, the World Bank has developed this first project through extensive consultations with
key national ministries/agencies, local authorities, and development partners. This project aims to (a) tackle critical policy
and capacity deficiencies in urban and blue economy development at both national and local levels, (b) finance priority
climate-resilient water and sanitation infrastructure in priority urban areas, and (c) support the government to formulate
a blue economy investment program that will promote sustainable urban and blue economy development. The
preparation for the second project is anticipated to commence in FY27, followed by the third in FY29.

 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
 Development Objective(s) (From PAD)

 9.      The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) are to improve Belize's management capacity for sustainable
 coastal and blue economy development, increase safe water supply and reduce land-based pollution discharges at
 targeted urban areas, and respond effectively in case of an eligible emergency.

  Key Results

10.      The proposed PDO level indicators are the following:

         •      Number of key spatial planning and environmental policies adopted
         •      Number of critical blue economy assets and activities under improved monitoring
         •      A comprehensive legal framework for carbon market access adopted
         •      Amounted of chemical oxygen demand (COD) load discharges reduced by the upgraded WWTP
         •      Number of people provided with water, sanitation and hygiene


  D. Project Description




investment, generating uncontrolled discharges of untreated waste and wastewater, and causing serious coastal erosion issues. Such pollution
discharges are visible issues and begin to affect visitor perceptions of the cleanliness of Belize’s marine environment and affecting the
attractiveness of the destination to its core markets.
20 https://www.healthyreefs.org/cms/wp-content/uploads/2022/12/2022-Report-Card-MAR.pdf.
21 Jackson, et al., eds. 2014. “Status and Trends of Caribbean Coral Reefs: 1970-2012.” Global Coral Reef Monitoring Network, Gland, Switzerland.



                                                                                                                                              Page 6
       The World Bank
       Belize Blue Cities and Beyond Project (P181064)


11.   The project will support four components: policy development and capacity building; water, sanitation, and waste
management; project management; and a contingent emergency response component (CERC).

12.     Component 1: Policy Development and Capacity Building. This component encompasses four subcomponents:
policy development, capacity building, carbon market readiness, and the formulation of a blue economy investment
program. Its objective is to address climate-related and socio-economic challenges that are impeding the sustainable
development and management of Belize’s coastal communities and blue economy. This will be achieved through the
advancement of policies, regulatory reforms, institutional strengthening, capacity building, carbon market readiness and
investment preparation.

13.      Subcomponent 1.1. Policy Development will support Belize to review and refine its spatial planning, tourism and
environmental policies that are critical to sustainable development of Belize’s coastal communities and its blue economy
development. Development of these policy actions will require cross-sectoral and cross-jurisdiction collaboration and
active public participation. Mitigation measures for expected climate impacts (such as hurricanes, floods, sea level rises)
will be fully incorporated into policies developed under the project.

14.     For land-uses, this subcomponent will support (a) the Ministry of Natural Resources to develop national geospatial
and spatial planning policies and legislations and associated national spatial development plan and (b) selected local
governments and township councils (Belize City, San Pedro and Placencia) to develop their respective urban land-use
planning after the approval of the National Land Use Policy (expected approval in 2024). Ecological urban planning and
nature-based solutions (NBS) will be integrated into these national and local planning policies and plans. For tourism, this
subcomponent will support policies related to sustainable tourism development and management, including the review
and development of regulation for improving local governance of tourism with the municipal governments, the Ministry
of Tourism and the Belize Tourism Board (BTB), green building code with the Ministry of Infrastructure, Development and
Housing and the Central Building Authority to increase climate resilience and environmental sustainability among tourism
investments, and green standards and certification for tourism business with BTB to address environmental externalities
stemming from tourism investments and businesses.

15.     For environmental policies, this subcomponent will focus on the monitoring and protection of the country’s critical
blue assets – water and fisheries. It will first support the Ministry of Natural Resources to lead the development of a
national water master plan and prescribe the country’s water quality control strategy and implementation plan. It will also
support MPUELE, the Public Utilities Commission (PUC), BWS and other relevant stakeholders to develop a national
sanitation master plan. These plans will focus on provision of climate-resilient water resources management and
sanitation services to urban and rural population of the country, particularly those living in underserved communities.
Moreover, the subcomponent will support the Ministry of Sustainable Development and Climate Change and its
Department of Environment (DOE) to work with the Ministry of Health and Wellness (MoHW) and develop surface water,
marine water, and groundwater quality standards; and MPUELE and its Public Utilities Commission to work with the MHW
to develop potable water standards and regulations. It will also support the Ministry of Investment to develop a green and
blue industrial policy and strategy. Finally, it will support the DOE to revise effluent discharge standards to minimize
environmental impacts of such discharges to Belize’s coastal and marine ecosystems, and the Ministry of Blue Economy
and Disaster Risk Management (MBEDRM) and its Belize Fisheries Department to lead the development of integrated
monitoring policies and procedures for sustainable fisheries.

16.     Subcomponent 1.2. Capacity Building will support Belizean stakeholders (including NGOs and private sector
actors) to develop their technical capacity in blue economy management under a changing climate through (a) the
establishment of a blue economy monitoring center under the MBEDRM with active participation of other related agencies
to properly monitor the status of blue assets (water quality, mangrove, coral reefs, biodiversity etc.) and blue economy

                                                                                                                        Page 7
        The World Bank
        Belize Blue Cities and Beyond Project (P181064)


activities (fisheries, navigation, and tourism) for evidence-based decision making;22 (b) the development of the Belize
National Spatial Data Infrastructure and an associated continuous operating reference station network;23 (c) technical
assistances on municipal finance and governance, sustainable financing mechanisms,24 NBS and disaster risk management,
sustainable tourism and destination management, and sustainable fisheries and alternative livelihood development for
fishing communities; (d) technical assistance for the Office of Auditor General, on carbon audits, and the auditing of blue
economy assets and activities, amongst others, and (e) knowledge and learning activities including technical trainings and
Belize’s participation in learning events under the Global Environmental Facility (GEF)’s Sustainable Cities Impact Program
Global Platform (SCIP-GP) knowledge platform to help Belize learn from other countries and share Belizean experience on
integrated urban planning, low carbon and climate-resilient urban infrastructure, sustainable wastewater and waste
management, and NBS for urban and coastal sustainability.

17.       Subcomponent 1.3. Carbon Market Readiness will support Belize to develop (a) carbon market regulatory
mechanisms (regulations, standards and guidelines on carbon ownerships and benefit sharing mechanisms, carbon
markets and carbon registry, monitoring, reporting and verification (MRV) protocols, authorization and corresponding
adjustments, co-benefits - e.g. biodiversity credits); (b) a new carbon governance structure to supervise carbon project
approvals, carbon registry, carbon transactions, MRV, and benefit sharing; and (c) digital carbon market infrastructure,
including a carbon registry, a carbon transaction platform, a MRV information system (focusing on carbon transactions)
and a benefit sharing information system. In doing so, this subcomponent will enable Belize to develop high-quality and
high integrity carbon credits that can be marketed internationally. The elements listed have been identified as priorities
for the development of the general carbon market infrastructure and especially for a comprehensive inclusion of the
critical blue ecosystems of the country. This initiative will provide an important approach of blue ecosystem inclusion to
promote a correct understanding of the different characteristics and needs to properly account for blue assets in the
national carbon market, per the recommendations of the Blue Carbon Readiness Framework and Blue Carbon Market
Infrastructure reports supported by PROBLUE. For example, in the MRV, infrastructure capable of including all ecosystems,
including sea grasses and mangroves will need to be chosen.

18.       Subcomponent 1.4. Blue Economy Investment Program will help prioritize and develop investment proposals for
critical investments for sustainable coastal and blue economy development under a changing climate. Such investments
include but are not limited to (a) additional monitoring and surveillance infrastructure to generate accurate, reliable, and
timely data for informed decision-making; (b) climate resilient municipal infrastructure and services with an emphasis on
NBS interventions for coastal ecosystem resilience and blue assets conservation and restoration; (c) sustainable tourism
infrastructure; and (d) sustainable fishery infrastructure and alternative livelihood investments. Detailed technical designs
and financing plans for these investments will be developed as part of investment proposals. Potential financial sources
to be explored include, but are not limited to, financing from international financial institutions, grant financing from
multilateral environmental/climate fund (such as GEF, Green Climate Fund) and bilateral donors, blue carbon, biodiversity
credits, sustainability linked bonds, and parametric insurances (such as the Caribbean Oceans and Aquaculture
Sustainability Facility, COAST), extended producer responsibility (EPR) mechanisms, and public-private partnerships. This
investment program will serve as a platform for domestic stakeholders and donors to coordinate their support to blue
economy development of Belize.


22 Design of the blue economy monitoring center will build upon CABEI’s support to the development of a blue economy office complex for the

ministry and IDB’s technical support to improve sustainable fisheries practices in the country.
23 These were initiated under the Belize Climate Resilient Infrastructure Project (P127338) but not completed due to funding shortage during the

COVID-19 pandemic.
24 Including financing mechanisms for sustainable waste management and circular economy development, which will review full cost recovery

needs at the national and local levels and the design and adoption of EPR schemes while considering existing environmental tax schemes in the
country.

                                                                                                                                              Page 8
        The World Bank
        Belize Blue Cities and Beyond Project (P181064)


19.      Component 2: Water, Sanitation and Waste Management. This component encompasses three
subcomponents—upgrade of the existing Belize City Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP25), expansion of water supply
in South San Pedro, and waste management pilot in San Pedro. BWS will manage the first two subcomponents as part of
its long-term investment plan to improve the coverage of its water and sanitation service. Expected climate impacts
(hurricane, flood etc.) will be integrated into the design and implementation of these interventions.

20.     Subcomponent 2.1. Belize City WWTP Upgrade will help BWS renovate the existing and only WWTP of Belize City,
which consists of a facultative lagoon, followed by a polishing lagoon, a sludge storage lagoon and an effluent discharge
canal conveying treated effluent through a mangrove area to the Caribbean Sea. Due to the lack of maintenance over
many years, the existing lagoons are filled with sludge, so the treatment system has currently a minimal level of treatment
effect with uncontrolled methane releases. The proposed investments will be performed within the physical boundaries
of the existing WWTP to expand its treatment capacity to accommodate the forecasted population growth for at least the
next 25 years and its treatment performance will be improved to meet the national effluent discharge standards.

21.     Subcomponent 2.2. Expansion of water supply in South San Pedro will help BWS expand the existing drinking
water distribution system to meet current and future potable water demand for the residents and tourism development
of South San Pedro area.26 The scope of works to be implemented includes (a) about 2.84 km of 8-inch distribution water
main, (b) 0.61 km of 6-inch distribution water main, and (c) 1.68 km of 4-inch distribution water main.

22.     Subcomponent 2.3. Waste management pilot in San Pedro will support the Belize Solid Waste Management
Authority, the San Pedro Town Council, the newly created Belize Waste Managers and Recyclers’ Association to work with
local communities, business associations, and private waste management firms to design effective interventions that will
help reduce waste generation and dumping, increase waste separation of recyclable and green materials for residents and
businesses at sources, transfer separated recyclable materials for processing or exporting and green materials for
composting using private operators and promote circular economy investments in San Pedro Ambergris Caye. Based on
findings of a behavior study, the proposed interventions will mobilize stakeholder participation through extensive
awareness-raising campaigns at the community level, employ a competitive process to identify private sector operators,
and provide necessary technical and financial support to ensure the sustainability of public and private waste management
operations supported by the project.27 This pilot will include targeted interventions to manage sargassum wastes and
minimize its negative impacts on local tourism operations. It is expected that this pilot will help demonstrate successful
business models for sustainable waste management operations that can be scaled up at the national level.

23.      Component 3: Project Management. This component will support the Central Executing Unit (CEU) of the Ministry
of Economic Development (MED) to coordinate overall project implementation, perform monitoring and evaluation (M&E)
activities at the project level, manage the implementation of project activities under Component 1 and Subcomponent
2.3. BWS will manage Subcomponents 2.1 and 2.2 as a part of its own investment program and will not request specific
project financing to its project management activities. BWS will perform its own M&E activities and submit its M&E
information for CEU’s consolidation and reporting. A Project Steering Committee (PSC) comprising relevant ministries and
key non-government organizations (NGOs), and on which MED will serve as the chair, will provide general oversight to the




25
   Project activities won't support the provision of anaerobic treatment plants with high unabated methane emissions, or large-scale sanitation
systems that significantly rely on the use of on-site fossil fuels.
26
   BWS provides water supply to San Pedro through its desalination operations.
27
   The study examined waste management behaviors of key stakeholders and identified incentives needed to improve waste management
practices in San Pedro.

                                                                                                                                                  Page 9
        The World Bank
        Belize Blue Cities and Beyond Project (P181064)


CEU and the BWS. The PSC will be supported by a technical working group (TWG) of focal points identified from among
the PSC’s members.

24.     Component 4: CERC. This component is included in the project in accordance with IPF Policy, paragraphs 12 and
13, for Situations of Urgent Need of Assistance and Capacity Constraints. This will allow for rapid reallocation of
uncommitted project funds in the event of an eligible emergency as defined in OP 8.00.28 For the CERC to be activated and
financing to be provided, the Government will need (a) to submit a request letter for CERC activation and the evidence
required to determine eligibility of the emergency, as defined in the CERC Annex to the Project Operations Manual; (b)to
submit an Emergency Action Plan, including the emergency expenditures to be financed; and (c) to meet the
environmental and social requirements as agreed in the Emergency Action Plan and the Environmental and Social
Commitment Plan.



 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate
 Legal Operational Policies                                                                             Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                                            Yes
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                                      Yes


Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts


25.      Overall, the Project is expected to result in positive environmental and social (E&S) outcomes by reducing land-
based pollution, promoting sustainable management of coastal zones, and improving the health and wellbeing of the
population. The Environmental and Social Risks Classification (ESRC) is Substantial with a Substantial environmental risk
rating, and a Moderate social risk rating. The key environmental risks are associated with Component 2 activities and
include (a) soil, water, and air pollution resulting from the desludging of facultative ponds and septage disposal; (b)
leakages and emissions of greenhouse gases from anerobic lagoons; (c) generation, management and disposal of waste;
(d) occupational health and safety (OHS) risks during construction; and (e) community health and safety risks during
construction and operation.

26.      The main social risks of the project activities are (a) the social exclusion of the disadvantaged and vulnerable
groups (fishers, female-headed households, low-income households, the youth, the LGBTI+ community, persons with
disabilities, etc.) from the consultation and decision-making processes; (b) transparency of stakeholder participation and
public information disclosure; (c) inadequately addressing and promoting E&S capacity building and institutional
strengthening; (d) potential moderate risk associated to labor influx and low SEASH risks; (e) low-moderate risk for child
labor, along with labor safety concerns; and (f) weak capacity of contractors to manage E&S risks and impacts. Currently,
no physical or economic displacement related to ESS5 is envisaged as a result of project activities. Overall, the E&S risks
are likely to be temporary, short-term, and limited in extent and can be managed through routine preventive and
mitigation E&S measures and capacity strengthening. The ESRC will be reviewed regularly during preparation and



28 An eligible emergency is defined as an event that has caused, or is likely to imminently cause, a major adverse economic and/or social impact

associated with natural or man-made crises or disasters. Such events include a disease outbreak.

                                                                                                                                              Page 10
       The World Bank
       Belize Blue Cities and Beyond Project (P181064)


implementation to reflect the project's risk level. The Government of Belize will prepare appropriate assessments to
manage the E&S risks.

27.      Prior to appraisal, the Borrower has prepared: (a) a draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) with its Grievance
Mechanism (GM) - the SEP also addresses the requirements of meaningful consultations in contexts of IPs, consistent with
ESS7, and for the implementation of activities under Component 1. Two consultations were conducted in San Pedro and
Belize City on May 21 and 22, 2024; (b) draft terms of reference (ToR) for the E&S Assessment for Subcomponent 2.1
activities; and (c) a draft ESCP which will be finalized during negotiations. The SEP, ToR, and ESCP have been disclosed
prior to Appraisal. During implementation, and within the timeframes listed in the ESCP, the Borrower will prepare and
implement (a) Labor Management Procedures (LMP) with a labor GM; (b) an environmental and social management plan
(ESMP) for subcomponent 2.2; and (c) an ESMP for subcomponent 2.3 which will be reviewed by the Bank, disclosed for
consultations, updated, and finalized.

 E. Implementation

 Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

28.     Given the need for strong cross-sectoral coordination, the Government of Belize will establish a Project Steering
Committee (PSC) to coordinate project preparation and implementation. The PSC is to be chaired by MED with
representatives from relevant ministries, local government, relevant regulatory or promotion agencies, and key non-
government organizations (NGOs) that are involved in proposed project activities. The PSC will meet annually to review
the project’s annual implementation plans and biannually on project implementation status to ensure proper planning
and implementation of all project activities. As needed, the PSC will organize additional review meetings at the request of
its members. In all such review meetings, the PSC may identify implementation challenges, provide technical and strategic
advice at the sectoral and project levels, facilitate the cooperations across agencies and between state and non-state
stakeholders, and make decisions on actions needed to address identified implementation challenges. The PSC will be
supported by a technical working group (TWG) of focal points identified from among the PSC’s members.

29.     The existing CEU of MED will be the lead implementing agency for the project, managing overall project
coordination and implementing activities under Component 1, Subcomponent 2.3, and Component 3. The existing PIU of
the BWS will manage the water and sanitation investments under Subcomponents 2.1 and 2.2. Both the CEU and PIU of
BWS have qualified specialists and experience in managing donor-financed investment projects. In addition, the project
will support the CEU to hire a full-time project manager; a full-time knowledge management specialist; and four part-time
analysts on procurement, financial management (FM), E&S issues, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E). In cooperation
with the BWS PIU, CEU is leading the preparation of the project’s operations manual (POM) which will prescribe roles and
responsibilities of each PIU and its members and procedures and requirements of implementation tasks. Following the
POM, the CEU and the BWS PIU will prepare their respective reports on project implementation while the CEU will
integrate reports from both units and produce consolidated reports for the entire project.

30.      For technical activities, the CEU will rely on related stakeholders to supervise technical requirements of such
activities, including, but not limited to, the development ToR of project-financed consultancies and knowledge
management events, the development technical specifications of project-financed equipment and goods, and technical
review and acceptance of project deliverables. For the BWS, its PIU will work with its technical departments to manage
technical aspects of project investments under Subcomponents 2.1 and 2.2.




                                                                                                                      Page 11
     The World Bank
     Belize Blue Cities and Beyond Project (P181064)



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
CONTACT POINT

World Bank
 Nicolas Benjamin Claude Desramaut
 Senior Environmental Engineer

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 The Government of Belize

Implementing Agencies
 Ministry of Economic Development
 Osmond Martinez
 Chief Executive Officer
 ceo@med.gov.bz

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                     Nicolas Benjamin Claude Desramaut

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:                Genevieve Connors                   30-May-2024

Country Director:                        Federico E. Baechli                 26-Aug-2024




                                                                                           Page 12
