Public Disclosure Authorized
                                         The World Bank
                                         Belize Blue Economy Project(P181064)



                                  @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                      Project Information Document (PID)


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                        Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 30-Nov-2023 | Report No: PID191




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Nov 30, 2023                                                                                      Page 1 of 9
          The World Bank
          Belize Blue Economy Project(P181064)


   @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
   BASIC INFORMATION


   A. Basic Project Data
   Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID               Operation Name
   Belize                         P181064                    Belize Blue Economy Project
   Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date   Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
   LATIN AMERICA AND              27-May-2024                31-Oct-2024                   Environment, Natural
   CARIBBEAN                                                                               Resources & the Blue
                                                                                           Economy
   Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                Implementing Agency           GEF Focal Area
   Investment Project             The Government of Belize   Ministry of Economic          Climate Change
   Financing (IPF)                                           Development

  Proposed Development Objective(s)
   To improve Belize's management capacity for sustainable development of its blue economy and increase access to
   climate resilient and sustainable water and sanitation services in targeted coastal areas of Belize.

   @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
   PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

   Maximizing Finance for Development

   Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                 Yes
   Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?           Yes

   SUMMARY
     Total Operation Cost                                                                                      21.76

     Total Financing                                                                                              9.49
                of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                 5.73
     Financing Gap                                                                                             12.27

   DETAILS
     World Bank Group Financing
       International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                               5.73
     Non-World Bank Group Financing


Nov 30, 2023                                                                                                   Page 2 of 9
          The World Bank
          Belize Blue Economy Project(P181064)


       Trust Funds                                                                                                                           3.76
          Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                                                                  3.76

   @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
 Environmental and Social Risk Classification                                 Concept Review Decision
 Substantial                                                                  The review did authorize the preparation to continue



  B. Introduction and Context

  Country Context

   1.    Belize is an upper-middle-income country in Central America with a population of 405,272, a gross domestic
   product (GDP) of US$2.82 billion, and per capita GDP over US$6,900 in 2022.1, As a member of the Caribbean Community
   (CARICOM), Belize has close socioeconomic and political ties to the wider Caribbean Region. While its economy
   experienced a sound rebound after the COVID-19 pandemic, Belize maintains a high poverty rate of 35.7 percent
   according to the 2022 Census, and infrastructure gaps have been identified as one of the key constraints to the country’s
   economic growth.2 Women and Mayans are more likely to be self-employed and poor, underscoring a structural
   difference in employment and poverty outcomes.3

   2.     As a Small Island Developing State (SIDS)4 with 386 km of coastline and numerous cayes and outer islands, Belize
   is highly dependent on its blue economy which is built on the country’s expansive seagrass beds, mangroves, and the
   Belize Barrier Reef. This reef is a key part of the Mesoamerican Barrier Reef—the largest in the western hemisphere
   stretching over 1,000 km along the coasts of Honduras, Guatemala, Belize, and Mexico. With over 50% of Belizean living
   along the coast,5 Belize is reliant on its coastal and marine ecosystems for the protection of its coastal communities,
   livelihoods of its fishing families, food security, and the country’s most important economic sector—tourism.6 In 2017,
   the tourism sector contributed to over 40 percent of the country’s GDP (direct and indirect), and in 2018, it contributed
   to almost 40 percent of the country’s total employment.7 It is estimated that a majority of Belize tourism is linked to its
   rich coastal and marine natural resources and its coastal communities.8


 1 For country group information, please see https://datahelpdesk.worldbank.org/knowledgebase/articles/906519-world-bank-country-and-lending-

 groups. For population information, please see https://sib.org.bz/statistics/population/. For GDP information, please see
 https://data.worldbank.org/country/belize.
 2 International Monetary Fund. 2023. Belize: 2023 Article IV Consultation - Staff Report. The country’s official consumption poverty estimates from

 2018 indicate that more than half of Belize’s population (52 percent) is poor, 10 percent is extremely poor, and 10 percent is vulnerable.
 3 World Bank, Macro Poverty Outlook: Belize. (https://thedocs.worldbank.org/en/doc/e408a7e21ba62d843bdd90dc37e61b57-

 0500032021/related/mpo-blz.pdf, last accessed August 29, 2023.)
 4 Despite not being an island, Belize is considered a United Nations Small Island Developing States (UNSIDS) member. See

 https://www.un.org/ohrlls/content/list-sids.
 5 Oceana, 2021. State of Belize Fisheries Report 2020. (https://belize.oceana.org/reports/state-of-belize-fisheries-report-2020/)
 6 “Together, the coral reef and the extensive mangroves ecosystem shelter Belize’s extensive coast from storms and high velocity winds that cause

 floods and coastal damage.” (World Bank Group. 2017. Country Partnership Framework for Belize).
 7 Belize Ministry of Blue Economy and Civil Aviation. 2022. Belize Maritime Economy Plan.

 (https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/1134627/Belize_Maritime_Economy_Plan_A
 ugust_2022.pdf).
 8 Oceana, 2021.



Nov 30, 2023                                                                                                                               Page 3 of 9
          The World Bank
          Belize Blue Economy Project(P181064)


   3.    Belize’s reliance on its coastal and marine ecosystems corresponds to its exceptional vulnerability to adverse
   impacts from external shocks, most notably climate-related shocks. Ranked third in terms of disaster risk and fifth in
   climate change risk among all SIDS, Belize’s coastal areas are threatened by hurricanes, storms, and flooding, while the
   low-lying terrain of these areas exacerbates the effects of flooding and sea level rise. Coastal erosion and coral bleaching
   are additional climate-related threats, particularly affecting the tourism and fisheries sectors. Economically, the country
   has recently witnessed high loss caused by Hurricane Lisa in 2022, estimated at about 10 percent of Belize’s national
   budget.9 Land-based pollution such as waste and wastewater and, more recently, the massive influx of sargassum are
   new threats to the country’s efforts to conserve its coastal and marine environment and develop its tourism and fisheries
   sectors. On top of such natural events, external shocks such as increasing energy prices and the COVID-19 pandemic
   weaken the country’s external position and reduce the purchasing power of its population. Such climate and economic
   vulnerability has disproportionally affected the country’s poor and vulnerable population.10

  Sectoral and Institutional Context
   4.     Recognizing the importance of coastal and marine ecosystems to its economy and the livelihood of its coastal
   communities, the Government of Belize has developed a suite of laws and regulations to ensure sustainable
   management of its forest resources and safeguard mangroves and associated ecosystem services,11 protect the wildlife
   and globally threatened species from local extinction,12 control environmental pollution and protect natural resources,13
   and manage coastal zones and promote international best practices for management of aquatic and fisheries
   resources,14 among others. In 2020, Belize established the Ministry of Blue Economy and Civil Aviation (MBECA) with a
   mission to “increase GDP through a thriving Blue Economy Development pathway that is harmonized, innovative and
   socially just, supported by a robust, science-based management regime of our aquatic resources and space to improve
   the livelihood of all Belizeans.”15

   5.    At the national level, in 2011, Belize presented its Horizon 2030 Vision in the National Development Framework
   for Belize (2010–2030) with specific emphases on sustainable fisheries and sustainable and responsible tourism. The
   framework also acknowledges the need to incorporate environmental sustainability into development planning,
   strengthen protected areas management, and promote green energy. In 2016, the Belize’s Growth and Sustainable
   Development Strategy (2016–2019) incorporated both poverty reduction and long-term sustainable development issues
   into the country’s medium-term economic development plans. It specifically called for the rationalization of land-use
   planning to support sustainable economic activities, value added from sustainable fisheries management and
   processing, and competitiveness and value added of the tourism sector and its ‘eco-tourism’ profiles.

   6.    More recently, in October 2022, the Government of Belize, through MBECA, launched its first Blue Economy
   Development, Policy and Strategy with a high-level objective that “Belize’s Blue Economy, by year 2030, is productive,
   sustainable, resilient and vibrant, contributing sustainably to the socio-economic well-being of the country and its
   people” and its first Belize Maritime Economy Plan with concrete recommendations on how to promote sustainable
   practices for the country’s main blue economy sectors—coastal development, tourism, shipping and ports, fisheries—

 9 Statement by Hon. Orlando Habet, Minister of Sustainable Development, Climate Change and Disaster Risk Management at the 27th Conference

 of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
 https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/BELIZE_cop27cmp17cma4_HLS_ENG.pdf.
 10 Bailey, S., and F. Ciardi. 2020. Case Study on Shock-Responsive Social Protection in Belize. Oxford Policy Management and World Food

 Programme. https://docs.wfp.org/api/documents/WFP-0000118598/download/.
 11 Forests Act (1927, revised 2000), Forests (Protection of Mangroves) Regulations (2018).
 12 Wildlife Protection Act (1981, revised 2000).
 13 Environmental Protection Act (1992, revised 2020).
 14 Coastal Zone Management (CZM) Act (1998, revised 2020).
 15 MBECA Annual Report 2021: https://edc.gov.bz/elibrary/uploads/bhnFCM4fDcsayLrmXL1gIKL9R5QlUDWO.pdf.



Nov 30, 2023                                                                                                                               Page 4 of 9
          The World Bank
          Belize Blue Economy Project(P181064)


   and attention needed for the development of marine renewable energy, aquaculture and mariculture, and ecosystem
   services. It is noteworthy that blue economy-related actions are featured in Belize Updated Nationally Determined
   Contribution (August 2021), including reductions in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by restoring ecosystems and
   adaptation actions in tourism and fisheries sectors.

   7.    Align with these blue economy strategy and plan, in 2023, the #Plan Belize listed the protection and sustainable
   use of natural resources as one of its six strategic objectives of its Medium-Term Development Strategy (2022-2026)
   and called for the development of the National Blue Economy Strategy and Action Plan. To implement these strategies,
   Belize has been actively cooperating with development partners to conserve its coastal and marine ecosystems and
   explore effective interventions to promote its blue economy development.

   8.     With increasing pollution, overfishing, coastal erosion, and rapid but uncoordinated development, Belize however
   faces challenges to operationalize its blue economy strategies and lacks a comprehensive program to effectively manage
   its blue assets and achieve sustainable development of its blue economy. Extensive stakeholder consultation identified
   that the following key challenges: (a) lack of coordinated development planning and implementation across blue
   economy sectors and between national and destination levels; (b) lack of climate-resilient urban infrastructure and
   services, most notably for water, sanitation, and waste management, to meet the demands of its population and tourists
   and quality development of its blue economy; (c) lack of capacity of key public actors to monitor development activities,
   enforce existing regulations, and properly manage blue assets; and (d) lack of sustainable financing mechanisms to
   support long-term investments for climate-resilient blue economy development. Together, these challenges are
   negatively affecting the country’s ability to manage its blue assets and blue economy development in the long run.

   9.    Recognizing the successful implementation results of the Belize Marine Conservation and Climate Adaptation
   Project (MCCAP, P131408), the Government of Belize has requested the World Bank’s support to develop a
   comprehensive blue economy program that addresses the key challenges in Belize and to implement priority water and
   sanitation investments in Belize City and San Pedro.

  Relationship to CPF
   10. The proposed project is fully aligned with Objective 1b (Enhancing sustainable natural resource management)
   under Focus Area 1 (Fostering climate resilience and environmental sustainability) of the World Bank Group Country
   Partnership Framework (CPF) for Belize for the period FY18–22 (Report No. 106630, discussed by the Board on May 30,
   2017), which has been extended to FY24. By focusing on blue economy development and supporting the country to
   mobilize sustainable financing mechanisms such as parametric catastrophe insurances, the project will also contribute
   to Focus Area 2 (Promoting financial inclusion and social resilience).

  C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
   11.     The proposed project development objectives are to improve Belize's management capacity for sustainable
   development of its blue economy and increase access to climate resilient and sustainable water and sanitation services
   in targeted coastal areas of Belize.

   Key Results (From PCN)
   12. The proposed key results are:

      •    Coordinated policies for blue economy development.
      •    Improved capacity for operationalizing blue economy strategies.
      •    Reduced land-based pollution discharge to targeted coastal ecosystems.

Nov 30, 2023                                                                                                        Page 5 of 9
          The World Bank
          Belize Blue Economy Project(P181064)


      •    Improved access to safe water supply in target areas.


  D. Concept Description
   13. Component 1: Policy Development and Capacity Building.16 This component aims to improve cross-sectoral and
   cross-jurisdiction coordination in land-use and environmental management policies and plans, strengthen technical
   capacity of key stakeholders in promoting blue economy development, and establish a platform to coordinate the
   development and financing of a blue economy investment program.

   14. Subcomponent 1.1: Policy Development will support the review and revision of critical land-use and
   environmental management policies and regulations to facilitate blue economy development in Belize. At the concept
   stage, key planning policy actions to be supported are: (a) a national land-use policy and (b) regulatory reforms to
   support destination management. Key environmental management policies to be supported are: (a) environmental
   monitoring and enforcement standards and procedures, (b) integrated fisheries monitoring policies and procedures,
   and (c) a national sanitation master plan and operational efficiency improvement plans for BWS.

   15. Subcomponent 1.2: Capacity Development will support knowledge management activities (training, knowledge
   exchange, and so on) on selected blue economy topics to help improve technical and operational capacity of targeted
   stakeholders. This Subcomponent will also support Belize’s participation in knowledge events organized by the global
   knowledge platform of the GEF Sustainable Cities Integrated Program.

   16. Subcomponent 1.3: Blue Economy Investment Program will identify critical investment needs in key blue
   economic sectors of the country, promote coordinated interventions across ministries and jurisdictions, and develop a
   financing plan to mobilize resources from the public and private sectors and development partners. This program is
   expected to serve as a coordination platform to support Belize’s blue economy development beyond this project. As
   part of the proposed financing plan, sustainable financing mechanisms such as blue carbon, sustainability linked bonds,
   and parametric insurance under the Caribbean Oceans and Aquaculture Sustainability Facility (COAST) will be explored
   along with bilateral and multilateral donor financing mechanisms.

   17. Component 2: Water, Sanitation and Waste Management. This component will support (a) the upgrade of Belize
   City Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP), (b) water network expansion in South San Pedro, (c) water network
   expansion in North Placencia Peninsula, and (d) waste management pilot in San Pedro.

   18. Subcomponent 2.1: Belize City Wastewater Treatment Plant Upgrade. This subcomponent will help renovate the
   existing Belize City WWTP to improve its treatment performance to meet the national discharge standards, and to
   expand the treatment capacity so that it can accommodate the expected population growth for at least the next 25
   years.

   19. Subcomponent 2.2: Water Network Expansion to South San Pedro. This component would expand the existing
   water distribution system in South San Pedro to meet current and future potable water demand for the residents and
   businesses of this area. This would improve access to safe and reliable potable water to the residents of South San Pedro
   and contribute to the economic development.

   20. Subcomponent 2.3: Water Network Expansion to North Placencia Peninsula. This subcomponent would include
   the construction of groundwater intake facility including reservoir, pump house, generator building, and pipe linear

 16 Note that the front-end fee is deducted from component financing numbers.



Nov 30, 2023                                                                                                        Page 6 of 9
          The World Bank
          Belize Blue Economy Project(P181064)


   works for North Placencia as a redundant system to provide continuous water services to residents and businesses of
   Placencia.

   21. Subcomponent 2.4: Waste Management Pilot in San Pedro. This subcomponent will be designed to support San
   Pedro to pilot a waste separation and recycling program. At the concept stage, the targeted recyclable materials are
   polyethylene terephthalate (PET) plastics, glass, and aluminum products. A key element of this pilot will be on public
   mobilization through extensive awareness-raising campaigns at the community level, which will be designed based on
   findings of a behavior economic analysis of key stakeholders involved in the pilot. Technical training and financial
   support may be considered under the pilot to incentivize active participation of residents and business entities and
   designated purchasers/exporters.

   22. Component 3: Project Management. This component will support project management, monitoring and
   evaluation, technical assistance and technical studies, and capacity strengthening. It will finance project implementation
   costs associated with the Project Implementation Units (PIUs) at key agencies involved in project implementation.


   @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
   Legal Operational Policies                                                            Triggered?
   Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                           Yes
   Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                     Yes


   Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts



   23. The Environmental and Social Risks Classification (ESRC) is Substantial at the Concept stage. Overall, the Project is
   expected to result in positive environmental and social outcomes. However, at the concept stage, the environmental
   risk rating is Substantial, and the social risk rating is Moderate. The key environmental risks include (i) soil, water, and
   air pollution that may result from desludging of facultative ponds and septage disposal; (ii) leakages and emissions of
   greenhouse gasses (GHGs) from the wastewater treatment plant upgrades; (iii) adverse impacts to water quantity and
   quality of groundwater systems in case water supply activities lead to significant water use; (iv) generation and disposal
   of hazardous waste; and (v) construction stage risks such as occupational health and safety (OHS), cultural heritage risks,
   and waste management.

   24. The main social risks of the project activities are (i) the social exclusion of the disadvantaged and vulnerable groups
   (fishers, women, female-headed households, low-income households, the youth, the LGBTI+ community, persons with
   disabilities, etc.) from the consultation and decision-making processes; (ii) transparency of stakeholder participation and
   public information disclosure; (iii) inadequately addressing and promoting environmental and social capacity building
   and institutional strengthening; (iv) labor influx, and (v) probability of economic and physical displacement caused by
   civil work. These E&S risks are likely to be temporary, short-term, and limited in extent and can be managed through
   routine preventive and mitigation E&S measures and by applying known technologies. The Government of Belize will
   prepare appropriate assessments to manage the environmental and social risks. Prior to appraisal, the Borrower will
   prepare, consult, and disclose: (i) a draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) with its Grievance Mechanism (GM) - The
   SEP will also address the requirements of meaningful consultations in contexts of IPs, consistent with ESS7, and for the


Nov 30, 2023                                                                                                           Page 7 of 9
          The World Bank
          Belize Blue Economy Project(P181064)


   implementation of activities under Component 1; (ii) draft LMP; (iii) draft terms of reference (ToRs) for the E&S
   assessments for Component 2 activities; and (iv) a draft Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) which will
   be finalized during negotiations. During implementation, the Borrower will prepare E&S assessments for Component 2
   activities, which will be reviewed by the Bank, disclosed for consultations, updated, and finalized. The outcome of the
   E&S assessments will be considered in project design and no activities will commence prior to having the appropriate
   assessments and mitigation measures in place. The ESRC will be reviewed regularly during preparation and
   implementation to reflect the project's risk level.

   @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
   CONTACT POINT

   World Bank
     Jiang Ru
     Senior Environmental Specialist

     Midori Makino
     Lead Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

   Borrower/Client/Recipient
    The Government of Belize

   Implementing Agencies
    Ministry of Economic Development
    Osmond Martinez, Chief Executive Officer, ceo@med.gov.bz

   FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

   The World Bank
   1818 H Street, NW
   Washington, D.C. 20433
   Telephone: (202) 473-1000
   Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

   @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
   APPROVAL


   Task Team Leader(s):                     Jiang Ru, Midori Makino

   Approved By

   Practice Manager/Manager:


Nov 30, 2023                                                                                                      Page 8 of 9
          The World Bank
          Belize Blue Economy Project(P181064)



   Country Director:                        Federico E. Baechli   30-Nov-2023




Nov 30, 2023                                                                    Page 9 of 9
