Public Disclosure Authorized
                                    The World Bank
                                    Mali Water Security Project(P181538)




                               Note to Task Team: The following sections are system generated and changes must be made in Data Sheet(s). Delete
                               this note when finalizing the document.


                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                  Project Information Document (PID)

                                                 Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 27-Jun-2024 | Report No: PIDDC00378




Public Disclosure Authorized
       The World Bank
       Mali Water Security Project(P181538)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                 Operation Name
Mali                           P181538                      Mali Water Security Project
Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
WESTERN AND CENTRAL            16-Sept-2024                 12-Nov-2024                   Water
AFRICA
Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                  Implementing Agency
Investment Project             Ministry of Energy and       Societe Malienne de
Financing (IPF)                Water                        Gestion de l'Eau Potable
                                                            (SOMAGEP), Societe
                                                            Malienne de Patrimoine de
                                                            l'eau Potable (SOMAPEP),
                                                            Direction National de
                                                            l'Hydraulique (DNH)

Proposed Development Objective(s)
Increase access to improved drinking water supply and enhance conservation of water sources in selected cities.


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   No
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             No

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                           100.00

  Total Financing                                                                                                100.00
              of which IBRD/IDA                                                                              100.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                                    0.00

DETAILS
  World Bank Group Financing


                                                                                                                    Page 1
        The World Bank
        Mali Water Security Project(P181538)


      International Development Association (IDA)                                                                            100.00
         IDA Credit                                                                                                          100.00

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                                  Concept Review Decision
Substantial                                                                   The review did authorize the preparation to continue



 B. Introduction and Context
 Introduction
 1.       Mali, a Sahelian country, is facing multi-dimensional challenges that are affecting its economic development.
 Water insecurity contributes to this situation, aggravated by climate change, natural resource degradation, fragility, and
 rapid population growth. The country remains highly vulnerable to climate change impacts, such as increasing severity
 and incidence of floods and droughts which adversely affect the agricultural production on which most of the population
 depends. The limited development and the poor management of water resources is exacerbating the precariousness of
 livelihoods, worsening economic and human capital outcomes. Inadequate coordination among institutions responsible
 for the management, development, and use of natural resources, including water, exacerbates the country’s
 vulnerability to climate change.
 2.       Well-coordinated water-related interventions are needed to reduce fragility, increase resilience to climate
 variability, and strengthen the foundations of socio-economic development in Mali. These coordinated actions span
 areas of water resource management and ecosystems preservation, irrigation and optimized rain-fed agriculture, flood
 management, and expansion of access to sustainable and safely managed drinking water and sanitation.
 3.       The proposed project aims to improve access to drinking water services and water security in the selected
 urban cities and their tenant sub-basins. The project will focus on the current government’s priority by improving access
 to drinking water services with specific attention on water resources in the tenant sub-basins through activities that
 ensure the security of water resources by local communities’ organizations. The proposed project intends to also
 support the government with key studies (to be defined) that can lay the ground for consistent water resource
 management investments for future bank support to the sector.

 Country Context
 4.       Mali faces internal and external shocks that hamper progress toward inclusive and sustainable development.
 Solid demography growth, armed-conflicts, climate change, social conflict, insecurity, and trade disruptions induced by
 the war in Ukraine have worsened the vulnerability and the fragility of the state. A vast landlocked country of 22.3
 million people, Mali experiences an average annual population growth of 3 percent, with a median age of 18 years. Most
 of the population lives in the south close to the Senegal and Niger rivers, while 57 percent resides in rural areas and 12
 percent in the capital city of Bamako. With a per capita gross domestic product (GDP) estimated at US$885, Mali ranks
 as the 22nd poorest country in the world. The proportion of the Malian population living under the national poverty line
 was 42 percent in 2018/19 and is concentrated in rural areas1. About 80 percent of Mali’s poor population lives in the
 Koulikoro, Dioila, Mopti, Ségou, Bogouni, Koutiala and Sikasso regions. The country is characterized by high regional
 disparities and access to basic services and infrastructure is low and highly unequal. Poverty rates were highest in Sikasso
 (63 percent in 2019), where households depend on cotton farming, and high in Ségou (53 percent) and Mopti (61


1 West African Economic and Monetary Union [WAEMU] household survey 2018-19




                                                                                                                                     Page 2
      The World Bank
      Mali Water Security Project(P181538)


percent) where families mostly depend on rainfed sorghum and millet cultivation. In Kayes, where households depend
on remittances and livestock, poverty is lower (33 percent).2
5.        Mali’s Human Development Index ranks among the lowest as education, health and social protection systems
remain weak. On the gender Inequality Index, measuring three important aspects of human development—
reproductive health, empowerment, and economic status – Mali ranks 158th out of 162.3 Gender-based violence (GBV)
is highly prevalent, with an estimated 38.5 percent of women experiencing physical and/or sexual intimate partner
violence at some point in their lives.4
6.        Mali is also among the world’s most vulnerable countries to climate change. The country ranks among the top
seven most vulnerable to climate change. Most climate scenarios project temperatures in the Sahel to rise by at least
2°C in the near term (2021 to 2040) while rainfall patterns are projected to become more irregular, with sudden
oscillations between very wet and very dry years. Sustaining economic growth, especially in the agriculture sector, to
reduce poverty becomes even more challenging with growth volatile and subject to climatic shocks, including frequent
and intense droughts and floods in addition to political instability, and insecurity. It is projected that by 2050 Mali’s
annual GDP would be reduced by between 10.7 percent with 2.2 million additional poor due to climate change-related
shocks if urgent investments in climate adaptation are not taken.5
7.        Mali’s economy experienced little structural change over the last three decades. Agriculture and low-
productivity services dominate the economic and employment landscape, while manufacturing remains limited and
concentrated in agro-industries and cotton ginning. Exports are dominated by gold and cotton, exposing the economy
to commodity-price and climatic shocks. In addition to climatic risks, high population growth rate has led to
overexploitation, and degradation of natural resources. Two-thirds of the country is arid and semiarid and exposed to
desertification. While the economy is heavily dependent on natural resources and agriculture, only 14 percent of the
country’s land area is considered suitable for agriculture, making landscape restoration a central issue.
8.        Mali's wealth is composed of natural capital, human capital, produced capital and net foreign assets 6.
Globally, natural capital includes renewable assets—such as forests, wetlands, fisheries, pastoral lands, and other
lands—and nonrenewable assets, including fossil fuels, metals, and minerals. In 2018 Mali's natural capital reached US$
5,000 per capita (about 46 percent of its total wealth per capital). Unfortunately, renewable capital has been exploited
to the point of diminishing returns. The result is most pronounced in increased communal tension between pastoralists,
cultivators, and fishermen. It is further exacerbated by insufficiently inclusive land management and agribusiness
policies. Lacking governance of the industrial and artisanal mining of extractive resources, particularly gold, creates
financing opportunities for armed groups, contributes to communal conflict and reduces government revenues.
9.       As identified in the World Bank’s 2020 Risk and Resilience Assessment, fragility, conflict, and violence (FCV)
in Mali is driven by at least three main risk drivers: (a) low public confidence and trust in state institutions in conjunction
with shortcomings in service delivery and a lack of inclusive governance; (b) increasing competition over natural
resources (land, water, forests, grazing areas, halieutic resources, and extractive resources), which has contributed to
the escalation of all types of violence and is likely to increase due to the effects of climate change and demographic
trends; and (c) subnational conflicts within large areas (mostly, Kidal, Gao, Menaka, Timbuktu, Mopti, and parts of
Ségou), resulting in endemic violence, local political fragmentation, and the erosion of national cohesion and state
authority (violence fueled by inter and intracommunal conflict has expanded from the north to the central region and
much of the affected area remains outside the control of authorities).7 Increased access to weapons and persistently
high levels of youth unemployment also contribute to fragility. State institutions are also facing growing social unrest
and discontent with the Central Government across the country. The Government of Mali (GoM) prepared and adopted
a strategy to mitigate conflict and violence risks (2020-2023), which identified improvement of living conditions as an
important pillar to directly address the root causes of conflict.
10.      An operation that aims to improve access to water service and water security in Mali’s FCV context will
directly target this fragility. The proposed project complements the Mali urban water supply project (P122826) and


                                                                                                                            Page 3
         The World Bank
         Mali Water Security Project(P181538)


 Mali Emergency and Resilience Project (P173389), in its targeting of fragility through investments in public infrastructure
 and service delivery through a spatial approach. Given the risk of a worsening security situation in the country, better
 coordination for service delivery would contribute to increasing resilience of the populations and address drivers of
 fragility. Bamako is the world's sixth fastest growing city, with large migration from other parts of Mali. Migrants look
 for better urban and social services, and access to employment. Project components aim to improve access to water
 supply, sanitation, and hygiene, throughout the city of Bamako and secondary centers. These improvements to key
 public services directly address citizen needs, as such reducing fragility in the city. In addition, the project provides direct
 employment to youth and those in vulnerable communities, through opportunities for cash-for-work, and investments
 in community infrastructure.
 11.      To recover from devastating landscape degradation, climate impacts, violence, and food insecurity, Mali has
 developed several development plans and strategies to promote sustainable development, economic growth, and
 climate change resilience8 All national strategies and action plans prioritize better management of land resources. They
 include the following key dimensions: (a) the need for large investments to combat land degradation worsened by
 climate change exacerbated drought, (b) effective transfer of natural resource management to decentralized entities,
 (c) improved capacity of local governments, and (d) more effective coordination of land management and
 environmental initiatives. However, the implementation of these strategies/action plans is fragmented and
 characterized by a lack of synchronized objectives and by many competing frameworks. The problem is not the lack of
 policies, but rather weak institutional coordination, overlapping mandates, conflicting objectives, and contradictory
 agendas. Sectoral ministries address issues such as climate change exacerbated floods and droughts, climate-
 biodiversity interaction, and land management in a piecemeal manner. Institutional, policy and governance responses
 to address these issues are often reactive through a fragmented and ad hoc approach, while failing to address the root
 causes.
 12.     In Mali, the decentralization policy is the result of a major political and strategic governance option. Since
 1990, decentralization has been built around the following core principles: respect for national unity and integrity of
 the territory, respect for the free administration of local authorities, respect for local specificities in territorial
 reorganization, democratic and transparent management of local authorities, subsidiarity, progressiveness,
 concurrency in the transfer of skills and resources, and project management of regional and local development by local
 authorities. On March 13, 2023, Law 2023-006 on the creation of administrative districts was promulgated to enshrine
 the creation of 19 regions in addition to the District of Bamako. Thus, Mali now has 19 regions, 156 circles, 466
 arrondissements, 819 communes, 12,712 villages and the District of Bamako.9


 Sectoral and Institutional Context

2 For this entire paragraph, see United Nations estimate (July 2021). According to the results of the Agricultural Economic Survey integrated into household living

conditions (ECA), the agricultural population stands at 16,833,767, of which 48.3 percent are women (EAC 2018); World Bank (2021) From Covid-19 Crisis response to
resilient recovery. Saving lives and Livelihoods while Supporting Green, Resilient and Inclusive Development (GRID). Development Committee of the Boards of
Governors of the Bank (The World Bank and IMF) and World Bank (2015) Geography of Poverty in Mali.
3
  UNDP http://hdr.undp.org/en/content/gender-inequality-index-gii, consulted in November 2021.
4
  Mali, Demographic and Health Survey, 2018.
5 World Bank. 2022. Sahel Region: Country Climate and Development Report. Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group.
6 Mali | Country profile - Changing Wealth of Nations 2021 https://www.worldbank.org/en/publication/changing-wealth-of-nations
7 World Bank (2019) Performance and Learning Review of the Country Partnership Framework for the Republic of Mali for the period of FY15 FY19.
8
  The Strategic Framework for Economic Recovery and Sustainable Development (CREDD 2019–2023); The National Policy for the Protection of the Environment
(PNPE), dated 1998; The National Forest Policy, approved in 2017, and its action plan; The Agricultural Orientation Law (LOA) (approved in 2005); The Country
Strategic Investment Framework (CSIF) for Sustainable Land and Water Management (SLWM), adopted in July 2010; The National Policy/Strategy and an action plan
for climate change, approved in 2011; The National Policy for the Development of Fisheries and Aquaculture; The new Malian Decentralization Framework; The
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) revised in 2021, The National Food and Nutritional Security Policy; The National Wetlands Policy (2003); and the Program
for Integrated Development and Adaptation to Climate Change in the Niger Basin.
9 https://sgg-mali.ml/JO/2023/mali-jo-2023-02-sp.pdf




                                                                                                                                                                      Page 4
         The World Bank
         Mali Water Security Project(P181538)


Water resources challenges: overview
13.      Mali’s annual precipitation is estimated to 415 billion cubic meter and the renewal water from Niger, Senegal
and Volta basins is estimated to 71.4 billion m3/year.10 The country’s hydrology spans four international river basins: (i)
the Niger basin (47% of the country area); (ii) the Senegal basin (11%); (iii) the Volta basin (1%); and (iv) the Comoé-Bia-
Tanoé basin. The country also holds two transboundary aquifer systems: the Taoudeni Basin (also known as the Taoudeni-
Tanezrouft Aquifer System) and the Iullemeden Aquifer System, which cover 64% and 9% of the country's territory
respectively. The country is divided into four bio-climatic zones, from south to north: The forest zone, which occupies 6%
of the country’s land area, receives annual rainfall of up to 1200 mm. The Savana zone covers 17% of the country and
receives rainfall ranging from 600 mm to 1200 mm. In contrast, the Sahel zone, which covers 26% of the country, receives
between 200 mm to 600 mm of rainfall. The remaining 51% of the country is classified as desert.11
14.      Despite the endowment of the country in water resource, the sustainability of this resource is threatened by its
vulnerability to drought exacerbated by climate change. The severe drought in 2021 resulted in the loss of 225,000 ha of
cultivated fields12 affecting more than 3 million people mainly in Mopti, Segou, and Timbuktu.13 Moreover, the shortening
of the rainy season has prevented the renewal of pastures in many parts of the country, increasing competition for the
few remaining grazing resources. Against this backdrop, Mali’s rivers (Niger, Senegal, Volta) are lifelines for most of its
population and irrigation is fundamental to increase and stabilize food output and incomes, and to reduce the need to
migrate.
15.      Although Mali does not face physical water scarcity in average terms, variability14, and mismanagement
contribute to significant economic water scarcity. With annual renewable water resources of 6,290 m3 per capita,15 Mali’s
current water consumption levels do not exceed sustainable water resources at the country level. However, extreme
variability in water availability in time and space (particularly between riparian and Saharan populations), coupled with
underdeveloped knowledge and infrastructure bases and poor service delivery and water quality management, lead to
differentiated water access and exacerbate water insecurity. Violence has also led to significant restrictions on movement,
disrupting economic activities and limiting access to fields and grazing areas and resulting in the abandonment of cropped
lands. Because of an increasingly unpredictable climate, insecurity, and poor infrastructures and services, 1,2 million16
people across the country are food insecure, 800,000 children are malnourished, and conflicts between farmers and
herders are on the rise.17. At the same time, the quality of surface water is being impacted by climate change, in particular
by changes in the precipitation regime, as well as by anthropic effects. Gold mining activities, deforestation, liquid, and
solid waste pollution are also affecting water quality and increasing water treatment costs in Bamako and other cities
using the surface water source.18
16.      Increasing water demands engendered by population growth, rapid urbanization, and food production,
compounded by climate change, will further drive conflict for water allocations and access to water services. Already,
40 percent of Mali’s population lives in urban areas, while the annual urbanization rate of 4.8 percent is almost twice its
population growth,19.20 Based on current trends, Bamako would surpass five million inhabitants by 2030,21 and urban


10 Annual report on water-mining resources – Ministry of Energy, Water and Mining, January 2006
11
   FAO - Aquastat Survey 2005
12
   GTPA, October 2021
13 https://reliefweb.int/report/mali/mali-alarming-food-crisis-leaves-12-million-hungry
14 Temporal and spatial variability
15 FAO Aquastat. 2018. https://www.fao.org/aquastat/statistics/query/index.html;jsessionid=E357A9D3F72DC9F3EDAA5F11C57E6CBD
16
   https://reliefweb.int/report/mali/mali-alarming-food-crisis-leaves-12-million-hungry
17 Alou DIAKITE, Erwann FILLOL, Action Contre la Faim, Mali, Biomass production in 2021, analyzes and perspectives for 2022, September 2021
18 Source: urban water utility – Société Malienne de Gestion de l’Eau Potable (SOMAGEP)
19 The World Bank, 2021. Strengthening the Link between Economic Growth and Poverty Reduction in Mali: A Poverty Assessment, 2021. International Bank for

Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank, Washington, DC.
20 From regions with highest agricultural and industrial activity like Sikasso, Koulikoro, district of Bamako, and Segou.
21 DNH, 2018. Rapport Diagnostique du Secteur de l’Eau : Volume 1. Politique Nationale de l’Eau. Ministère de l’Energie et de l’Eau, République du Mali.




                                                                                                                                                            Page 5
         The World Bank
         Mali Water Security Project(P181538)


population is projected to reach 14 million in 2030.22 Considering that less than 60 percent of the urban population have
access to piped water accessible on premises,23 rapid urbanization will further increase needed coverage and result in
soaring water demands. Climate, population growth and insecurity combine to exacerbate food insecurity, which will likely
only be improved through more resilient agricultural services and investments in irrigation. Decreasing resource
availability, increasing demand, and the seasonality of demands and river flows, with peak demands often not coinciding
with peak flows, make water allocation between different sectors and uses very complex and may intensify conflicts
around water and natural resources at various levels. At the basins scale, increased tension between growing demand for
urban water, expanding irrigation, livelihoods, and ecosystems in the NID, may spark a need for national dialogue. Water
uses must be prioritized based on strategic developmental objectives and subsequent allocation informed by sound
modelling and scenario analysis. At the local level, water risks, although not root causes of conflict, may exacerbate
preexisting socio-economic and political factors of disputed and unequal access to resources, grievance, and deterioration
of the social fabric that may eventually lead to conflict.24 For instance, insecurity, expansion of agriculture, changing
environmental conditions, and the lack of water infrastructures, prompt pastoralists to move to areas where there is
increasing pressure on natural resources. In the floodplain, disputes over access to water and wetland pastures for herders
caused extremely violent confrontations between Dogon and Fulani communities in 1993, escalating to a massacre in
2019.
17.      Water resources management is the responsibility of the National Directorate of Hydraulics (DNH). The National
Integrated Water Resources Management Program (PNGIRE 2019-2030, updated in early 2019) establishes priorities for
water resources management. The first phase of PNGIRE was supported by the Netherlands Cooperation and was focused
on the upper Niger Basin that covers Guinea and Mali. The PNGIRE does not yet harmonize decision-making with the
National Hydraulic Development Program (PNAH), which focuses on hydraulic investments to be developed over the same
period. Several tools defined in the PNGIRE and the PNAH could significantly improve the management of the resource
once implemented, such as decentralized management structures and the development of master plans for water
development and management (schéma directeur d’aménagement et de gestion de l’eau, SDAGE). The elaboration of
such a document, through an integrated, participatory process, would be an important first step in quantifying current
uses, and future demands, while forming a basis for future decision-making to harmonize investments and water
allocation around multiple and competing needs, with proper consideration regarding the uncertainty of the sustainably
available water resource. Given the fragile security situation, a broad-based community consultation would generate
significant benefits by democratizing that process and contributing to improved national dialogue.
18.     Weak knowledge and monitoring of Mali’s water resources prevent sustainable and sound decision-making
over water investments. Improved Knowledge of the state of the country’s water resources constitute the basis for both
granting new water allocations as well as identifying measures to preserve the resource. To date, Mali’s monitoring and
analysis of both groundwater and surface water resources is lacking. Data on river water levels and flows and water
withdrawals by different users is either inaccurate or missing except for the urban water utility for which a good
mechanism of data transmission to DNH still needs to be established. This impedes a clear picture for sound water
management to support further allocations.


Water supply
19.     Due to years of underinvestment compounded by high population growth and poor service provider
performance, water supply services do not deliver expected outcomes for Mali’s population. . Demographic growth and
insecurity make it difficult to develop basic services such as water and electricity. Access to drinking water supply services

22 UNDESA, Population Division (2018). World Urbanization Prospects: The 2018 Revision, Online Edition.
23 Progress on household drinking water, sanitation and hygiene 2000-2020: Five years into the SDGs. Geneva: World Health Organization (WHO) and the United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), 2021.
24 WGP, 2021. Water in the Shadow of Conflict: Water, forced displacement and conflict in the Middle East and North Africa. Water Global Practice, The World Bank.




                                                                                                                                                              Page 6
                The World Bank
                Mali Water Security Project(P181538)


    is currently 83% in Mali and continues to increase (94% in urban areas and 74% in rural areas) - (JMP-2022), but the quality
    of services remains poor with only 62 percent of services qualifying as improved. Water supply is the responsibility of the
    Ministry of Energy and Water, which delegates urban asset management to SOMAPEP-SA (Societé Malienne de Patrimoine
    de l'Eau Potable) and urban service management to SOMAGEP-SA (Societé Malienne de Gestion de l’Eau Potable), while
    rural water remains the responsibility of National Directorate of Hydraulics (DNH) and the municipalities. The urban water
    perimeter covered 18 centers including the city of Bamako but since 2017, 72 growing rural centers were transferred to
    the urban water perimeter without the resources to upgrade existing systems. With 65 percent water coverage,25 Bamako
    already experiences water shortages in several neighborhoods. Shortages due to low pressure and/or lack of water
    network are sometimes so acute that the outbreak of related tensions is common in some parts of the capital, particularly
    in the oldest and poorest left bank neighborhoods. The influx of internally displaced people puts additional pressure on
    already poor water and sanitation services. Mali has one of the lowest water tariffs in West Africa, unchanged since 2004
    and too low to cover sector operating expenses. Further, the extension of the urban sector perimeter in 2018 to include
    72 additional secondary centers (to the historic 18), where coverage is low (31 percent, compared to 64 percent in the 18
    historic centers26), has impacted the ability to meet the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and to charge adequate
    tariffs for services,27 and contributed to worsen the financial situation of the sector. Although SOMAGEP-SA’s service
    delivery performance is generally satisfactory, it is heavily underfinanced, with secondary towns showing the largest
    deficit, posing concerns about its ability to sustain and improve services.28 SOMAPEP’s poor financial and debt situation29
    is also a major constraint to improving urban service coverage and performance.
    20.      Started in 2013, the Kabala project was designed to increase water production and expand service in unserved
    neighborhoods of Bamako, but implementation delays have hampered results. The project (Phase 1 started in 2013,
    Phase 2 ongoing) produces an additional 288,000 m3 of water per day, raising SAOMAGEP’s daily production capacity to
    484,500 m3/day. However, delays in the roll out of the distribution network and the water transfer (pipeline) between the
    two riversides prevent Kabala to work at full capacity and reach the targeted 966,000 inhabitants. The Kabala project is
    part of Bamako’s Water Supply Master Plan and all planned investments fit within Bamako’s current allocation of the Niger
    river for potable uses. Implementation challenges to date have included the poor institutional and financial capacity of
    SOMAPEP-SA and SOMAGEP-SA. SOMAPEP-SA is currently seeking financing for completion of phase 2 activities for which
    some donors have cancelled or paused their engagement. The financing is also in part intended to cover phase 3 needs of
    the project. Learning from phases 1 and 2, further support to Kabala should be tied to improvements in SOMAPEP-SA and
    SOMAGEP-SA’s operational and financial performance.30 Moreover, as many donors are supporting the sector,
    harmonized planning and close coordination would ensure that water production and distribution infrastructure are done
    in a way to avoid delay in access to water by the consumer.
21. Non-revenue water (NRW) and energy costs constitute the most limiting constraints for the financial sustainability of
    the urban water sector. The current network efficiency is less than 62%, which is considered very poor as a good ratio
    must span between 80 to 85%. Tariff adjustment is the easy and rapid way to improve the financial sustainability of the
    water utility according to the financial model in use to monitor the sector viability. But, as highlighted in the previous
    sections, water tariffs stayed unchanged since 2004. In 2020 a Bank-financed study of the sector's financial viability
    recommended to: (i) in the short term, alleviate debts in order to stabilize the sector, and (ii) in the medium and long
    term, apply more structural policy measures such as socially acceptable tariff adjustments and balancing subsidies (for
    payment of the reform costs promised to SOMAPEP when the assets of the former company, known as “Eau et Energie

    25 Elaboration d’un Plan pour la Viabilité Financière du Secteur de l’Eau Potable, 2020. SOMAPEP-SA/Banque Mondiale.
    26
         Elaboration d’un Plan pour la Viabilité Financière du Secteur de l’Eau Potable, 2020. SOMAPEP-SA/Banque Mondiale.
    27 Under the ongoing Mali Urban Water Supply Project (P122826), the Bank has financed feasibility studies for the improvement of water supply in 20 secondary

    towns served by SOMAPEP-SA and SOMAGEP-SA.
    28 Elaboration d’un Plan pour la Viabilité Financière du Secteur de l’Eau Potable, 2020. SOMAPEP-SA/Banque Mondiale.
    29 With World Bank financing, the government conducted a study to revise the tariff structure with the objective of achieving financial equilibrium in the sector by

    2024. Administrative procedures are underway to implement the recommendations of this study.
    30 The World Bank's "Utility of the Future" tool could be applied to develop an overall performance improvement plan.




                                                                                                                                                                       Page 7
         The World Bank
         Mali Water Security Project(P181538)


du Mali”, were shared)). The political, social and security situation that has plagued the country since 2012 has prevented
the government from applying these recommendations to adjust tariffs and thus improve the sector's financial situation.
According to the SOMAGEP 2019 annual report, the main reasons explaining the increase in NRW between 2018 and 2019
were (i) the commissioning of the new Bamako (Kabala) Water Treatment Plant, which exerts higher pressure on the
older network, causing numerous water leaks, and (ii) the water production that was not sold in towns experiencing
security issue (i.e., Kidal) and (iii) the poor quality of networks in the 72 secondary centers added to the urban perimeter.
Reducing NRW through a program of network rehabilitation, sectorization, and the installation of production and
distribution meters combined with innovative solutions such as use of solar energy that improve energy efficiency will
help reduce the utility operating cost, increase its revenue and thereby improving their financial viability.


 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
 Support improved access to water services in selected cities of Mali and strengthen the management of their water
 sources.


  Key Results (From PCN)
 22.    The achievement of the PDO will be measured through the following Results Indicators:
          •      Percentage of people with access to safely managed water services in the project area.
          •      Improved cost recovery by SOMAGEP-SA including lowered non-revenue water (NRW) (percentage).
          •      Number of hectares of terrestrial area of surface and groundwater sources under enhanced
                 conservation and management.


 D. Concept Description
23.      Given the current challenges, an integrated and basin-wide approach to water security will contribute to
sustaining economic development and reducing fragility and conflict in Mali. To this end, the project seeks to support a
spatially targeted set of keystone water investments in the country, to be coordinated through an integrated water
resources management perspective and promoted in synergy with other sectors. These interventions would span the
areas with nature-based solutions (NBS),31 improved access to at least basic drinking water services, and water resource
management at the sub-basin scale.
24.     Potential project components and activities for the project. The proposed project is structured around four
components, based on a preliminary identification of investments. Most of these investments benefit from well advanced
detailed studies and there is no need for a project preparation advance (PPA). The project components are as follow: (i)
Water Supply Investment, (ii) Securing corresponding water sources, (iii) Project management and Capacity
reinforcement, and (iv) Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC).



  @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                                                                                                               Triggered?

31 As defined by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) in 2016, Nature-based Solutions (NbS) can help tackle societal challenges such as water

security and disaster risk whilst generating benefits for people and nature, improving climate resilience and sequestering carbon, leading to climate change
mitigation.


                                                                                                                                                                Page 8
     The World Bank
     Mali Water Security Project(P181538)


                                                           Last approved                           Current
Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                     No
Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                               No



Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts



Note to Task Team: This summary section is downloaded from the PCN data sheet and is editable. It should match
the text provided by E&S specialist. If it is revised after the initial download the task team must manually update the
summary in this section. Delete this note when finalizing the document.




Note: To view the Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts, refer to the Concept Stage ESRS Document. Delete
this note when finalizing the document.


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
CONTACT POINT

World Bank
 Taibou Adamou Maiga
 Senior Water Specialist

 Karamoko Sanogo
 Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 Ministry of Energy and Water
 Djouro Bocoum
 Secretary General
 bdjoouro@yahoo.fr

Implementing Agencies




                                                                                                                      Page 9
     The World Bank
     Mali Water Security Project(P181538)


 Societe Malienne de Gestion de l'Eau Potable (SOMAGEP)
 Ibrahima Guindo
 Director Water Distribution
 Ibrahima.GUINDO@somagep.ml
 Dramane Coulibaly
 Chairman
 drcoulibaly@somagep.ml

 Societe Malienne de Patrimoine de l'eau Potable (SOMAPEP)
 Souleimana Maiga
 Chairman
 smaiga@somapep.ml
 Aly Kone
 Project Director
 kanene84@hotmail.fr

 Direction National de l'Hydraulique (DNH)
 Boubacar Sidibe
 Chef de Division
 dsgre.dnh@gmail.com
 Sekou Diarra
 Director
 fadjigui2006@yahoo.fr

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                    Taibou Adamou Maiga, Karamoko Sanogo

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:               Fatouma Toure Ibrahima Wane       23-May-2024

Country Director:                       Robert Bou Jaoude                 27-Jun-2024



                                                                                        Page 10
     The World Bank
     Mali Water Security Project(P181538)




Note to Task Team: This is the end of document. No further content should be added. Delete this note when
finalizing the document.




                                                                                                            Page 11
