Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Mali Water Security Project (P181538)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                               Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                       (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 08/26/2024 | Report No: ESRSC04447




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Sep 11, 2024                                                                         Page 1 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Mali Water Security Project (P181538)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                   Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P181538                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)        Mali Water Security          2025
                                                                                         Project

                     Operation Name            Mali Water Security Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries            Region                        Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Mali                      Mali                                      WESTERN AND CENTRAL          Water
                                                                                         AFRICA

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                  Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     Ministry of Energy        Direction National de l'Hydraulique       21-Oct-2024                  05-Dec-2024
                     and Water                 (DNH), Societe Malienne de Gestion de
                                               l'Eau Potable (SOMAGEP), Societe
                                               Malienne de Patrimoine de l'eau



Public Disclosure
                                               Potable (SOMAPEP)

                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date

                     03-Jun-2024               100,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     Increase access to improved drinking water supply and enhance conservation of water sources in selected cities.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The PASEMa project will leverage already conducted technical studies supported by French Development Agency (AFD)
                     in Bamako and secondary centers of Mopti, Sevare and San. Given the current challenges, an integrated and basin-wide
                     approach to water security will contribute to sustaining economic development and reducing fragility and conflict in
                     Mali. To this end, the project seeks to support a spatially targeted set of keystone climate resilient water investments in

                    Sep 11, 2024                                                                                                       Page 2 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Mali Water Security Project (P181538)



                     the country, to be coordinated through an integrated water resources management perspective and promoted in
                     synergy with other sectors. These interventions would span the areas with nature-based solutions (NBS), improved
                     access to at least basic drinking water services, and water resource management at the sub-basin scale. The project
                     intends to improve access to drinking water supply in Bamako and some secondary centers as well as to enhance water
                     source conservation around the water abstraction locations which will improve the drought and flood resilience of the
                     communities by giving increased access to safely managed water supply. The project will implement activities for water
                     production, water transmission mains, water storage and distribution network, as well as rehabilitation works to
                     improve the distribution network efficiency and metering with the objective to reduce non-revenue water (NRW), thus
                     reducing emissions from energy use. The project will support the implementation of activities aimed at supporting the
                     financial sustainability of the sector and a strong analytical underpinning including inter-alia continuous dialogue,
                     consultation, and a short- medium- and long-term roadmap to define priority reforms and investments. The project
                     activities will also focus on activities that will improve the monitoring and data sharing system for water quality of
                     quantity withdrawal between DNH, SOMAGEP and SOMAPEP, improving early warning detection for climate shocks. The
                     project activities also include nature-based solutions (NBS) to improve infiltration that will feed underground water,
                     tree planting, riverbanks consolidation to reduce erosion, improve row water quality, sequester carbon and optimize
                     water treatment cost by the utility. The proposed project is structured around four components, based on an
                     identification of investments. Most of these investments benefit from well advanced detailed studies. The project
                     components are as follow: (i) Water Supply in Bamako and selected secondary centers, (ii) Enhancing conservation of
                     the water sources, (iii) Project management and Capacity Building, and (iv) Contingency Emergency Response
                     Component (CERC).




Public Disclosure
                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The project will be implemented in urban and peri-urban areas in the south and central regions of the country. Mali
                     faces a range of internal and external shocks that hamper its progress toward inclusive and sustainable development.
                     Climate change, social conflicts, security risks, and COVID-19 pandemics worsened the state's vulnerability and fragility.
                     The project area, as everywhere else in the country, remains highly vulnerable to climate change impacts, such as
                     increasing severity and incidence of floods and droughts. Habitats in the project area, even the classified forests, have
                     been significantly modified by uncontrolled urbanization and the cutting of firewood. Because land degradation
                     adversely affects water quality, project’s activities include landscape restoration such as reforestation.

                     In Mali, the 2 companies: Malian Society of Water Patrimonia (SOMAPEP-SA) and Malian Society of Management of
                     Potable Water (SOMAGEP) in charge of supplying drinking water have in general financial difficulties to reach their
                     objectives.
                     In areas not covered by the 2 companies, the supply of drinking water is done through simplified water supply system
                     (AES), the improved village water supply system (SHVA), and human-powered pumps (PMH). In addition, there are large
                     diameter wells and wells as sources of supply.
                     In families, women, while remaining in her traditional role, is at the forefront in providing water to the family, especially
                     in rural areas. This activity for women in remote areas is not without risks, particularly security risks and sexual violence.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Project will be implemented by the Ministry of Mines Energy and Water which will establish a central project
                     management unit to coordinate the intervention of several implementing agencies including from other Ministries.

                    Sep 11, 2024                                                                                                         Page 3 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Mali Water Security Project (P181538)



                     Component 1 will be implemented by the Malian Society of Water Patrimonia (SOMAPEP-SA) that has experience
                     implementing World Bank financed project: AF Urban water supply project (P157438)-Parent project: Urban water
                     supply project (P122826). Both projects where on Ops and performed well. However, the management of non-revenue
                     water (NRW) activities of component 1 will be implementated by the Malian Society of Management of Potable Water
                     (SOMAGEP) for operational reason. Component 2 will be implemented by the National Directorate of Hydraulics (DNH)
                     – Ministry of Mines Energy and Water – and they do not have any experience implementing World Bank-financed
                     operations. The Borrower's institutional capacity to implement the project in accordance with ESF requirements will be
                     assessed by the Bank's task team during preparation. This assessment will be carried out through amongst others, by a
                     live questionary related to team members experience in conception and implementation of ESF instruments in the last
                     six months and years. Any capacity building will be outlined in an Institutional Capacity Strengthening Plan that will be
                     financed under Component 4.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                         Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                  Substantial
                     The project will not support activities related to dams or intakes that would rely on existing dams. The expected
                     environmental risks and impacts are mainly linked to the activities to be undertaken under component 1: Water
                     Supply investment. Through sub-components 1.1 and 1.2, this component will support the construction and
                     supervision of water supply systems (boreholes, pumping stations, overhead water tanks), as well as water transport



Public Disclosure
                     and distribution infrastructure (networks, storage, meters) in the centers of Sevare/Mopti, San and mainly in the
                     district of Bamako. Risks and potential impacts during the construction phase may include: (i) increased pollution due
                     to the generation of hazardous and non-hazardous waste (oil, paints, asbestos), dust, noise, vibration, and accidental
                     spills of fuel and lubricants; (ii) traffic congestion, (iii) ecosystems disturbance, and (iv) occupational and community
                     health and safety issues. During the operational phase, the risks and impacts are expected to be minor. The above-
                     mentioned risks and impacts are readily identifiable and can be avoided, minimized, or mitigated by appropriate
                     assessment and readily available mitigation measures, by national regulations, the World Bank's Environment, Health
                     and Safety Guidelines (EHSG), and Good International Industry Practices (GIIP). However, given the type and
                     geographical extent of the activities (9 km from Djikoroni Para to Missira and 6 km from Missira to Kati-Sud), the
                     associated EHS risks, Borrower's limited experience and institutional capacity to implement the project under the ESF
                     requirements, and the limited capacity of the local authorities to effectively manage the operational risks of the
                     infrastructure being implemented, the environmental risk is considered as Substantial at the concept stage.
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating                                                                                         Substantial
                     The social sisk rating is Substantial, given the nature of the activities and their implementation in densely populated
                     urban areas of Bamako, and secondary cities, which also host displaced populations (Mopti/Sévaré, San). The planned
                     water supply system in Bamako – Djcoroni Para – Missira – Kati sud will consist, among others, of the construction of
                     water transport infrastructure crossing several districts, water distribution , water storage and associated
                     infrastructure within crowded urban areas, which is likely to require some land acquisition leading to physical and/or
                     economic displacement. According to site visits undertaken, the project is expected to generate a wide range of
                     significant adverse impacts on human populations such as community health and safety, working conditions, SEA/SH.



                    Sep 11, 2024                                                                                                       Page 4 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Mali Water Security Project (P181538)



                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                Relevant

                      The E&S risks and impacts are mainly associated with small scale civil engineering works and include occupational
                      health and safety, pollution, traffic, ecosystem disruption, and community health and safety during the construction,
                      operation and maintenance phases. The social risks include the potential impact on land tenure and use rights and on
                      the economic activities of the local population. The impacts of civil works will be addressed by the Contractors’ C-
                      ESMPs. Public health risks during maintenance and service operations will be addressed as part of design measures
                      and capacity building for WSS operators and community representatives. Since the project sites are known, the
                      corresponding instruments ESIAS/ESMP will be prepared and implemented before starting works. Regarding risks
                      related to the CERC, the CERC Manual will include a description of the E&S assessment and management
                      arrangements for the implementation of the CERC component, in accordance with the ESSs.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                     Relevant

                      The project will have impacts on various stakeholders. To ensure their engagement throughout the project cycle, the
                      Borrower will prepare and disclose an inclusive Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) consistent with the requirements
                      of ESS10 and proportional to the nature and scale of the project and associated risks and impacts. While work will be
                      done during preparation to identify the key stakeholders, some of the possible key stakeholders include local water
                      committees , various beneficiaries with a special focus on women, and directly impacted project-affected persons



Public Disclosure
                      (PAPs). The SEP will identify vulnerable groups, outline the characteristics and interests of those stakeholder groups
                      and timing and methods of engagement throughout the project lifecycle. The SEP, to be prepared by appraisal, will
                      include a SEA/SH-sensitive grievance management system to be put in place before the start of project civil works.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                           Relevant

                      The PIU and implementation agencies will hire direct workers, contract workers and primary supply workers .
                      Following a careful assessment of the labor requirements and types of employees engaged in the project, the
                      Borrower will prepare, by appraisal, labor management procedures (LMP) to address key issues, such as working
                      conditions and the management of worker relationships, protecting the workforce, non-discrimination, minimum age
                      of work, measures to prevent forced labor, occupational health and safety requirements, as well as relevant guidance
                      for the employment of youth and women through the project's job placement activities. The LMP will include an
                      effective labor-specific workers’ grievance mechanism that is SEA/SH sensitive, based on national laws and
                      regulations and the provisions of ESS2 and management of labor issues. Finally, the LMP will include a code of
                      conduct highlighting the prohibition of SEA/SH and sanctions in case of misconduct.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                            Relevant

                      The standard is relevant in so far as the construction, operation and maintenance of water distribution infrastructures
                      are likely to generate dust and noise emissions, hazardous (including asbestos) and non-hazardous waste, wastewater
                      and sludge, and vibrations that may cause significant harm to local populations. However, measures to improve the
                      efficiency of water use, reduce water losses by improving the network and management, and minimize greenhouse


                    Sep 11, 2024                                                                                                     Page 5 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Mali Water Security Project (P181538)



                      gas emissions by installing energy-efficient pumping equipment will be largely taken into account in the ESIA This ESIA
                      will provide guidance and guidelines for the prevention of pollution and the efficient use of resources for air, water,
                      and soil pollution, the treatment and disposal of waste (including asbestos), and the transportation of materials.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                               Relevant

                      Project activities may generate significant health and safety concerns, particularly during the construction phase, as
                      some of the project intervention sites are located in densely populated and very active urban and rural areas. . Each
                      site-specific environmental and social management plan (ESMP) for all the planned works will require contractors to
                      secure the work site by installing fences and engaging security guards to safeguard property and protect local
                      communities from any risks associated with construction. The Borrower will be required to assess the risks posed by
                      such security arrangements and incorporate the relevant measures outlined in the good practice note (GPN) on the
                      use of security personnel. A preliminary security assessment related to project implementation zone will be prepared
                      during the project preparation phase, and according to the result, a security management plan will be prepared at the
                      beginning of the project.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                   Relevant

                      ESS5 is relevant because project activities may require some land aquisition for water supply infrastructure. The
                      installation of the water pipes along the right-of-way may affect homes, assets and economic activities of the local
                      populations. Works in urban areas may lead to economic activity disruption on a temporary and permanent basis. All
                      the project sites are known and a RAP will be for each of the 3 sites for the planned water supply system in Missira –




Public Disclosure
                      Kati sud, San, Mopti/Sevaré . For the Bamako – Djcoroni Para water system, a RAP will be prepared after appraisal
                      and before starting works.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                    Relevant
                      Resources

                      The standard is relevant. The project involves the construction of water storage and transport infrastructure
                      (boreholes, Ground water tanks, elevated water towers, etc.) and the laying of new water pipes in urban areas
                      (Bamako, Sevare/Mopti, and San). The connection zone between Bamako (missira) and Kati will cross the Koulouba
                      classified forests, a modified habitat, which could be affected by the work planned as part of the installation of the
                      distribution pipes. Aside from these activities, which may affect certain modified habitats, land restoration activities
                      are expected to have positive effects on ecosystems. The ESIA/ESMP will include guidance to assess and address
                      these risks to ensure that the project has no significant impact on protected areas.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                         Relevant

                      Since the project will be financing significant civil works for the construction of water pipeline, water supply system,
                      earth movement and disturbance are to be expected. These types of activities pose the possibility of encountering
                      cultural heritage. The risks, and likely impacts on cultural heritage will be addressed in the ESIAs which will identify
                      known heritage in the areas of project intervention. The Borrower will consult with local communities and other


                    Sep 11, 2024                                                                                                        Page 6 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Mali Water Security Project (P181538)



                      stakeholders as part of the ESIA process to identify any possible cultural heritage that could be affected by the
                      project. The procedures for Chance Finds will be included in the bidding documents, to be further developed in the
                      site-specific ESMPs. Though the possibility is not considered significant, the Borrower will avoid having any impact on
                      known cultural heritage sites and, where such avoidance is not possible, will identify and implement measures to
                      address the impacts in accordance with the mitigation hierarchy.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                 Not Currently Relevant



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                        Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                  No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                             No
                       NA


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                No
                       NA



Public Disclosure
                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     1.Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP): before appraisal,
                     2. Labor Management Procedures (LMP): date to TBC,
                     3. Security risk assessment – prior to appraisal security management plan: date to TBC
                     4. ESIA/RAP for the works on the transfer pipeline from Missira to Kati Sud: date to TBC,
                     5. ESIA/RAP for the works to strengthen the drinking water supply in the city of San: by appraisal
                     6. ESIA/RAP for the works to strengthen the drinking water supply in the city of Mopti/Sévaré: by appraisal
                     7. ESIA/RAP for the works on the water transfer pipeline from Djicoroni Para to Missira: after appraisal and before
                     starting project works.
                     8. CERC Manual including a description of the E&S assessment for the CERC component, in accordance with the ESSs
                     (same timeframe as the project manuals, will be specified in the A-ESRS)


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank




                    Sep 11, 2024                                                                                                      Page 7 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Mali Water Security Project (P181538)



                      Task Team Leader:       Taibou Adamou Maiga               Title:        Senior Water Specialist

                      Email:                  tmaiga@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Karamoko Sanogo                   Job Title:    Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

                      Email:                  ksanogo@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                              Taibou Adamou Maiga, Karamoko Sanogo

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                     Mohamed Youba Sokona




Public Disclosure
                     ADM Social Specialist:                            Mahamadou Ahmadou Maiga




                    Sep 11, 2024                                                                                             Page 8 of 8
