Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                                     $
                                                                                                                       Report No: RES01360



                                                                      RESTRUCTURING PAPER
                                                                                 ON A




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                              PROPOSED PROJECT RESTRUCTURING
                                                                                     OF


                               THE SUSTAINABLE FINANCING FOR ROGUN HYDROPOWER PROJECT AS PHASE 1 OF THE SUSTAINABLE
                                                    FINANCING FOR ROGUN HYDROPOWER PROGRAM
                                                                APPROVED ON DECEMBER 17,2024

                                                                                     TO




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                   THE REPUBLIC OF TAJIKISTAN




                                 Energy and Extractives Global Practice
                                 Europe and Central Asia Region




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                         Regional Vice President:        Antonella Bassani
                                                       Regional Practice Director:       Charles Joseph Cormier
                                                                Division Director:       Najy Benhassine
                                                               Practice Manager:         Stephanie Gil
                                                             Task Team Leaders:          Chris Trimble, Manuel Berlengiero, Stephan
                                                                                         Claude Frederic Garnier




                                                                 Official Use Only                                                           i
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

ADB      Asian Development Bank
ADFD     Abu Dhabi Fund for Development
AIIB     Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank
BSP      Benefit Sharing Program
BT       Barqi Tojik Open Joint Stock Company
CDP      Cassa Depositi e Prestiti S.p.A.
C-EPP    Construction stage Emergency Preparedness Plans
COE      Conditions of Effectiveness
DFZ      Directorate of the Flooding Zone
DSPOE    Dam Safety Panel of Experts
EW       Early Works
EIB      European Investment Bank
E&S      Environmental & Social
ER       Employers Representative
ESCP     Environmental and Social Commitment Plan
ESF      Environmental and Social Framework
ESIA     Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
EPP      Emergency Preparedness Plans
ESPOE    Environmental and Social Panel of Experts
FM       Financial Management
GoT      Government of Tajikistan
HPP      Hydropower Plant
IsDB     Islamic Development Bank
LTA      Lenders Technical Advisor
MEWR     Ministry of Energy and Water Resources
MFD      Maximizing Finance for Development
MPA      Multiphase Programmatic Approach
OJSC     Open Joint Stock Company
OHS      Occupational Health and Safety
OIP      Overall Implementation Plan
PCE      Private Capital Enabling
PMG      Project Management Group
PP       Plunge Pool
PPA      Power Purchase Agreement
SIB      Shabakahoi Intiqoli Barq Joint Stock Company
STB      Shabakahoi Taqsimoti Barq Joint Stock Company
TALCO    Tajikistan Aluminium Company




                                            Official Use Only   ii
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@restrhybridbasicdata#doctemplate

BASIC DATA

Product Information

Operation ID                                                   Operation Name
P181029                                                         Sustainable Financing for Rogun Hydropower Project

Product/Financing Instrument                                    Geographical Identifier

Investment Project Financing (IPF)                              Tajikistan

Approval Date                                                   Current Closing Date

17-Dec-2024                                                    30-Jun-2029

Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)
High




Organizations
Borrower                                                       Responsible Agency
                                                               Directorate of the FLooding Zone, Rogun HPP Open Joint Stock
Republic of Tajikistan                                         Company, Rogun Project Management Group for the Power
                                                               Plant Construction under the President of the Republic
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@restrhybridoperationstatus#doctemplate
OPERATION STATUS

Project Development Objective (DO)

Original Development Objective
The objective of the Project is to increase supply of clean, affordable and climate resilient hydroelectricity for
consumers in the territory of the Recipient and the Central Asia region by 2 TWh.

Disbursement Summary (in USD million)

     Source of Funds           Net Commitment                   Disbursed              Undisbursed           % Disbursed

IBRD                                                --                        --                     --                       0



                                           Official Use Only                                                                  iii
IDA                                            349.47                  0.00                  349.47                  0.00

Grants                                             --                     --                      --                    0

Policy Waivers
Does this restructuring trigger the need for any policy
waiver(s)?                                                                                                             No
@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@restrhybridmpa#doctemplate
MULTIPHASE PROGRAMMATIC APPROACH (MPA)


Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) Program Development Objective
Original MPA Program Development Objective (Approved as part of Approval on 17-Dec-2024)
To increase supply of clean, affordable and climate resilient hydroelectricity for consumers in Tajikistan and the Central
Asia region.

Current MPA Program Development Objective (Approved as part of Approval on 17-Dec-2024)
To increase supply of clean, affordable and climate resilient hydroelectricity for consumers in Tajikistan and the Central
Asia region.

Proposed MPA Program Development Objective


Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) Status (Public Disclosure)

Status and Key Decisions (Public Disclosure)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@restrhybridmpa#doctemplate




                                          Official Use Only                                                             iv
      The World Bank
      Sustainable Financing for Rogun Hydropower Project (P181029)




                                                               TABLE OF CONTENTS


I. PROJECT STATUS AND RATIONALE FOR RESTRUCTURING ........................................................................................1
II. DESCRIPTION OF PROPOSED CHANGES ....................................................................................................................3
III. PROPOSED CHANGES................................................................................................................................................6
IV. DETAILED CHANGE(S) ...............................................................................................................................................6




                                                      Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Sustainable Financing for Rogun Hydropower Project (P181029)



I. PROJECT STATUS AND RATIONALE FOR RESTRUCTURING

I. Project Status and Rationale for Restructuring

Project Status

1.       The financing for the Sustainable Financing for Rogun Hydropower Project (P181029) was approved on December
17, 2024, with an IDA grant of US$350 million as the first phase of a US$650 million Multi-Phase Programmatic Approach
(MPA). The Program aims to increase the supply of clean, affordable, and climate-resilient hydroelectricity for Tajikistan
and the Central Asia region. Implementation is led by the Rogun Hydropower Plant (HPP) Open Joint Stock Company
(OJSC), the Rogun Project Management Group (PMG), and the Directorate of the Flooding Zone (DFZ).

2.       2. The proposed restructuring will provide much needed financing and maintain project momentum for key
activities (including resettlement), while addressing project risks and ensuring continued compliance with World Bank
environmental and social requirements and accommodating the evolving technical and institutional context of the Rogun
HPP Project.

3.      At the request of Government, the Bank agreed to finance this project already under construction, as Tajikistan
had been unable to secure the full financing for the project which was increasingly resulting in broader macroeconomic
impacts (given the size of the Rogun Hydropower Project relative to the economy). The financing package consists of a
mix of domestic resources, project revenues from the sale of electricity and $2.9 billion in concessional funds and grant
resources consistent with the parameters of the debt sustainability analysis developed jointly between the Bank and the
IMF.

4.       As of December 15, 2025, construction of the Rogun HPP continues to advance across multiple major contract
lots, with notable progress achieved on key civil works and electromechanical components. The Main Dam (Lot 2) has
reached approximately 46 percent completion, marking steady advancement on the 335 meters high dam and related
foundation works. The Left Bank Early Works (Lot 4 Early Works) have achieved around 61 percent progress, including
significant excavation and slope stabilization activities. Meanwhile, Lot 1 (electro-mechanical equipment) has reached 9.5
percent completion, focusing on the supply and installation of the six generating units and associated auxiliaries. The Right
Bank Structures (Lot 3) are about 25 percent complete. Procurement for Lot 4 (Left Bank Structures) is ongoing (bids under
evaluation). The prequalification process for the procurement process for activities under Lot 3A has been launched, and
the Request for Bids for Lot 1A has been issued. Lot 1B covering additional electro-mechanical structures is planned for
future tendering in 2029. With this progress, the reservoir level was raised to 1100 meters above sea level (masl) in
September 2025, enabling for more energy for the winter season. Overall, progress reflects continued momentum, with
key civil works and electromechanical packages advancing in line with project phasing, while upcoming procurements will
complete the scope required for commissioning all generating units.

5.      Since approval, other international finance institutions (IFIs) have also proceeded with approval of their own
financing for the Rogun HPP1. To this date, the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) has also approved US$270
million on December 19, 2024 and the Italian Cassa Depositi e Prestiti (CDP) approved EUR 150 million on October 22,


 1 The ten development partners include World Bank, European Investment Bank, Asian Development Bank (ADB), Asian
 Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB), Islamic Development Bank (IsDB), Kuwait Fund, Saudi Fund for Development, OPEC Fund,
 Abu Dhabi Fund, and other financial institutions, including the Italian CDP (“Cassa Depositi e Prestiti”).

                                            Official Use Only                                                         Page 1
         The World Bank
         Sustainable Financing for Rogun Hydropower Project (P181029)


2025. This was in addition to the Islamic Development Bank, the OPEC Fund for International Development, the Kuwait
Fund and the Saudi Fund for Development which also approved financing in late 2023 in the amount of US$150 million,
US$100 million, US$16.7 million and US$100 million, respectively.

6.      Despite the progress, the Rogun HPP is continuing to face constraints to access financing due to the time required
to meet the Conditions of Effectiveness (COEs) for the IDA grant and the cross-effectiveness conditions with financing
from AIIB and Italian CPD.

7.      As of December 15, 2025, significant progress has been made towards meeting the COEs under the Financing
Agreement. Out of 18 COEs, 16 have been completed, reflecting strong commitment and coordination among the
Government of Tajikistan, implementing agencies, and development partners (see summary table Annex 1). The two
remaining COEs have been partially met (i) The unmet part of one COE relates to the amendment of the existing project
contracts to incorporate the World Bank’s Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) and Environmental and Social
Commitment Plan (ESCP) requirements. While most of the contracts, including the main contracts of Lot 1, Lot 3 and the
miscellaneous works (MW), have been amended as per the COE, negotiations with the Lot 2 contractor remain ongoing.
These negotiations are particularly complex, given the substantial nature of the contract (main dam works) and legacy
issues between the Government of Tajikistan (GoT) and the contractor. The Government has requested more time to
complete contract negotiations, which require an agreement with the contractor. The Government has agreed to an action
plan to address the gaps identified during an Environmental and Social (E&S) audit (mostly related to Occupational Health
and Safety (OHS)), which will ensure compliance with Bank requirements; (ii) The other COE not fully met needs an
amendment to reflect a slight change to the institutional arrangement, and the need to remove the Rogun PMG as part
of the Employer’s definition. Instead, PMG’s role is appropriately defined in the Project Implementation Agreement (PIA).

8.      The GoT has also made significant progress in meeting dated and recurring legal covenants under the Project (see
overview in Legal Covenants table below). Notably, this includes (i) increased transparency on the operational, commercial
and financial performance of the electricity sector, with the three electricity companies regularly publishing data on their
websites per agreed reporting templates; and (ii) increased transparency on sharing water flow and impoundment data
on the Vakhsh river, demonstrating Tajikistan’s commitment to respecting international water sharing agreements. The
GoT is making progress on several covenants that have partially been complied with including finalizing the recruitment
process of staff to DFZ, Rogun OJSC implementation of mitigation measures identified in the Independent Assessment of
the Diversion Tunnels (being closely supervised by the Bank), and completion of publication of Talco financial results.

9.       Regarding covenants not yet met (Schedule 2, Section IV.C.1 and Schedule 2, Section IV.C.2), both concern Talco,
which is behind on payments for past due arrears, and has not been current on its electricity bill payments (e.g. average
payment rate of 40 percent since the payment plan agreed in July 2024). The GoT has taken significant steps to strengthen
payment discipline and improve the financial sustainability of the electricity sector, partly through the decrees approved
as COEs for the Project, by (i) approving and implementing clear disconnection procedures for non-paying consumers; (ii)
mandating the distribution company to enforce these procedures after two months of sustained non-payment; (iii)
establishing a new agency reporting directly to the President, to monitor and report on collection rates and arrears; (iv)
requiring supervisory boards and economic entities to budget for and prioritize payment of electricity bills; mandating
inclusion of electricity payments by budgetary organizations in annual budget submissions; and (v) allowing MOF, as a last
resort, to compensate defaulting customers, who are then expected to pay the distribution company. The GoT has
requested additional time for this new set of measures to take effect, and thereby improve the Talco payment rate. The
Bank will continue monitoring progress on the new measures on payment discipline for Talco as part of the overall policy
sector dialogue.



                                            Official Use Only                                                       Page 2
         The World Bank
         Sustainable Financing for Rogun Hydropower Project (P181029)


10.     Regarding commitments under the ESCP, the GoT has made significant progress in completing commitments,
including through the update to the E&S instruments and retrofitting existing contracts, supported through close
supervision of the Bank and under the advice of the Environmental and Social Panel of Experts (ESPOE). The ESCP has been
revised to reflect additional commitments related to the Lot 2 retrofitting, and to clarify commitments on the preparation
of Emergency Preparedness Plans (EPPs) under the Project.


Rationale for Restructuring

11.      The main goals of the proposed restructuring are to: (i) revise some COEs, while adding a new dated covenant
given the substantial progress already made to retrofit ESF requirements (see below); (ii) adjust the project description to
reflect the latest project developments; (iii) update commitments, milestones and target dates in the ESCP; and (iv) revise
disbursement categories and add a withdrawal condition.

12.     The restructuring allows the MPA Phase 1 to move forward with effectiveness, although not allowing
disbursement for works under Categories (1), (2), and (3) (almost all works) until the Lot 2 contract has been amended.
The restructuring will also add two new expenditure Categories: (5) advance payment to the Lot 2 contractor; and (6) for
the Lenders Technical Advisor, to be co-financed with AIIB and ADB.


 II. DESCRIPTION OF PROPOSED CHANGES

Proposed Change #1: Adjustments to Condition of Effectiveness 5.01 (j) and addition of an associated Dated Covenant,
to reflect progress of ESF retrofitting of ongoing contracts.

13.     To this date, the only outstanding E&S retrofit still required under Condition of Effectiveness 5.01 (j) is for the Lot
2 contract. A WB-led rapid E&S audit in October 2025 assessed the contractors’ performance vis-à-vis World Bank ESF
requirements, which complements OHS audits performed by international consultants. Since the audit, the client has
made good progress, including (i) improved management and reporting of OHS incidents; (ii) enhanced OHS supervision
by the OHS team of the Employers Representative (ER); and (iii) gradual improvement of OHS performance by some
contractors.

14.    The client has also completed all the short-term actions identified under the rapid audit and agreed on additional
medium to long term corrective actions to improve OHS management on site. On this basis, the proposed restructuring
envisages to modify the associated COE as follows: “Each of the Existing Project Contracts, except Contract Agreement 2,
has been amended in form and substance acceptable to the Association to incorporate, inter alia, the requirements of the
Environmental and Social Standards and the ESCP”.

15.     To ensure compliance of the Lot 2 contract with E&S requirements, while providing adequate time for the
contractors to implement the remedial actions identified in the audit, the following additional dated covenant is also
proposed to be added (Schedule 2, Section I.J(7)): “No later than five (5) months after the Effective Date, the Recipient
shall cause Rogun OJSC to amend Contract Agreement 2 to incorporate, inter alia, (a) the requirements of the
Environmental and Social Standards and the ESCP; (b) the alignment of contract milestones in compliance with the Regional
Water Sharing Arrangements; (c) measures to ensure improved oversight and management of OHS; and (d) measures to
protect against child labor and forced labor in primary suppliers; all in form and substance satisfactory to the Association.“



                                             Official Use Only                                                         Page 3
         The World Bank
         Sustainable Financing for Rogun Hydropower Project (P181029)


16.     The combination of the revised COE and the newly introduced dated covenant and withdrawal condition will allow
the IDA grant to become effective, providing critical financing to the Government to implement ESF related activities and
disburse for advance payments of Lot 1 equipment, while not allowing disbursement for any other civil works until the Lot
2 contract is amended.

Proposed Change #2: Adjustments to COE 5.01 (h) to remove requirement to amend the Lot 1 Contract to define rights
and obligations of Rogun PMG.

17.     The rights and obligations of Rogun PMG are now comprehensively addressed under the PIA between the
Government and the implementing entities. Consequently, maintaining this requirement as a condition of effectiveness
is no longer necessary. The deletion simplifies the legal framework and eliminates redundancy between the Financing
Agreement and the PIA, without affecting fiduciary or E&S assurances.

18.      The revised COE will be as follows: “The Recipient has launched the procurement process for activities under Part
1.5 of the Project, in a manner acceptable to the Association.”

Proposed Change #3: Adjustments to the project description to reflect the latest project developments and to add some
dated covenants on capacity building

19.     Since the approval of the IDA grant, the situation on the ground has advanced thus requiring minor adjustments
to the project description in the legal agreements as follows:
            a. While Phase 1 project will primarily cover the installation of Units 3 and 4, the advanced payment will
                cover all four Units under the Lot 1 contract (needed for design, placement of orders etc., for all four
                Units). Therefore, the project description will be expanded to cover Units 1 and 2.
            b. Reallocation of the scope of works for the Permanent Power Intakes (PPIs) for Units 3 and 4 from Lot 4 to
                Lot 4 EW. Moving the PPI works to the Lot 4 EW joint-venture contractor will allow early commencement
                and minimize risks of delay to the commissioning of Units 3 and 4. These works will be financed from the
                state budget.
            c. Reallocation of the Scope of Works for the Plunge Pool (PP) and High-Level Outlet Structure 1 package
                (HLO-1 package) from Lot 3A to Lot 3. The timely completion of the Plunge Pool (PP) and HLO-1 is essential
                to ensure the safety of the Rogun Dam during impoundment and subsequent early operations. To prevent
                further delays, the Bank has agreed to reassign the PP and the HLO-1 package (HLO-1, surface excavation
                of HLO-2 and grouting galleries GG5R and GG6R) to Lot 3. These works will be carried out by qualified sub-
                contractors, which will assume full technical and contractual liability for the execution and performance
                of both structures.
            d. Addition of a Lenders’ Technical Advisor (LTA), to be jointly financed and coordinated with co-financiers
                including the AIIB and the Asian Development Bank (ADB). The LTA will support the monitoring of project
                implementation and reduce the burden on Rogun PMG interacting with ten IFIs, by having a single point
                of contact for several aspects of project monitoring.
                A new dated covenant will be added regarding the LTA as follows (Schedule 2, Section I.A(8):
                No later than twelve (12) months after the Effective Date, the Recipient shall cause Rogun OJSC, to engage,
                and thereafter maintain throughout the period of Project implementation, an LTA with terms of reference
                acceptable to the Association. The LTA shall be responsible for, inter alia, the following services, for the
                benefit of the Co-financiers: (a) monitoring and reporting on the construction quality of the Project
                facilities, including budget, environmental and social, and operational health and safety performance; (b)


                                            Official Use Only                                                       Page 4
         The World Bank
         Sustainable Financing for Rogun Hydropower Project (P181029)


                monitoring and reporting on the technical integrity of the Rogun HPP and its associated facilities; (c)
                examining and opining on the compliance of the Recipient and Project Implementing Entities with their
                obligations under this Agreement and the ESCP; (d) recommending corrective actions, as required.

            e. Rogun PMG and Rogun DFZ have already hired 29 new qualified staff. Further reinforcements have been
               agreed with the Government, and relevant dated covenants added to the Financing Agreement.
            f. Addition of EPP preparation and activation costs in Tajikistan and riparian countries.

Proposed Change #4: Adjustment to the disbursement categories and withdrawal conditions

20.      To ensure the project remains compliant with E&S requirements after effectiveness, the proposed restructuring
will allow disbursement only to specific activities until the Contract Agreement 2 amendment withdrawal condition and
associated dated covenant have been satisfied. This, in turn, will allow the Government to proceed with disbursing funds
for resettlement activities and advance payment for the electromechanical supply under Lot 1.

21.      For the purpose of the advance payment under Lot 1, it is proposed to revise the disbursement categories and
allocations adding a new disbursement Category (“Category 5: works under Contract Agreement 1 for manufacturing of
Generating Units 1,2,3 and 4 under Part 1.1 of the Project”), reallocating approximately US$56 million from Category 1 to
this new Category.

22.    In addition, the following withdrawal condition will be included to ensure disbursement for works until relevant
E&S Dated Covenant on Lot 2 is met: “for any works of any nature under Categories (1), (2) or (3), unless and until Contract
Agreement 2 has been amended in form and substance satisfactory to the Association to incorporate, inter alia¸ the
requirements of the Environmental and Social Standards and the ESCP.”

23.     Finally, a new disbursement category will be added for expenditure relating to the LTA: “Category (6): consulting
services under Part 2.1(c) of the Project”

Proposed Change #5: Changes to the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)

24.     The ESCP has been updated to revise timelines and add additional conditions, as follows:
            a. Requirement for a Construction-Stage Emergency Preparedness Plan (C-EPP) corresponding to the next
               impoundment elevation level of 1,140 masl.
            b. Additional commitment to ensure the preparation and implementation of full-fledged EPPs in riparian
               countries.
            c. Revision of various deadlines to reflect implementation realities and the revised project timeline. The
               technical content of the actions remains unchanged; however, the deadlines will be adjusted and re-
               agreed between the Recipient and the Association during the upcoming ESCP revision process.

(iv) Disbursement Estimates and Implementation Schedule
25.      The implementation and disbursement schedule will be updated to reflect the current implementation schedule.
The project closing date remains unchanged (June 30, 2029), but interim milestones and disbursement projections will be
adjusted to reflect the latest project schedule. See Annex 2 for details.




                                            Official Use Only                                                       Page 5
                  The World Bank
                  Sustainable Financing for Rogun Hydropower Project (P181029)




     @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@restrhybridsummarychanges#doctemplate
Summary changes




III. PROPOSED CHANGES

      Operation Information                       Proposed Changes               Operation Information         Proposed Changes

      Legal Covenants                                            Yes             Implementation Schedule             Yes
      Conditions                                                 Yes             Loan Closing Date Extension         No
      Disbursements Estimates                                    Yes             Loan Cancellations                  No
      Development Objective                                      No              Reallocations                       No
      Summary Description
                                                                 No              Financial Management                No
      (Operation Abstract)
      Legal Operational Policies                                 No              Procurement                         No
      MFD/PCE                                                    No              Institutional Arrangement           No
      Results                                                    No
      Risks                                                      No
      Implementation Modalities                                  No
      Disbursements Arrangements                                 No
      DDO                                                        No
      Additional Regional
                                                                 No
      Institutions
      Clients                                                    No
      Appraisal Summary                                          No
      Components                                                 No

     @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@restrhybriddetailedchanges-disclose#doctemplate
    IV. DETAILED CHANGE(S)


  COSTS & FINANCING

        Private Capital Facilitation

        Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                                 No

        Last approved as part of PAD Data Sheet (Approval) on 17-Dec-2024


        Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?                           No


                                                             Official Use Only                                             Page 6
          The World Bank
          Sustainable Financing for Rogun Hydropower Project (P181029)



 Last approved as part of PAD Data Sheet (Approval) on 17-Dec-2024



DISBURSEMENTS
Operation Dates & Projection Details
Reasons to change the full Disbursement date and/or the projection
Restructuring
Implementation Start Date                                                  Operation Closing Date
17-Dec-2024                                                                30-Jun-2029
Projected Date for Full Disbursement
29-Dec-2028

Expected Disbursements (in US $) (Absolute)

                                     Original Estimation at Preparation                                           Actual
Year                                                                                Revised Estimation
                                     (Approval Package – 17 Dec 2024)
FY2025                                                           40,833,338.35                         0.00                   0.00
FY2026                                                           90,000,000.00              80,000,000.00                     0.00
FY2027                                                           90,000,000.00             120,000,000.00                     0.00
FY2028                                                           90,000,000.00             100,000,000.00                     0.00
FY2029                                                           39,166,661.65              50,000,000.00                     0.00

ENVIRONMENTAL & SOCIAL

Environmental & Social Assessment

According to the E/S Specialist are there changes proposed to the operation’s design that                                       No
would impact the Bank’s E&S assessment?”

LEGAL

Legal Covenants

  Loan/Credit/TF                         Description                              Status                       Action
                          Schedule 2, Section I.A.2 Throughout the
                          period of implementation of the Project, the
                                                                                  Partially complied
 IDA-E3800                Recipient shall cause DFZ to maintain a team                                        No Change
                                                                                  with
                          acceptable to the Association with functions,
                          resources, and staff in adequate numbers


                                                      Official Use Only                                                    Page 7
     The World Bank
     Sustainable Financing for Rogun Hydropower Project (P181029)



                and with qualifications, experience, and
                terms of reference satisfactory to the
                Association.
                Schedule 2, Section I.A.3 The Recipient shall
                cause Rogun OJSC, through Rogun PMG, to
                maintain and convene regularly throughout
                the period of Project implementation until
                two (2) years after the filling of the reservoir
                to the full supply level and commissioning of
IDA-E3800       the Rogun HPP, an Environmental and Social         Complied with   No Change
                Panel of Experts (“ESPOE”) in form and with
                terms of reference, composition,
                qualifications, and resources satisfactory to
                the Association to review and advise on all
                environmental and social aspects of the
                Project.
                Schedule 2, Section I.A.5 The Recipient shall
                cause Rogun OJSC, through Rogun PMG, to
                maintain and convene regularly throughout
                the period of Project implementation until
                two (2) years after the filling of the reservoir
                to the full supply level and commissioning of
IDA-E3800                                                          Complied with   No Change
                the Rogun HPP, the Dam Safety Panel of
                Experts (“DSPOE”) in form and with terms of
                reference, composition, qualifications, and
                resources satisfactory to the Association, to
                provide just-in-time advice on construction-
                related matters of the Rogun HPP.
                Schedule 2, Section I.A.7 No later than three
                (3) months after the Effective Date, the
                Recipient shall cause Rogun OJSC, through
                Rogun PMG, to engage, and thereafter
                maintain throughout the period of Project
IDA-E3800       implementation, a PMC with terms of                Not yet due     No Change
                reference acceptable to the Association to,
                inter alia: (a) manage the construction
                contracts; and (b) provide management and
                review services with respect to the Project,
                including appointed design engineers.
                Schedule 2, Section I.B.1 No later than seven
IDA-E3800       (7) months after the Effective Date, the           Complied with   No Change
                Recipient shall: (a) adopt the BSP


                                      Official Use Only                                        Page 8
     The World Bank
     Sustainable Financing for Rogun Hydropower Project (P181029)



                Implementation Mechanism; and (b)
                thereafter, implement the BSP in accordance
                with said BSP Implementation Mechanism,
                including maintaining the Benefit Sharing
                Fund, adequate implementation capacity,
                conducting a regular audit, and complying
                with the disclosure requirements about
                revenues and expenditures of the BSP; all in
                a manner satisfactory to the Association.
                Schedule 2, Section I.B.2 The Recipient shall
                cause Rogun OJSC to: (i) maintain, at all
                times, the Project Revenues Account; (ii)
                allocate every year 3% of the previous
                calendar year’s Project Revenues, increasing
                to 4% of annual Project Revenues from
                completion of construction of the dam at a
                height of 1,185 masl and to 5% of annual
IDA-E3800       Project Revenues from completion of              Complied with   No Change
                construction of the Rogun HPP, for purposes
                of implementation of the BSP; and (iii)
                transfer the annual allocation to the Benefit
                Sharing Fund by no later than January 31 of
                each year in accordance with the BSP
                Resolution, with the first allocation being
                made for the last quarter of calendar year
                2024 no later than January 31, 2025.
                Schedule 2, Section I.C.1 and I.C.2 The
                Recipient shall maintain and cause Rogun
                OJSC to update on a quarterly basis,
                throughout the period of Project
IDA-E3800       implementation, the optimized Overall            Complied with   No Change
                Implementation Plan (“OIP”), and shall cause
                the Project Implementing Entities to carry
                out their Respective Parts of the Project in
                accordance with said plan.
                Schedule 2, Section I.D.2 The Recipient shall
                provide, and shall cause Rogun OJSC,
                through Rogun PMG to provide, all relevant
IDA-E3800       information as may be reasonably requested       Complied with   No Change
                in order for the Association to satisfy itself
                that the requirements of paragraph 2.3 of
                Section II of the Procurement Regulations


                                     Official Use Only                                       Page 9
     The World Bank
     Sustainable Financing for Rogun Hydropower Project (P181029)



                are met. Additionally, in connection with any
                such contract not financed by the
                Association which falls under Part 1 of the
                Project and which has a total price exceeding
                $1,000,000 equivalent, the Recipient shall
                cause Rogun OJSC, through Rogun PMG, to:
                (A) submit to the Association, prior to award
                or contract amendment thereto, as the case
                may be, all relevant information regarding
                such contract or amendment in accordance
                with the template agreed with the
                Association; and (B) provide the Association
                with the opportunity to review the
                information and share any comments within
                seven (7) calendar days.
                Schedule 2, Section I.D.3 Notwithstanding
                the requirements of paragraph 10.01.a and
                10.01.c of Annex II to the Procurement
                Regulations, the Recipient shall cause Rogun
                OJSC, through Rogun PMG, to seek the
                Association’s no objection before agreeing to
                any extension of the stipulated time for
                execution of the Contract Agreement 1, and
                any variation order or contract amendment
                that increases the contract price set forth in
                the Contract Amendment No. 2. All other
IDA-E3800       requirements of paragraph 10.01 of Annex II      Complied with   No Change
                to the Procurement Regulations remain
                unchanged and shall be fully complied with
                by the Recipient. Additionally, the Recipient
                shall cause Rogun OJSC, through Rogun PMG,
                to seek the Association’s no objection before
                agreeing to any changes to the list of
                subcontractors in form 7 of annex 8 to the
                Particular Conditions of Contract and any
                changes to the list of suppliers and
                manufacturers in form 8 of annex 8 to the
                Particular Conditions of Contract.
                Schedule 2, Section I.F.1 To facilitate the
                implementation of the Project, the Recipient,
IDA-E3800                                                        Complied with   No Change
                through MoF and MEWR, shall enter into an
                agreement (the “Project Implementation


                                     Official Use Only                                       Page 10
     The World Bank
     Sustainable Financing for Rogun Hydropower Project (P181029)



                Agreement”) with Rogun PMG, Rogun OJSC,
                DFZ, and Hydromet under terms and
                conditions approved by the Association,
                including: (i) the obligation of Rogun OJSC to
                promptly disclose on its website up-to-date
                information regarding Rogun OJSC’s
                operations in the Tajik and English
                languages, carry out the recurrent transfers
                of Project Revenues to the Benefit Sharing
                Fund, secure the appointment of the dispute
                avoidance/adjudication board under the
                Contract Agreement 1, and implement the
                Corporate Governance Action Plan in a
                manner satisfactory to the Association; (ii)
                the obligation of MEWR to cause BWO
                Amudarya Tajikistan Branch to ensure
                regular sharing of discharge and water level
                data from the Main Reservoirs in the Vakhsh
                River basin and water withdrawals at the
                major monitoring stations/hydroposts within
                its jurisdiction to the MEWR for further
                reporting to the BWO Amudarya; and (iii) the
                obligation of Hydromet to carry out Vakhsh
                River flow measurement and reporting of
                hydro meteorological data from selected
                stations through the National Water
                Information System in accordance with
                standards acceptable to the Association,
                including daily information concerning inflow
                data of the Rogun HPP.
                Schedule 2, Section I.G.1 The Recipient shall
                make the proceeds of the Financing
                allocated under Categories (1), (2) and (3)
                available to Rogun OJSC under a subsidiary
                agreement between the Recipient and
                Rogun OJSC, under terms and conditions
                                                                 Partially complied
IDA-E3800       approved by the Association, including the                            No Change
                                                                 with
                obligation of Rogun OJSC, through Rogun
                PMG to: (i) carry out the remedial actions set
                out in the Independent Assessment of
                Diversion Tunnels, in accordance with the
                deadlines for such remedial actions set out
                therein, unless otherwise agreed to in

                                     Official Use Only                                            Page 11
     The World Bank
     Sustainable Financing for Rogun Hydropower Project (P181029)



                writing by the Association; and (ii) submit to
                the Association the final report on the
                identification of legacy wastes and
                contaminated lands and thereafter carry out,
                or cause to be carried out, remedial
                measures recommended in the report.
                Schedule 2, Section I.G.4 The Recipient shall
                cause Rogun OJSC to enter into an
                implementation arrangement, satisfactory to
                the Association, with Rogun PMG to delegate
                certain implementation functions to Rogun
                PMG, under terms and conditions approved
IDA-E3800                                                         Complied with   No Change
                by the Association, including the obligation
                of Rogun PMG to install no later than sixty
                (60) days after the Effective Date, and
                thereafter maintain throughout the period of
                Project implementation, an accounting
                software satisfactory to the Association.
                Schedule 2, Section I.H.1 The Recipient shall
                cause Rogun OJSC to enter into an
                implementation arrangement, satisfactory to
                the Association, with Rogun PMG to delegate
                certain implementation functions to Rogun
                PMG, under terms and conditions approved
IDA-E3800                                                         Complied with   No Change
                by the Association, including the obligation
                of Rogun PMG to install no later than sixty
                (60) days after the Effective Date, and
                thereafter maintain throughout the period of
                Project implementation, an accounting
                software satisfactory to the Association.
                Schedule 2, Section I.I.1 No later than six (6)
                months after the Effective Date, the
                Recipient shall ensure that the Co-financing
                Agreement between the Recipient and the
IDA-E3800                                                         Not yet due     No Change
                AIIB has been executed and delivered and all
                conditions precedent to its effectiveness or
                to the right of the Recipient to make
                withdrawals thereunder have been fulfilled.
                Schedule 2, Section I.I.2 No later than eight
                (8) months after the Effective Date, the
IDA-E3800                                                         Not yet due     No Change
                Recipient shall ensure that the following co-
                financing agreements have been executed


                                      Official Use Only                                       Page 12
     The World Bank
     Sustainable Financing for Rogun Hydropower Project (P181029)



                and delivered and all conditions precedent to
                their effectiveness or to the right of the
                Recipient to make withdrawals thereunder
                have been fulfilled: (a) the Co-financing
                Agreement between the Recipient and the
                ADB; (b) the Co-financing Agreement
                between the Recipient and the EIB; and (c)
                the other Co-financing Agreements being
                negotiated by the Recipient as of the
                Signature Date.
                Schedule 2, Section I.I.3 No later than twelve
                (12) months after the Effective Date, the
                Recipient shall ensure that the following co-
                financing agreements have been executed
                and delivered and all conditions precedent to
                their effectiveness or to the right of the
                Recipient to make withdrawals thereunder
                have been fulfilled: (a) the Co-financing
IDA-E3800       Agreement between the Recipient and the          Not yet due     No Change
                ADFD; (b) the Co-financing Agreement
                between the Recipient and the IsDB; (c) the
                Co-financing Agreement between the
                Recipient and the Kuwait Fund; (d) the Co-
                financing Agreement between the Recipient
                and the OPEC Fund; and (e) the Co-financing
                Agreement between the Recipient and the
                SFD.
                Schedule 2, Section IV.A.1 The Recipient
                shall: (a) (i) no later than November 30,
                2024, prepare and adopt the Reservoir
                Impoundment Plan for 2025 in form and
                substance acceptable to the Association; and
                (ii) no later than November 30 of each year
                thereafter, until the completion of reservoir
                                                                 After delay
IDA-E3800       impoundment, prepare and adopt the                                Revised
                                                                 complied with
                Reservoir Impoundment Plan for the
                subsequent calendar year, in form and
                substance acceptable to the Association; (b)
                thereafter conduct the impoundment of the
                Rogun Reservoir in accordance with: (i) the
                master program incorporated in the OIP; and
                (ii) the Reservoir Impoundment Plan for


                                     Official Use Only                                       Page 13
     The World Bank
     Sustainable Financing for Rogun Hydropower Project (P181029)



                2025; and (c) comply at all times with the
                Regional Water Sharing Arrangements.
                Schedule 2, Section IV.A.2 The Recipient
                shall, promptly upon the Association’s
                request, solicit and furnish to the Association
                the ESPOE’s and DSPOE’s assessments and
                recommendations concerning the
IDA-E3800       environmental and social measures and dam         Complied with   No Change
                safety measures undertaken or to be
                undertaken by the Recipient and the Project
                Implementing Entities before, during, and
                after any stage of impoundment of the
                Rogun Reservoir.
                Schedule 2, Section IV.A.3 The Recipient shall
                cause Rogun OJSC to operate Rogun HPP
                during the Rogun Reservoir impoundment in
                such a manner that: (i) the Recipient
                complies at all times with the Regional Water
                Sharing Arrangements, including observance
IDA-E3800       of the Annual Allocation (meaning using no        Complied with   No Change
                more than the agreed and otherwise unused
                Annual Allocation to Tajikistan), and the
                interim Reservoir Management Rules for the
                Rogun Reservoir; and (ii) the Recipient does
                not cause appreciable harm to any of the
                downstream riparian countries.
                Schedule 2, Section IV.B.1 No later than six
                (6) months after the Effective Date, the
                Recipient shall amend the Decree of the
                Government of the Republic of Tajikistan No.
IDA-E3800                                                         Not yet due     No Change
                625 dated November 26, 2020 to include
                Rogun Reservoir in the list of reservoirs for
                which reservoir management rules are
                required.
                Schedule 2, Section IV.B.2 No later than
                twelve (12) months after the Effective Date,
                the Recipient shall cause Rogun OJSC to
                develop and adopt interim Reservoir
IDA-E3800                                                         Not yet due     No Change
                Management Rules for the Rogun Reservoir
                during the construction and impoundment
                stage in form and substance satisfactory to
                the Association and in a manner that


                                      Official Use Only                                       Page 14
     The World Bank
     Sustainable Financing for Rogun Hydropower Project (P181029)



                complies with the national legislation and
                the provisions of this Agreement.
                Schedule 2, Section IV.B.3 No later than
                thirty-six (36) months after the Effective
                Date, the Recipient, through MEWR, shall
                develop the Reservoir Management Rules for
                the Main Reservoirs in the Vakhsh River
IDA-E3800       basin for adoption upon completion of             Not yet due         No Change
                construction and impoundment of Rogun
                HPP, in form and substance satisfactory to
                the Association and in a manner that
                complies with the national legislation and
                the provisions of this Agreement.
                Schedule 2, Section IV.B.4 The Recipient shall
                cause Rogun OJSC to operate Rogun HPP
                during the operational phase once full supply
                level has been achieved in such a manner
                that: (i) the Recipient complies at all times
IDA-E3800       with the Regional Water Sharing                   Not yet due         No Change
                Arrangements and the Reservoir
                Management Rules for the Main Reservoirs
                in the Vakhsh River basin; and (ii) the
                Recipient does not cause appreciable harm
                to any of the downstream riparian countries.
                Schedule 2, Section IV.C.1 The Recipient shall
                cause TALCO to repay arrears accumulated
                towards: (i) BT in accordance with the BT
                repayment schedule as of June 1, 2024
IDA-E3800                                                         Not complied with   No Change
                agreed between BT and TALCO; and (ii) STB
                in accordance with the STB repayment
                schedule as of July 9, 2024 agreed between
                STB and TALCO.
                Schedule 2, Section IV.C.2 For each billing
                cycle as of July 9, 2024, the Recipient shall
IDA-E3800       cause TALCO to pay in full all electricity bill   Not complied with   No Change
                payments due to STB within thirty (30) days
                of receipt.
                Schedule 2, Section IV.C.3 No later than six
                (6) months after the Effective Date, the
IDA-E3800       Recipient shall cause BT to pay in full all       Not yet due         No Change
                electricity arrears accumulated with Rogun
                OJSC as of the date of the payment, and


                                      Official Use Only                                           Page 15
     The World Bank
     Sustainable Financing for Rogun Hydropower Project (P181029)



                thereafter cause BT to pay in full all
                electricity bills due to Rogun OJSC within
                forty-five (45) days of receipt.
                Schedule 2, Section IV.C.4 The Recipient shall
                maintain progressive annual increases in
IDA-E3800       end-user electricity tariffs to achieve cost      Complied with        No Change
                recovery by end of 2027 and maintain cost
                reflective tariffs thereafter.
                Schedule 2, Section IV.C.5 No later than
                three (3) months after the Effective Date, the
                Recipient shall adopt a government decree in
                form and substance acceptable to the
                Association, and thereafter adhere to its
                effective implementation throughout the
                period of Project implementation, mandating
                the implementation of a five-year
IDA-E3800                                                         Not yet due          No Change
                performance mechanism for BT, setting
                forth: (i) key performance indicators for BT
                management regarding improvements in
                BT’s operational and financial performance,
                including cost controls; (ii) a monitoring
                framework to track said indicators; and (iii)
                an adequate incentive framework to secure
                the achievement of said indicators.
                Schedule 2, Section IV.D.1 The Recipient shall
                cause TALCO to disclose on its website up-to-
                date information regarding TALCO’s
                operations, including: (i) annual production
                and export volumes; (ii) annual electricity       Partially complied
IDA-E3800                                                                              No Change
                consumption (in GWh); (iii) electricity tariff    with
                applicable during the relevant billing periods;
                (iv) audit reports, including financial
                statements and notes; and (v) the audit
                reports of TALCO Management Ltd.
                Schedule 2, Section IV.D.2 The Recipient,
                through MEWR, shall disclose on its website
                up-to-date information related to the
IDA-E3800       operational, commercial, and financial            Complied with        No Change
                performance of BT, SIB, and STB in
                accordance with indicators agreed with the
                Association.



                                     Official Use Only                                             Page 16
     The World Bank
     Sustainable Financing for Rogun Hydropower Project (P181029)



                Schedule 2, Section IV.D.3 The Recipient,
                through MEWR and with the assistance of
                Hydromet, shall disclose to the public on its
                website and on a monthly basis average
                monthly data for each preceding month on:
                (i) inflow and outflow data of the Rogun HPP;
                (ii) data on water level and discharge of the
IDA-E3800       Rogun and Nurek Reservoirs; (iii) water            Complied with   No Change
                withdrawals from the Vakhsh River in
                Tajikistan measured at the monitoring
                stations/hydroposts within the jurisdiction of
                the BWO Amudarya Tajikistan Branch; and
                (iv) flow data downstream measured at the
                hydrometeorological station located at the
                Tigrovaya Balka Nature Reserve.
                Schedule 2, Section I.A.8 No later than
                twelve (12) months after the Effective Date,
                the Recipient shall cause Rogun OJSC, to
                engage, and thereafter maintain throughout
                the period of Project implementation, an LTA
                with terms of reference acceptable to the
                Association. The LTA shall be responsible for,
                inter alia, the following services, for the
                benefit of the Co-financiers: (a) monitoring
                and reporting on the construction quality of
IDA-E3800       the Project facilities, including budget,          Not yet due       New
                environmental and social, and operational
                health and safety performance; (b)
                monitoring and reporting on the technical
                integrity of the Rogun HPP and its associated
                facilities; (c) examining and opining on the
                compliance of the Recipient and Project
                Implementing Entities with their obligations
                under this Agreement and the ESCP; (d)
                recommending corrective actions, as
                required.
                Schedule 2, Section I.J.7 No later than five (5)
                months after the Effective Date, the
                Recipient shall cause Rogun OJSC to amend
IDA-E3800                                                          Not yet due       New
                Contract Agreement 2 to incorporate, inter
                alia, (a) the requirements of the
                Environmental and Social Standards and the


                                      Official Use Only                                        Page 17
       The World Bank
       Sustainable Financing for Rogun Hydropower Project (P181029)



                  ESCP; (b) the alignment of contract
                  milestones in compliance with the Regional
                  Water Sharing Arrangements; (c) measures
                  to ensure improved oversight and
                  management of occupational health and
                  safety; and (d) measures to protect against
                  child and forced labor in primary suppliers;
                  all in form and substance satisfactory to the
                  Association.

Conditions

        Type                                Description of Conditions                         Action
                              The Project Implementation Agreement and the OJSC-
                             PMG Implementation Arrangement have been executed
 Effectiveness               in form and substance acceptable to the Association and     No Change
                             all conditions precedent, if any, to their effectiveness
                             have been fulfilled.
                              Rogun PMG and DFZ have been staffed with adequate
                             technical, procurement, fiduciary, environmental and
 Effectiveness                                                                           No Change
                             social specialists in a manner acceptable to the
                             Association and as required by the ESMP.
                              Either: (i) the Employer’s Representative Services
                             Contract has been amended in form and substance
                             acceptable to the Association to incorporate the
 Effectiveness               responsibility to monitor the Recipient’s compliance with   No Change
                             the requirements of the Environmental and Social
                             Standards; or (ii) the PMC Contract has been executed in
                             form and substance acceptable to the Association.
                              The Recipient has caused Rogun OJSC to update the
 Effectiveness               Overall Implementation Plan in form and substance           No Change
                             satisfactory to the Association.
                              (i) The BT PPA has been amended in form and substance
                             acceptable to the Association to incorporate, inter alia,
 Effectiveness               revised pricing; and (ii) each of the Kazakhstan PPA and    No Change
                             the Uzbekistan PPA have been executed in form and
                             substance acceptable to the Association.
                              The Recipient has approved a Cash Waterfall Decree in
 Effectiveness                                                                           No Change
                             form and substance acceptable to the Association.
                              The Recipient has: (i) caused the general assembly of
 Effectiveness               Rogun OJSC to adopt the BSP Resolution, mandating           No Change
                             inter alia: (A) the allocation of 3% of annual Project


                                       Official Use Only                                               Page 18
      The World Bank
      Sustainable Financing for Rogun Hydropower Project (P181029)



                           Revenues to the Benefit Sharing Fund during
                           construction, increasing to 4% of annual Project
                           Revenues from completion of construction of the dam at
                           a height of 1,185 masl and to 5% of annual Project
                           Revenues from completion of construction of the Rogun
                           HPP; (B) the transfer of the pro-rata allocation of 3% of
                           annual Project Revenues earned or received during the
                           period from October 1, 2024 to December 31, 2024 to
                           the Benefit Sharing Fund by no later than January 31,
                           2025; and (C) the transfer of the annual allocation to the
                           Benefit Sharing Fund by no later than January 31 of each
                           year; and (ii) established the Benefit Sharing Fund
                           through the Government Decree on the Benefit Sharing
                           Fund; all in form and substance acceptable to the
                           Association.
                            The Recipient has launched the procurement process for
Effectiveness              activities under Part 1.5 of the Project; all in a manner      Revised
                           acceptable to the Association.
                            The Independent Assessment of Diversion Tunnels has
                           been endorsed by the DSPOE, and the DSPOE’s
Effectiveness              recommendations have been adopted by the Rogun                 No Change
                           OJSC in form and substance satisfactory to the
                           Association.
                            Each of the Existing Project Contracts, except Contract
                           Agreement 2, has been amended in form and substance
Effectiveness              acceptable to the Association to incorporate, inter alia,      Revised
                           the requirements of the Environmental and Social
                           Standards and the ESCP.
                            The Recipient has adopted and disclosed: (i) the ESIA; (ii)
                           the ESMP; (iii) the Resettlement Action Plan 2; (iv) the
                           Livelihood Restoration Plan 2; (v) the Security
                           Management Plan; (vi) the Traffic Management Plan;
                           and (vii) guidelines/templates to establish: (A) site-wide
Effectiveness              rules for occupational health and safety; (B) site-wide        No Change
                           rules for emergency response procedures; and (C) site-
                           wide rules for waste management for ongoing
                           construction and operation; all in accordance with the
                           requirements of the ESCP and in form and substance
                           acceptable to the Association.
                            DFZ and Rogun OJSC, through Rogun PMG, have
Effectiveness              established a grievance mechanism for Project workers          No Change
                           in accordance with the requirements of the ESCP.



                                     Official Use Only                                                Page 19
      The World Bank
      Sustainable Financing for Rogun Hydropower Project (P181029)



                            The Recipient has hired an independent third-party
                           organization or consultant with terms of reference
Effectiveness                                                                           No Change
                           acceptable to the Association to undertake quarterly
                           external RAP (including LRP) monitoring.
                            The Recipient has approved a government decree in
                           form and substance satisfactory to the Association that:
                           (i) identifies disconnection procedures for all consumers;
                           (ii) in the event of sustained non-payment of electricity
                           bills over a two-month period, mandates the distribution
Effectiveness                                                                           No Change
                           company to disconnect consumers in accordance with
                           the established procedure; and (iii) introduces an
                           adequate mechanism of last resort to compensate the
                           distribution company for the non-payment by the
                           defaulting consumer.
                            (i) The Recipient has approved a government decree to
                           revise the rules of the Electricity Sector Escrow Account
                           to: (A) improve the prioritization, predictability, and
                           transparency of cash flows in the electricity sector; and
Effectiveness              (B) end offsetting practices; and (ii) the Recipient has     No Change
                           adopted a government decree to: (A) introduce a cash
                           waterfall mechanism for the BT account; and (B)
                           introduce adequate cost controls for BT; all in form and
                           substance satisfactory to the Association.
                            The Recipient, through MoF, has entered into a debt
                           restructuring agreement with BT, in form and substance
                           satisfactory to the Association, which includes: (i) the
                           conversion of the accumulated penalties and interest
                           payments as of October 1, 2024 into the BT equity; (ii)
                           the deferral of the repayment of BT’s debt arising from
Effectiveness              the subsidiary agreements between MoF and BT as of           No Change
                           October 1, 2024 for five (5) years, with repayment to be
                           distributed according to an agreed payment schedule
                           over the subsequent five (5) years after the deferral
                           period ends; and (iii) the revision of the terms of the
                           subsidiary agreements to impose penalties and interest
                           for unpaid debt.
                            Notwithstanding the provisions of Part A of this Section,
                           no withdrawal shall be made under Categories (1), (2),
Disbursement               and (3), unless and until the Rogun PMG’s FM Manual          No Change
                           has been adopted by Rogun PMG in a manner acceptable
                           to the Association.
                            Notwithstanding the provisions of Part A of this Section,
Disbursement                                                                            No Change
                           no withdrawal shall be made under Categories (1), (2),


                                     Official Use Only                                              Page 20
     The World Bank
     Sustainable Financing for Rogun Hydropower Project (P181029)



                             and (3), unless and until the Cultural Heritage
                             Management Plan and the Biodiversity Management
                             Plan have been adopted and disclosed by Rogun PMG in
                             accordance with the requirements of the ESCP and in
                             form and substance acceptable to the Association.
                              Notwithstanding the provisions of Part A of this Section,
                             no withdrawal shall be made under Category (4), unless
Disbursement                                                                              No Change
                             and until the DFZ’s FM Manual has been adopted by DFZ
                             in a manner acceptable to the Association.
                              For any works of any nature under Categories (1), (2) or
                             (3), unless and until Contract Agreement 2 has been
Disbursement                 amended in form and substance satisfactory to the            New
                             Association to incorporate, inter alia¸ the requirements
                             of the Environmental and Social Standards and the ESCP




    Annex 1. Status of the Conditions of Effectiveness

Reference                                                   CoE                                       Status



                                        Official Use Only                                                Page 21
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Financing for Rogun Hydropower Project (P181029)



                  The Project Implementation Agreement and the OJSC-PMG Implementation
FA - Article V,
                  Arrangement have been executed in form and substance acceptable to the Association         Achieved
   5.01 (a)
                  and all conditions precedent, if any, to their effectiveness have been fulfilled.
                  Rogun PMG and DFZ have been staffed with adequate technical, procurement, fiduciary,
FA - Article V,
                  environmental and social specialists in a manner acceptable to the Association and as      Achieved
   5.01 (b)
                  required by the ESMP.
                  Either: (i) the Employer’s Representative Services Contract has been amended in form
                  and substance acceptable to the Association to incorporate the responsibility to
FA - Article V,
                  monitor the Recipient’s compliance with the requirements of the Environmental and          Achieved
   5.01 (c)
                  Social Standards; or (ii) the PMC Contract has been executed in form and substance
                  acceptable to the Association.
FA - Article V,   The Recipient has caused Rogun OJSC to update the Overall Implementation Plan in
                                                                                                             Achieved
   5.01 (d)       form and substance satisfactory to the Association.
                  (i) The BT PPA has been amended in form and substance acceptable to the Association
FA - Article V,   to incorporate, inter alia, revised pricing; and (ii) each of the Kazakhstan PPA and the
                                                                                                             Achieved
   5.01 (e)       Uzbekistan PPA have been executed in form and substance acceptable to the
                  Association.
FA - Article V,   The Recipient has approved a Cash Waterfall Decree in form and substance acceptable
                                                                                                             Achieved
   5.01 (f)       to the Association.
                  The Recipient has:
                  (i) caused the general assembly of Rogun OJSC to adopt the BSP Resolution, mandating
                  inter alia: (A) the allocation of 3% of annual Project Revenues to the Benefit Sharing
                  Fund during construction, increasing to 4% of annual Project Revenues from completion
                  of construction of the dam at a height of 1,185 meters above sea level and to 5% of
                  annual Project Revenues from completion of construction of the Rogun HPP; (B) the
FA - Article V,
                  transfer of the pro-rata allocation of 3% of annual Project Revenues earned or received    Achieved
   5.01 (g)
                  during the period from October 1, 2024 to December 31, 2024 to the Benefit Sharing
                  Fund by no later than January 31, 2025; and (C) the transfer of the annual allocation to
                  the Benefit Sharing Fund by no later than January 31 of each year; and

                  (ii) established the Benefit Sharing Fund through the Government Decree on the Benefit
                  Sharing Fund; all in form and substance acceptable to the Association.
                  The Recipient has: (i) amended the Contract Agreement 1 to define the rights and
FA - Article V,   obligations of Rogun PMG as an additional contracting party; and (ii) launched the         Partially
   5.01 (h)       procurement process for activities under Part 1.5 of the Project,; all in a manner         achieved
                  acceptable to the Association.
                  The Independent Assessment of Diversion Tunnels has been endorsed by the DSPOE,
FA - Article V,
                  and the DSPOE’s recommendations have been adopted by the Rogun OJSC in form and            Achieved
   5.01 (i)
                  substance satisfactory to the Association.
                  Each of the Existing Project Contracts has been amended in form and substance
FA - Article V,                                                                                              Partially
                  acceptable to the Association to incorporate, inter alia, the requirements of the
   5.01 (j)                                                                                                  achieved
                  Environmental and Social Standards and the ESCP.




                                           Official Use Only                                                     Page 22
        The World Bank
        Sustainable Financing for Rogun Hydropower Project (P181029)



                  The Recipient has adopted and disclosed:
                  (i) the ESIA;
                  (ii) the ESMP;
                  (iii) the Resettlement Action Plan 2;
                  (iv) the Livelihood Restoration Plan 2;
FA - Article V,
                  (v) the Security Management Plan;                                                              Achieved
   5.01 (k)
                  (vi) the Traffic Management Plan; and
                  (vii) guidelines/templates to establish: (A) site-wide rules for occupational health and
                  safety; (B) site-wide rules for emergency response procedures; and (C) site-wide rules
                  for waste management for ongoing construction and operation; all in accordance with
                  the requirements of the ESCP and in form and substance acceptable to the Association.
FA - Article V,   DFZ and Rogun OJSC, through Rogun PMG, have established a grievance mechanism for
                                                                                                                 Achieved
   5.01 (l)       Project workers in accordance with the requirements of the ESCP.
                  The Recipient has hired an independent third-party organization or consultant with
FA - Article V,
                  terms of reference acceptable to the Association to undertake quarterly external RAP           Achieved
  5.01 (m)
                  (including LRP) monitoring.
                  The Recipient has approved a Government decree in form and substance satisfactory to
                  the Association that: (i) identifies disconnection procedures for all consumers; (ii) in the
                                                                                                                 Achieved
FA - Article V,   event of sustained non-payment of electricity bills over a two-month period, mandates
                                                                                                                   [(iii)
   5.01 (n)       the distribution company to disconnect consumers in accordance with the established
                                                                                                                 waived]
                  procedure; and (iii) introduces an adequate mechanism of last resort to compensate the
                  distribution company for the non-payment by the defaulting consumer.
                  (i) The Recipient has approved a Government decree to revise the rules of the Electricity
                  Sector Escrow Account to: (A) improve the prioritization, predictability, and
FA - Article V,   transparency of cash flows in the electricity sector; and (B) end offsetting practices; and
                                                                                                                 Achieved
   5.01 (o)       (ii) the Recipient has adopted a Government decree to: (A) introduce a cash waterfall
                  mechanism for the BT account; and (B) introduce adequate cost controls for BT; all in
                  form and substance satisfactory to the Association.
                  The Recipient, through MoF, has entered into a debt restructuring agreement with BT,
                  in form and substance satisfactory to the Association, which includes: (i) the conversion
                  of the accumulated penalties and interest payments as of October 1, 2024 into the BT
FA - Article V,   equity; (ii) the deferral of the repayment of BT’s debt arising from the subsidiary
                                                                                                                 Achieved
   5.01 (p)       agreements between MoF and BT as of October 1, 2024 for five (5) years, with
                  repayment to be distributed according to an agreed payment schedule over the
                  subsequent five (5) years after the deferral period ends; and (iii) the revision of the
                  terms of the subsidiary agreements to impose penalties and interest for unpaid debt.




                                            Official Use Only                                                        Page 23
 The World Bank
 Sustainable Financing for Rogun Hydropower Project (P181029)


Annex 2. Implementation Schedule and Disbursement Projection

                           Key Implementation Milestones (according to OIP, revision I)

    Completion of Diversion Tunnel 4 (DT4)                               April 2026
    Completion of the plunge pool                                        April 2028
    Main Dam construction up to 1110 masl (Partial)                      April 2026
    Reservoir impoundment to 1100 masl                                   September 2026
    Unit 6 Runner replacement                                            July 2026
    Unit 5 Runner replacement                                            October 2026
    Main Dam construction up to 1175 masl (Partial)                      May 2027
    Reservoir impoundment to 1165 masl                                   September 2028
    Unit 4 commissioning                                                 October 2027
    Unit 3 commissioning                                                 October 2028
    Completion of High Level Outlet Structure 1 (HLO1)                   May 2029
    Completion of High Level Outlet Structure 2 (HLO2)                   April 2031
    Completion of Overflow Spillways (OVS)                               September 2035
    Unit 2 commissioning                                                 January 2030
    Unit 1 commissioning                                                 February 2030
    Reservoir impoundment to 1230 masl                                   September 2032
    Unit 6 Generator replacement                                         October 2030
    Unit 5 Generator replacement                                         June 2031
    Main Dam completion up to 1300 masl                                  July 2029
    Reservoir impoundment to 1290 masl                                   September 2038



                                               Disbursement Projection

                                           USD million,        USD million,
                                           per 6 months        cumulative
                           2026-H2               80.0             80.0
                           2027-H1               60.0            140.0
                           2027-H2               60.0            200.0
                           2028-H1               50.0            250.0
                           2028-H2               50.0            300.0
                           2029-H1               50.0            350.0




                                     Official Use Only                                    Page 24
