Public Disclosure Authorized




                                 Livelihood Restoration Plan – Phase 2 (LRP 2)




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                       2017-2026

                                                           For

                                             ROGUN HYDROPOWER PROJECT




Public Disclosure Authorized



                               Project Management Group under the President of the Republic
                                                       of Tajikistan and
                                 State Enterprise, Directorate of the Flooding Zone of Rogun




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                      Hydropower Plant




                                                       August 2025



                                                                                        Official Use Only
TABLE OF CONTENTS

GLOSSARY OF TERMS                                                                   v
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS                                                 vii
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                                  ix
1. INTRODUCTION                                                                     1
     1.1 Resettlement and Livelihood Restoration: Current Situation and Planning    2
     1.2 Consultation, Information Disclosure and Grievance Redress Mechanism       6
     1.3 Implementation Arrangements, Monitoring and Budget                         6
2. LIVELIHOOD RESTORATION DURING RAP 1/LRP 1                                        8
     2.1 Lessons Learned about Livelihood Restoration from RAP 1/LRP 1 and         10
     Their Application in RAP 2/LRP 2
3. ASSESSMENT OF LIVELIHOOD RESTORATION MEASURES DURING RAP                        12
   2/LRP 2
     3.1 Livelihoods of RAP 2 PAPs                                                 16
4. CURRENT LIVELIHOOD RESTORATION MEASURES                                         24
     4.1 Financial Assistance, Loans, Training and Employment Support              24
     4.2 Additional Livelihood Support to PAPs during Project Implementation       33
     4.3 Outreach about Government Programs                                        39




                                                                                         ii
FIGURES

Figure 3-1   Occupations of the PAHs                                   21
Figure 3-2   Financial Circumstances of the PAHs                       22
Figure 4-1   Percentage of PAHs Receiving Livelihood Assistance from   27
             MoLMEP




                                                                            iii
TABLES

Table 1-1   Documentation Related to Ongoing Resettlement for Rogun HPP         1
Table 1-2   RAP Planning for Rogun HPP                                          2
Table 2-1   Summary of Funds Paid to PAPs During RAP 1                          8
Table 2-2   List of Outstanding Livelihood Restoration Issues upon Completion   9
            of RAP 1
Table 3-1   RAP 2 Assessment Recommendations and DFZ’s Responses                12
Table 3-2   Affected Populations in RAP 2 Villages as of July 2025              16
Table 3-3   Average Area of Agricultural Land Plots Before and After            20
            Resettlement
Table 4-1   Total Amount of Cash and In-kind Livelihood Support to PAPs         24
Table 4-2   DFZ and MoLMEP Support Provided by District, 2017-2024              25
Table 4-3   Number of RAP 2 PAPs Assisted by MoLMEP                             26
Table 4-4   Scholar Payments for Training and Teachers’ Salaries                28
Table 4-5   Information on Labor and Employment – Women and Youth               29




                                                                                     iv
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
Amonatbonk: `Amonatbonk` is a State Unitary enterprise, which is a savings bank of the Republic of
Tajikistan and used by the affected people to withdraw monetary compensation for their lost assets.
Project-Affected Person(s): Any person, group, community, or people who, because of the
implementation of the Rogun HPP, is affected by loss of the right to use, or otherwise benefit from land
(residential, agricultural, or commercial), water, livelihood, annual or perennial crops and trees, a built
structure, or any other fixed or movable assets, either in full or in part, permanently or temporarily. S/he
can be a legal owner, non-titled structure owner, or tenant.
Business Owner: Any person who owns or conducts a business within the Project-affected area, the
operation of which may be disrupted by the Project. S/he can be a legal owner, non-titled structure
owner, or tenant and will receive different compensation and livelihood restoration packages as per the
Entitlement Matrix detailed in the Resettlement and Livelihood Restoration Framework (RLRF).
Census: A process to identify people who will be affected by the Project, establish an inventory of land
and assets to be affected, determine who will be eligible for compensation and assistance, and
discourage ineligible persons from claiming benefits. The census collects pertinent demographic and
related social and economic information about Project affected people and household income streams.
Compensation: Payment in cash or in-kind for an asset or a resource that is acquired or affected by
the Project, at the time the asset needs to be replaced.
Cut-off date: Date of completion of census and assets inventory of persons affected by the project.
The cut-off date will be publicly announced and provided in all the Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs)
prepared under the RLRF. This is the date on which calculation of losses and compensation are
based. Persons who encroach on the area after the cut-off date are not entitled to claim compensation
or any other form of resettlement assistance, including from built structures, crops, fruit trees and other
fixed assets built or planted after the cut-off date.
Custodians of Community: A registered association or such other legally recognized organization or
committee of people managing, looking after, or responsible for the upkeep of, and liabilities relating to
the land and structures in the Project area.
Dekhan farm: A registered individual or family farm, legally and physically distinct from household
plots.
Encroacher: Someone who has illegally expanded or extended the outer limit of his/her private
premises beyond the approved building line or agricultural land and has occupied public space beyond
his/her plot or agricultural/residential land.
Entitlement: Measures that define what compensation that Project-affected households and people
will receive for losses of land, crops, buildings, trees, and other assets and livelihoods that result from
the Project’s construction and operation. This includes moving and relocation assistance, livelihood
restoration and other benefits, with the objective to improve, or at least restore, the incomes and
standards of living of project affected people These are usually set out in a table (Entitlement Matrix).
Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM): A grievance redress mechanism is a locally based,
formalized way to accept, assess, and resolve community feedback or complaints. These can be
complemented by national grievances systems. GRMs are used to improve project outcomes through
creating more predictable, timely and results-oriented responses to citizen concerns. The project GRM
is detailed in the Stakeholder Engagement Plan as well as the RLRF.


                                                                                                              v
Jamoats: The lowest tier of formal public administration in Tajikistan. Each jamoats is responsible for
administering approximately 10 villages. They report to the district (rayon)-level authorities, which
report to the regional administration.
Hukumat: District administration in Tajikistan.
Makhalla: Informal village council comprising community representatives.
Presidential land: Land for which use rights have been granted to households and dekhan farms by a
Presidential Decree for the purpose of small-scale food production. Ownership rights remain with the
State.
Replacement cost: A method of valuation yielding compensation sufficient to replace assets, plus
necessary transaction costs associated with asset replacement. Replacement costs is the current
market value plus transaction costs and must at least be sufficient to replace lost assets with assets of
similar value and quality.
Technical Household Passport (THP): To assess asset compensation entitlements, a ‘Technical
Household Passport’ (THP) is developed for each household by the local division of the Bureau of
Technical Inventory, which forms the basis of the valuation of the affected peoples’ assets. THPs
contain the following main elements: (i) the name of the head of household, village in which the plot is
located, and the names of officials carrying out the assessment; (ii) a detailed list and preliminary
valuation table of the household’s assets, including buildings, their size and the materials from which
they are constructed, outbuildings fences, and other fixed assets; (iii) a floor plan of buildings; (iv) a
diagram showing the layout of the plot; (v) administrative costs; and (vi) stamps showing the date of
approval. Trees, crops and movable assets are not included in the technical passport. Before
valuation, the THP is reviewed, and trees are added to the inventory.
Vulnerable Groups: People who by virtue of gender, age, physical or mental disability, economic
disadvantage, ethnicity, social discrimination, and exclusion may be disproportionately affected by
resettlement and hindered in their access to development benefits. Vulnerable groups within the
Project Area of Influence have been identified as elderly household members and heads who require
additional care and assistance, households who need to take care of members with disabilities and/or
chronic illnesses, women-headed households who have insufficient income, households living under
poverty or with low income, orphan and abandoned children and youth-at-risk (neither in education nor
in employment) groups.




                                                                                                             vi
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
Table of abbreviations

ADB                 Asian Development Bank
AIIB                Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank
Asl                 Above sea level

BTI                 Bureau of Technical Inventory

DFZ                 State Enterprise, Directorate of the Flooding Zone of Rogun HPP

E&S                 Environmental and social

ESDD                Environmental and Social Due Diligence
ESF                 Environmental and Social Framework (of the World Bank)
ESIA                Environmental and Social Impact Assessment

ESS                 Environmental and Social Standard

FSL                 Full Supply Level
GRM                 Grievance Redress Mechanism

GWh                 GigaWatt hour

HH                  Household

HoF                 Head of Family

HoH                 Head of Household

HPP                 Hydropower Plant
IFIs                International Finance Institutions
Km                  Kilometers
LRP                 Livelihood Restoration Plan

M                   Meters

Masl                Meters Above Sea Level

MoA                 Ministry of Agriculture

MoF                 Ministry of Finance

MoLMEP              Ministry of Labor, Migration and Employment of the Population

MW                  Megawatt

NGO                 Non-Governmental Organization

PAC                 Project-Affected Community

PAP                 Project-Affected Person

PAH                 Project-Affected Household

RAP                 Resettlement Action Plan

PMF                 Probable Maximum Flood

RLRF                Resettlement and Livelihood Restoration Framework

SEA/SH              Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual Harassment

SEP                 Stakeholder Engagement Plan

TA                  Technical Assistance

                                                                                      vii
Table of abbreviations

TEAS                Techno-Economical Assessment Study

TWh/yr              Tera-Watt hour per year

THP                 Technical Household Passport

TVET                Technical and Vocational Education and Training

WB                  The World Bank




                                                                      viii
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Introduction
The Rogun Hydropower Plant (Rogun HPP, hereafter referred to as ‘the Project’) is located on the
Vakhsh River in Tajikistan which is a tributary to the Amu Darya River in the larger Amu Darya Basin.
The Project is strategically important for the Central Asian region, due to the need to sustain and
improve the energy supply of Tajikistan and other Central Asian countries.
The Project was first proposed in 1959, with construction starting in 1982. Construction has progressed
with several stop-and resume cycles, driven by the economic consequences of major geopolitical
events. Construction has accelerated from 2016 onwards. At completion, the Project will have a total
installed capacity of 3,780 MW, a 335m high dam, and a reservoir that will have an area of up to
16,823 hectares (ha) and will store up to 13.3 km³ of water. The project is expected to generate an
annual average of 17,000 GWh.
Construction of the dam will cause permanent irreversible environmental and social impacts due to the
creation of the reservoir, headrace tunnel, powerhouse, transmission line, and ancillary facilities such
as access roads and workers’ camps. This includes large-scale physical and economic displacement
of low-income rural communities in the reservoir and buffer areas. Considerable disruption to
agricultural and other economic activities will lead to losses of land, assets, income and livelihoods,
access to public assets and pasturelands, and cultural sites and assets. By 2032, about six years prior
to the full inundation of the reservoir, an estimated population of more than 50,000 people living in 69
settlements in Rogun City, Nurobod and Rasht Districts will need to be permanently resettled from the
area affected by impoundment (the ‘flood zone’).
The Project’s design and configuration were re-evaluated in 2011-2014 and detailed Environmental
and Social (E&S) assessments were carried out, following the Government of Tajikistan’s request to
the World Bank to finance the Project. In 2011, the Government commissioned a Techno-Economic
Assessment Study (TEAS) and environmental and social (E&S) assessment, which were financed
under an earlier World Bank project. In 2014 an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA),
a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) and a Livelihood
Restoration Plan (LRP) were prepared in accordance with the World Bank’s previous Operational
Policies (OPs) on environmental and social safeguards. After completion of the TEAS, the Government
proceeded with the construction of the Project without the support of the World Bank or other
development partners, drawing upon the outputs from the TEAS. The resettlement program for the
Project has been and continues to be managed by the State Enterprise, Directorate of Flooding Zone
of Rogun HPP (DFZ), which was established in 2011, in line with the 2014 RPF and the RAP prepared
for the first phase of resettlement (RAP 1). During the first phase of resettlement, which was prepared
in 2014 and completed in 2017, a total of 289 households (2,697 PAPs) were physically relocated.
The World Bank and other International Finance Institutions (IFIs) are now financing the Project, with
construction and resettlement activities ongoing. In January 2023, the World Bank approved a
Technical Assistance (TA) package, ‘Financing Framework for Rogun Hydropower Project.’ It aims to
support the Government of Tajikistan to establish a macroeconomically sustainable financing plan and
improve the environmental and social performance of the Project, aligning it with the requirements of
the World Bank’s Environmental and Social Framework (ESF), as well as the standards of other
potential Lenders who may participate in the financing of the Project. As part of the TA, a number of
E&S instruments for the Project have been updated or newly prepared, including a Resettlement and
Livelihood Restoration Framework (RLRF), which was prepared in June 2024 and the Resettlement
Action Plan and Livelihood Restoration Plan for the ongoing second phase of resettlement (RAP 2 and
LRP 2).

                                                                                                        ix
Purpose of RAP 2 and LRP 2
RAP 2 describes the progress of resettlement in the second phase (which commenced in 2017) and
includes measures to ensure that past and current resettlement activities meet the requirements of
both Tajikistan’s applicable laws and the international lenders’ standards1, especially the World Bank’s
Environmental and Social Standard 5 (ESS 5) on “Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and
Involuntary Resettlement”. It includes the policies, procedures and processes to identify and mitigate
impacts on people who are being or will be affected by physical and economic displacement due to the
construction and operation of the Project.
The RLRF has guided the preparation of RAP 2. The RLRF replaced the 2014 RPF, which guided the
development of RAP 1 covering resettlement activities from 2009-2017 and has been fully
implemented. A completion audit carried out in 2018 to assess RAP 1 implementation concluded that it
was materially consistent with World Bank’s OP 4.12 on Involuntary resettlement. To date,
resettlement within the RAP 2 period (2017-2026)2 is being implemented by DFZ without the support of
the World Bank or other development partners, drawing upon the initial 2014 RPF and RAP 1. RAP 2
supersedes those instruments.
Given that resettlement activities are being carried out in a phased manner over several years, to
correspond to impoundment levels of the reservoir, as well as the magnitude of people affected by
displacement, a framework approach to identify and mitigate adverse impacts on Project Affected
Persons (PAP) was considered appropriate.


Lessons learned from RAP 1
Key lessons to inform RAP 2/LRP 2 include:
•         Strengthening information dissemination and awareness of entitlements.
•         Expanding training programs beyond agriculture/trades to IT, tourism, and services.
•         Providing targeted support for women and vulnerable PAPs to access training, micro-credit,
          and jobs.
•         Increasing DFZ’s monitoring capacity and outreach staff.
•         Addressing declining interest in agriculture and identifying alternative livelihood strategies.
•         Supporting women’s requests for childcare, safe transport, market access, and culturally
          appropriate employment.


Current livelihood restoration measures in RAP 2
Scale & Monitoring: As of July 2025, 1,710 households have been surveyed, with 778 already
resettled. DFZ staffing has expanded to 67 to strengthen monitoring, data collection, and grievance
redress.



1 Tables summarizing the lenders’ policies on land acquisition and involuntary resettlement and setting out a gap analysis and

    reconciliation between national and the lenders’ policies are in the RLRF, which is available at energyprojects.tj.
2 The end date of 2025 has been extended if the impoundment/filling dates are extended. RAP 2/LRP 2 will include a new

    filling table and resettlement schedule, if required.
                                                                                                                             x
Compensation: Since July 2024, households receive full market value for assets (depreciation no
longer deducted). Most PAPs report compensation as sufficient, though inflation in construction
materials remains a challenge.
Income Trends: Average annual income of resettled PAPs rose modestly (from TJS 26,269 to TJS
29,823). Income diversification occurred, with declines in irrigated agriculture and livestock, and
increases in wage labor, migration, pensions, and small businesses. Food costs and living expenses
increased, stressing vulnerable households.
Support Provided (2017–2025):
   •       TJS 4 million in cash, loans and wage support. PAPs have also benefited from a national
           agricultural program which provides in-kind agricultural and pastoral support (seeds,
           seedlings, animals and equipment). Vulnerable PAPs have received food assistance.
   •       The project will also provide training stipends of USD 2 million to be disbursed by 2025.
   •       An Additional Financing of the World Bank’s Socio-Economic Resilience Support Project
           (SERSP) will add USD 17.5 million in community infrastructure and economic investments
           that will benefit both the PAPs and host communities in the project area. These will include:
           o   Community Investments: SERSP will finance infrastructure (schools, clinics, irrigation,
               renewable energy) and small-scale business development.
           o   Targeted Training & Entrepreneurship: Emphasis on agriculture, tourism, IT, trades, and
               small-scale businesses. Up to 7,000 beneficiaries to receive entrepreneurship training;
               1,600 business plans to receive direct support.
           o   Women & Youth Empowerment: Programs focus on employment equity, safe transport,
               childcare, and culturally acceptable work.
           o   Sustainability: Incorporation of climate resilience, sustainable agriculture, and local
               tourism into long-term livelihood strategies.
Employment & Training:
   •   1,127 PAPs supported with permanent, temporary, or seasonal jobs.
   •   612 vocational training sessions conducted (2018–2024), attended by both men and women.
   •   Preferential loans (TJS 5,000) are available for small business start-ups.
   •   Special programs for vulnerable groups (disabled, women, female-headed households) include
       targeted training, shops, and agricultural support.
Agriculture:
   •   Land allocation increased (average plots expanded from ~2,500 m² to ~15,000 m²).
   •   Support provided through seeds, livestock, small machinery, and extension services.
   •   Shift from commercial farming to subsistence and diversification into other livelihoods.
Challenges to livelihood restoration includes: freshwater shortages; delays in road and utility
infrastructure; inflation-driven construction costs; and adaptation periods in new resettlement areas.
Opportunities for provision of additional resources and services through Rogun’s Benefit-Sharing
Program (BSP) will also support livelihoods. This LRP also pays particular attention to vulnerable
groups, including people who by virtue of gender, age, physical or mental disability, economic
disadvantage, ethnicity, social discrimination and/or exclusion may be disproportionately affected by
resettlement.
                                                                                                         xi
4. INTRODUCTION
LRP 2 needs to be read in conjunction with RAP 2. In addition to a summary of livelihood restoration
measures, RAP 2 includes:
    •   Project description and overview
    •   Project impacts due to the impoundment of the reservoir
    •   Socio-economic conditions of the PAPs in the Rogun HPP Area
    •   Institutional arrangements
    •   Implementation arrangements
    •   Eligibility, valuation and compensation procedures
    •   Entitlements and compensation
    •   Community participation
    •   Adaptive management processes
    •   Costs and budget
    •   Grievance redress mechanism
    •   Monitoring and evaluation
The focus of LRP 2 is to assess livelihood restoration efforts in RAP 1 and ongoing efforts in the second
phase of resettlement and provide a plan for livelihood restoration for the 16,919 PAPs. This LRP builds
upon the project Resettlement and Livelihood Restoration Framework (RLRF) and the resettlement that
was completed as part of the Phase 1 technical assistance in 2011-16 which was guided by a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), Resettlement Action Plan 1 (RAP 1) and Livelihood Restoration
Plan 1 (LRP 1)3.
LRP 2 is one of a series of documents that will guide the implementation of the resettlement process
going forward. The RLRF provides the overarching policy guidance and requirements for the
resettlement program to inform the preparation of further RAPs and LRPs. These documents are
outlined in Table 1-1.
Table 1-1 – Documentation Related to Ongoing Resettlement for Rogun HPP
 Document          Purpose
 RLRF              The RLRF updates the 2014 Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and provides guidance for the second
                   phase Resettlement Action Plan (RAP 2) and Livelihood Restoration Plan (LRP 2) for the years 2017-
                   2026, as well as describing when future RAPs and LRPs will be prepared for the remaining stages of the
                   reservoir filling.

                   The objectives of the RLRF are to:
                   •   Set out the approach for managing involuntary resettlement, ensuring living conditions for Project-
                       affected persons (PAPs) are equivalent to, if not better than, those which existed before the Project;
                   •   Explain how resettlement activities are being coordinated, including provision and allocation of
                       resources and overall decision-making;
                   •   Provide information on institutional arrangements, numbers of PAPs, entitlements, indicative budget
                       and timetables and initial livelihood restoration modalities for upcoming resettlement activities for the
                       period 2026 until the end of 2032, when resettlement will be completed four years in advance of full
                       impoundment in 2038. The RLRF has guided the development of this RAP 2 and will guide the
                       preparation of future RAPs and LRPs, which will be prepared in parallel with future stages of reservoir
                       filling after 2025;


3 The Government of Tajikistan commenced the resettlement process in 2009, but most PAPs did not start relocating until

  2011. The first phase of resettlement was completed in 2017.

                                                                                                                               1
 Document           Purpose
                    •   Summarize the Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) for resolving potential complaints from
                        displaced persons; and
                    •   Describe the arrangements for implementing and monitoring the resettlement process, including
                        internal and external monitoring arrangements.

                    The RLRF also includes key findings and lessons learned from an assessment of the Phase 2
                    resettlement activities undertaken between 2017 and 2024. It also provides measures in RAP 2/LRP 2 to
                    align it with international standards.


                    The implementation plans for resettlement and livelihood restoration that identify the households and
 2017-2026
                    assets of those affected by the Project and details compensation, assistance, relocation arrangements
 RAP 2 and
                    and other livelihood measures that will be undertaken to ensure that impacts on people who are adversely
 LRP 2
                    affected are appropriately mitigated, covering the period 2017-2026.
 Future             These will be prepared by DFZ for resettlement taking place after 2025, guided by the RLRF and drawing
 RAPs/LRPs          on the lessons learned from implementation of RAP 2/LRP 2.



     1.1 Resettlement and Livelihood Restoration: Current Situation and Planning
The Project is subject to a national resettlement policy established by Resolution No.467 of October 1,
2008, and expanded by Resolution No.47 of January 20, 2009, and associated presidential decrees.
Following Resolution No. 47, DFZ was founded in 2011 and has two major responsibilities (i)
resettlement of the affected population and (ii) construction of communal infrastructure. The Ministry of
Labor, Migration and Employment of the Population (MoLMEP) and the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA)
are responsible for livelihood support and restoration activities, including training and support for
employment. DFZ also works with jamoats and other relevant ministries and agencies dealing with
education, health, energy, water supply, environmental protection and social protection to ensure the
program follows the key principles described above.
Resettlement is proceeding in phases according to a series of RAPs as follows:


Table 1-2: RAP Planning for Rogun HPP

     SCENARIO-I – RAP PLANNING (For all 69 villages, resettlement completed by 2032, in
                    advance of full impoundment (1290 masl) by 2038)
 Impoundment            Proposed years       RAP              No. of        No. of         No. of         RAP Status
 levels based on        to complete          period          villages    households        PAPs
 lowest point of        resettlement                        covered in   covered in      covered in
 villages (m asl)                                           each RAP      each RAP       each RAP

 1092-1220              2014-2017            2014-2017           8            326           2,697          Completed
                                             RAP 1
 1110-1290              2017-2026            2017-2026          16           1,710         16,919       In progress (to be
                                             RAP 2                                                      finalized by 2026)
 1185-1270              2026-2028            2026-2028          16           1,328          9,206        RAP 3 ready by
                                             RAP 3                                                           20264




4 The commencements dates for RAPs/LRPs 3 to 5 may be adjusted if the impoundment/filling dates change, if there are

  increases in the number of PAPs or if there are delays in financing.

                                                                                                                               2
 1271-1295               2028-2030            2028-2030           17           2,215          12,547        RAP 4 ready by
                                              RAP 4                                                             20275
 1296-1414               2030-2032            2030-2032           12           1,209           8,898        RAP 5 ready by
                                              RAP 5                                                             20296
           TOTAL AFFECTED POPULATION                              69           6,788          50,2677


As of June 2025, 778 households (7,820 PAPs) in the second phase of resettlement (RAP 2) have been
relocated. The remainder are either in the process of moving (6,699 PAPs) or selecting the place to
which they will resettle (2,400 PAPs).

In general, resettled households in this phase consider the structures and associated services to be
better or the same as they were in their previous communities. PAPs have received household land for
their homes and structures, comparable to what they had before, as well as additional land for each
married child in the household. Those PAPs who requested agricultural land for subsistence and other
uses received such land, though in some cases, some of the allocated land is outside their community
because of land scarcity. Communal land has also been made available to communities, though the
amount of land for grazing may be less than what was available to them before, due to the scarcity of
such land in some of the resettlement areas. Additional schools, medical facilities and other social
structures have been built in the communities where the PAPs have been resettled, as well as
provisions for electricity and water supply. These amenities have also benefited host communities.

According to a June 2024 socio-economic survey of resettled PAPs carried out by DFZ, most services
have improved or stayed the same:

    •    No change in road accessibility. After resettlement, 99% of households still have access to
         roads.

    •    Electricity: Resettlement has not affected the availability of electricity for households. The level
         of access to electricity is 100%.

    •    Hospital/Medical Center: Accessibility to healthcare facilities in all areas has improved
         significantly and is 100%.

    •    Access to drinking water: The overall level of accessibility after resettlement is 96%. The
         availability of drinking water has remained almost the same in all districts.

    •    Telecommunications infrastructure: Resettlement has also had a positive impact on the
         availability of telecommunications infrastructure in all districts. On average, household access to
         mobile networks and the internet has increased from 73% to 85%.

    •    Access to primary schools: Initially, the socio-economic analysis indicated that access to primary
         schools had fallen from 75% to 67% across all districts. This is because the new schools built in
         the resettlement areas combine primary (Grades 1 to 4) and secondary (Grades 5 to 11),


5 See Footnote 3.
6 See Footnote 3.
7 This is the current number as of June 2025. It is possible that the final count of PAPs could be up to 60,000 to take account of

  population growth.

                                                                                                                                3
         resulting in fewer standalone primary schools. In fact, access to primary schools has increased
         to 100% in the resettled areas.

    •    Leisure/recreation facilities: Access to leisure facilities has improved since the resettlement. On
         average, all districts have increased from 33% to 42%.

    •    Bus stations: Accessibility to bus stations for households has also improved. On average, in all
         districts, household access to bus stations increased from 26% to 52%.

    •    Sewerage: On average, 51% of households in all districts have sewerage after resettlement,
         where previously almost all of them had none.

Some key challenges remain:

    •    Interviews by the World Bank of some 200 resettled households (between 2022 and 2024)
         indicated that about 90% of PAHs reported that the financial compensation for their houses and
         structures – even with the permitted depreciation by the government8 – was adequate to
         purchase or build new houses and structures at the resettlement sites.9 The remaining 10% of
         PAH surveyed stated that they needed additional support, as materials and labor costs were
         higher than expected. Almost all PAPs agree strongly that their new homes are superior in
         quality to their original homes, with important amenities such electricity and water supply, and
         upgraded or new schools and medical facilities to accommodate the resettled people, as well as
         host communities.

    •    Livelihood restoration is recognized to take more time than physical resettlement and it will be
         important for the government to strengthen efforts in this area. While PAPs may opt to keep
         some agricultural land for subsistence farming and try to continue working as migrant laborers in
         other countries, many have been switching to or are considering new occupations, such as
         construction and services. This, and proximity to larger towns, may explain why the average
         annual income of resettled persons generally increased by about 11 percent after resettlement.

    •    Access to irrigation water: On average, the usage of irrigation water has decreased from 98% to
         70% across all districts. This is largely because many resettled families have opted not to have
         agricultural plots, but to engage in other economic activities, such as construction and small
         businesses. The share of households engaged in irrigated agriculture has fallen from 44% to
         6%. In terms of agriculture, the cultivation of crops, in particular potatoes and vegetables,
         decreased. The proportion of households without crops has increased. The number of fruit trees,
         namely mulberries, walnuts and pears, has significantly decreased. About 2/3 of the PAPs have
         indicated that, while they support some subsistence farming at the new resettlement sites, they
         prefer doing migrant labor or new professions, such as construction, carpentry, masonry, etc.
         For some resettlement sites (e.g. Sebiston), there are challenges with water supply and quality



8 The depreciation of household asset values ended in July 1, 2024, as part of the government’s effort to align the

   compensation process with good international industry practice and the requirements of the World Bank and other
   international financial institutions investing in the project.
9 A separate survey of 363 households prepared by a consultant to DFZ indicated that 73% of PAHs reported adequate

   compensation, but the questionnaire did not ask PAPs to explain how or why they were not adequately compensated.

                                                                                                                      4
       for irrigation, and DFZ is working with the Ministry of Energy and Water Resources to build water
       supply pipes (see below).

   •   Access to public land for grazing or access to hay or timber: On average across all districts, the
       usage of grazing land and access to timber decreased from 97% to 20%. However, it is
       important to note that there is significantly less demand for grazing land or for any hay and
       timber growing on such land. In their original villages, PAPs were using local land informally in
       mountainous areas for grazing animals, gathering hay and timber and growing fruit and nut
       trees. In the new resettlement areas, the communal land is more formally established and
       delineated, but the quantity and quality is sufficient to support livelihoods. New settlements are
       more peri-urban than rural and many families have opted not to keep grazing animals and thus
       do not require hay. As for timber, resettled communities are able to purchase timber in local
       markets. In some areas, such as Tursunzoda, PAPs have preferred to have agricultural land
       allotted to individual households, rather than establishing communal land. While allocation of
       communal land remains an issue in at least a few cases, DFZ is focusing on resettling the PAPs
       to the new sites first and then working closely with communities which have asked for communal
       land to make such land available in or near the resettled communities. In some cases,
       communal land will end up being in areas near the resettled communities because of difficulties
       in finding accessible and productive land in the communities themselves.

   •   Access to secondary schools: The average level in all districts has fallen from 96% to 89%. This
       is due to the fact that some of the secondary schools are still under construction. Once they are
       completed, access to secondary schools in the resettled areas will be 100%.

DFZ has reached out to resettled PAPs and invited them to submit claims through the Grievance
Redress Mechanism for additional cash compensation or other support, as needed. This point will be
reiterated during the consultations on RAP 2 and LRP 2 and monitored during supervision, including by
the independent RAP monitor.

DFZ has also worked with the Ministry of Energy and Water Resources and other related state
enterprises to resolve accessibility to drinking and irrigation water, as well as public lands for grazing
and other purposes. There are some challenges in the resettlement areas. For example, in some areas,
the groundwater is saline. This means that water has to be pumped into the new resettlement from
other locations and/or water retention ponds and purification systems need to be built. Communal land
may be limited by geography, which means that there may be more intensive use of the land. DFZ has
held numerous consultations with PAHs to discuss land use in the new settlements, including balancing
household agricultural plots with communal land. In many cases, resettled communities have requested
less communal land and household agricultural land, as they are shifting away from farming and
pastoral activities in favor of new employment, for example in construction or other migrant labor
opportunities. LRP 2 includes proposals for targeted skills-based training to enable the transition for
interested PAPs from land-based livelihoods to other occupations, such as services, construction and
small businesses.

DFZ has worked closely with the Ministry of Education to ensure existing schools are expanded to
accommodate extra students or that new schools are built in new settlements – and that this is done
before families resettle. In some cases, temporary alternative arrangements have had to be made for
students to attend schools in other towns while the construction of existing or new facilities are being
finalized. Education authorities also point out that some schools are completing construction and, once

                                                                                                           5
this is done, the percentage of students with access to primary and secondary schools will improve. The
construction of the new schools will also benefit students from adjoining host communities (as has been
demonstrated in RAP 1).

Finally, DFZ is working closely with MoLMEP, Ministry of Agriculture and other relevant ministries,
agencies and jamoats to help resettled PAPs restore previous livelihoods or get support in establishing
new occupations. These measures are detailed in LRP 2.

    1.2 Consultation, Information Disclosure and Grievance Redress Mechanism
Regular and ongoing consultations – both formal and informal – with affected communities have been
carried out since the establishment of DFZ in 201110. For the RLRF, in-country consultations with
affected communities and the wider public took place in June 2024 and are detailed in the Stakeholder
Engagement Plan (SEP), which is available at: energyprojects.tj. DFZ has hired appropriately qualified
staff to effectively carry out stakeholder engagement activities and provide oversight on livelihood
restoration measures.
PAPs have been notified well in advance of relocation to provide necessary time to plan and relocate
their families with the support of DFZ and local authorities. The entitlement matrix has been shared with
all affected communities in the form of a simple guide for land acquisition and compensation. As
detailed in the SEP, these entitlements have been communicated through various means, including
national media sources, TV ads, radios, and printed leaflets.
A Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) managed by DFZ to handle resettlement-related issues at the
local level has been established. This includes a second tier to handle complaints, which is led by
members of civil society. Complainants can also go to court. The PAPs also have access to a
centralized grievance mechanism, at the national level, which is available to receive appeals from all
citizens of Tajikistan.

    1.3 Implementation Arrangements, Monitoring and Budget
Resettlement and livelihood restoration management of a project of this scale requires an effective and
efficient governance structure, in which coordination and communication amongst responsible agencies
is critical. As noted previously, DFZ is mandated to coordinate and manage the resettlement program of
the Project. Given that livelihood restoration support is also vital during physical relocation and post-
resettlement, DFZ has received additional support and capacity to carry out its responsibilities and
coordinate with MoLMEP, MoA and other ministries and agencies so that affected people are aware of
the livelihood restoration process, and the livelihood support opportunities and entitlements that the
Government of Tajikistan is providing.
Internal and external monitoring protocols and procedures have been strengthened under DFZ’s
supervision and coordination. These will involve an independent third-party monitor. Furthermore,
completion audits will be conducted by another independent consultant at the end of the implementation
of each RAP. An information management system is being developed by DFZ to permit real-time
monitoring of the project-affected districts and settlements. Appropriate output and outcome indicators
to monitor progress on resettlement and livelihood have been developed and are included in RAP 2
(Section 15, ‘Monitoring and Evaluation’).


10 DFZ prepares records of the meetings, including key issues raised and actions for follow-up.



                                                                                                          6
The total budget for RAP 2 (2017-2026) is estimated to be about USD 87.5 million. This includes
sufficient budget to complete RAP 2 and LRP 2 and expenses to bring the current resettlement
management into alignment with the updated standards of the Lenders. The budget to complete the
resettlement and livelihood restoration of the remaining 4,752 households after 2026 is estimated at
around 200 million USD, which includes appropriate contingencies, as it is expected that this amount
may increase in the future.




                                                                                                       7
5. LIVELIHOOD RESTORATION DURING RAP 1/LRP 1
During the first phase of resettlement, 289 project-affected households (2,697 PAPs) were resettled
from villages near the dam site to other towns and villages: Teppai Samarkandi and Moinkach in Rudaki
District; Toichi villages I and II in Tursonzoda City; New Saidon; and Yoli Garmoba in Rogun city.
Resettlement commenced in 2011 and was completed in the summer of 2017. In 2018, PMG
commissioned an audit of the RAP 1 process.
Some of the livelihood measures provided in the first phase includes MoLMEP providing loans to each
family11 for a total of TJS 3,000.12 In addition, each Head of Household received TJS 100 somoni and
each family member received TJS 50 somoni. Survey data showed that 99 percent of households
interviewed received such loans and benefits. Table 2-1 provides a breakdown of these payments.


           Table 2-1: Summary of Funds Paid to PAPs during RAP 1 (in TJS)
                    Expenditures       Chorsada          Urban         Rural                 Total
                                       Nurabad           community     communities
                                       (settled in       of Rogun      of Rogun: Tagi
                                       Rudaki            (settled in   Kamar,Tagi
                                       District)         Tursunzoda    Agba, Mirog
                                                         City)         (settled in
                                                                       Rogun city)

 1                  MoLMEP             780,000           381,000       492,000             1,653,000
                    Preferential
                    credits 3,000
                    somoni per
                    family.
 2                  MoLMEP             77,250            37,500        43,050                157,800
                    One-time
                    assistance to
                    families (100
                    somoni per
                    family and 50
                    somoni for
                    each family
                    member)
 Total                                 857,250           418,500       535,050             1,810,800



No household was required to move until their replacement house had been completed. In addition,
relocated households were allowed to continue using previous plots until all crops had been harvested.
All resettled households built replacement homes. Additionally, married children of primary homeowners
that lived jointly with the families were recognized as separate households and were provided land plots
on which they built new homes. Vulnerable households took longer on average to complete house
construction than non-vulnerable households, with many receiving additional in-kind support and


11 In almost all households, there was more than one family and so loans were provided for the Head of Household as well as

     other eligible family members (i.e. married children).
12 There was no obligation to pay 50 percent of the amount received, and the remaining part (50 percent) had to be repaid

     without interest.

                                                                                                                              8
assistance. In accordance with the approved master plans of new settlements, engineering
communication facilities, health centers and educational institutions were built and commissioned.
The standard of living in the new resettlement areas improved significantly for PAPs compared to their
living standards prior to being resettled. This included better quality homes on larger land plots which
have electricity, water connections, paved roads and transportation links to work and markets, as well
as access to new or upgraded education and medical facilities. Approximately 90 percent of the
resettled PAPs grow agricultural crops and fruit trees in household gardens adjacent to their newly built
homes.
Prior to be being resettled, women engaged largely in housekeeping activities however post
resettlement women had greater livelihood opportunities. For example, in Tursunzoda, more than 180
women obtained jobs in social work, small businesses, crop production, and seasonal work (harvesting
of raw cotton, grapes, and other crops). For women lacking formal education, MoLMEP provided
training courses (e.g. sewing courses). Upon completion of these courses, 40 students received
certificates and are currently employed in the formal sector or work out of their homes.
In Rogun City, post resettlement has also provided more employment opportunities for women.
Whereas prior to resettlement women had limited employment opportunities, women have found
employment as medical staff, teachers, cleaners and other jobs.
Although the RAP 1 audit found that the resettlement process met the standards of good international
industry practice (including the World Bank’s Operational Policy 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement),
restoring livelihoods was a challenge. Out of the population affected by resettlement under RAP 1,
those who had been resettled in the Rudaki District had the most successful livelihood restoration
outcomes, mainly because they were resettled to a peri-urban area on the outskirts of Dushanbe. All of
the PAPs were able to restore their incomes in 4-5 years, with 25% earning more than they did in their
previous communities. According to DFZ, overall it took between 4 and 10 years for the PAPs to restore
their incomes. DFZ spent several years addressing the issues as noted in Table 2-12 below:


Table 2-2: List of Outstanding Livelihood Restoration Issues upon Completion of RAP 1
 Outstanding Issues              Responsible Agencies              Result
 Employment                      MoLMEP                            Reduction of the
                                 Local state authorities (Rudaki   unemployment rate and the
                                 District, Tursunzoda City, and    acquisition of alternative
                                 Rogun City) target resettled      income sources
                                 persons as priority in hiring
 Refresher courses               MoLMEP                            Acquisition of new skills and
                                                                   specialties
 Allotment of land for the       Local state authorities (Rudaki   Full use of lands provided to
 cultivation of crops            District, Tursunzoda City,        those who have requested land
                                 Rogun City)
                                 Committee on Land Building
 Allotment of land plots for     Local state authorities (Rudaki   Improvement in the standard of
 families of migrants            District, Tursunzoda City)        living
 Support for vulnerable people   Local state authorities (Rudaki   Improvement in the standard
                                 District, Tursunzoda City) give   of living

                                                                                                        9
                                 priority to vulnerable people for
                                 employment opportunities

DFZ has been continuing to monitor the PAPs from RAP 1 and to provide support to PAPs, as and
when needed.



      5.1 Lessons Learned about Livelihood Restoration from RAP 1/LRP 1 and Their
          Application in RAP 2/LRP 2
Based on interviews with people affected by resettlement under of RAP 1, a number of key lessons
have been learned about the livelihood restoration process:
•   DFZ and MoLMEP should strengthen information dissemination to efforts to make PAPs aware of
    their entitlements and opportunities in both Rogun HPP targeted programs and other government
    programs. PAPs should receive support to register for services and get to access entitlements and
    opportunities offered.
•   MoLMEP should provide more targeted advice and guidance to individual PAPs to utilize training
    opportunities. One constraint is that few PAPs can afford doing longer-term training, as they need to
    earn a daily income.
•   Training should go beyond the usual curriculum related to agriculture, construction and trades, but
    include new skills and professions such as in IT and natural resource management/tourism near the
    Rogun reservoir.
•   MoLMEP should provide targeted support/measures to ensure that, PAPs, especially women and
    those most vulnerable, are able to access training and micro-credit opportunities.
•   DFZ should hire additional qualified staff to strengthen their outreach to PAPs and increase its
    capacity to monitor livelihood prior to relocation and post relocation. Strengthened monitoring of
    livelihood restoration measures is critical to confirm effectiveness during implementation and
    facilitate quick response to challenges.
•   DFZ and MoLMEP should undertake a pre-identification process to identify and provide targeted
    support to PAPs who will lose livelihoods.
•   DFZ and MoLMEP should carry out further analysis to ascertain why many PAPs no longer wish to
    pursue agricultural based livelihoods These metrics should inform resettlement into specific
    relocation sites.
•   DFZ should maintain ongoing engagement with female PAPs to identify specific needs and
    obstacles to restore their livelihoods. Women PAPs have made several suggestions to enhance the
    quality and effectiveness of future LRPs, including:
       •   Finding employment in their new locations (both those continuing existing employment and
           those entering employment for the first time). Many acknowledged the importance of
           acquiring skills to be able to enter the labor market. Some women stressed the need for
           childcare facilities and culturally acceptable work (e.g. such as sewing, working in a bakery
           or pharmacy) to enable them to work locally. Availability of such infrastructure varies
           between sites.

                                                                                                         10
•   Having access to safe transportation services to enable women to access social and
    economic opportunities.

•   Getting short-term assistance to lease market stalls to sell products in new places of
    residence, start up small gardens or nurseries, (i.e., seeds, trees, compost) and start up
    agricultural activities at the new resettlement sites.

•   Getting support to for technical and vocational education and training (TVET) and
    apprenticeships or financial support while undertaking longer-term training.




                                                                                                 11
6. ASSESSMENT OF LIVELIHOOD RESTORATION FOR RAP 2/LRP 2
While preparing RAP 2, DFZ undertook an assessment of key issues. These issues are similar to the
lessons learned from RAP 1/LRP 1 – and Table 3-1 below includes a number of actions DFZ is taking to
improve resettlement and livelihood restoration during the second phase.


Table 3-1: RAP 2 Assessment Recommendations and DFZ’s Responses

                Recommendations                                          DFZ’s Response

 Improving data collection systems on socio-             The census has been expanded to collect
 economic baseline, vulnerabilities and livelihoods      education, employment and income data for all
                                                         family members.
                                                         Jamoats are improving data collection and keeping
                                                         track of this information and sharing it with DFZ.
                                                         DFZ coordinates with other ministries to ensure
                                                         vulnerable people in the resettlement areas receive
                                                         support to which they are entitled, as well as
                                                         additional support related to resettlement and
                                                         livelihood restoration.

 Improving information management systems                A modern, digitized data collection system has been
                                                         developed and is being used by DFZ, including a
                                                         data verification process. This includes an updated
                                                         system for documenting and recording all valuation
                                                         reports, payments, entitlements and additional
                                                         support measures that are provided either as cash
                                                         and/or in-kind.
                                                         DFZ has hired qualified staff to manage census
                                                         data and management information system.



 Increase staff and capacity to manage resettlement      DFZ has increased staffing to 67 as of April 2025.
 and livelihood monitoring in line with international
 standards.
                                                         Hiring is underway.
 This includes commissioning an
 external/independent valuation expert’s assessment
 on the valuation process to benchmark replacement
 cost especially for assets such as buildings,
 structures and other moveable assets where
 depreciation is being deducted as per national law.



 Improving outreach on valuation process, eligibility,   DFZ is making information available through its
 entitlements, compensation and cut-off dates.           public information centers in the resettlement areas,
                                                         though meetings and consultations and
                                                         posters/pamphlets. Extra efforts are being made to
                                                         ensure women and vulnerable persons are


                                                                                                                 12
                                                       consulted about the resettlement process. For
                                                       example, DFZ is seeking specific feedback from
                                                       women and vulnerable persons on their desires in
                                                       terms of employment, skills and training and
                                                       preferences around vocations. Consultation
                                                       processes are also designed to support equal
                                                       participation of women and vulnerable persons
                                                       (e.g., appropriate meeting times, transport,
                                                       childcare support, as well as convening of women-
                                                       only meetings).



Improving the efficiency of compensation payments      DFZ is doing this. First compensation payments are
and documentation                                      being paid within six months after the final valuation
                                                       and no later than 12 months.
                                                       DFZ is working to improve timelines for issuing land
                                                       certificates, but the issuance process is linked to the
                                                       construction of houses, which can take time.

Ensuring full replacement value is achieved in         Since July 1, 2024, DFZ and the State Unitary
compensation paid for all lost assets and structures   Enterprise “Narkhguzor” have ceased deducting the
of affected households. Where national law does        value of household assets. Instead, PAHs receive
not meet the standard of compensation at full          the full market value for their assets. As part of the
replacement cost, ensure compensation under            ongoing consultations on the resettlement process,
national law is supplemented by additional             DFZ has been asking PAPs to come forward to the
measures (in-kind or cash support) to meet the         Grievance Redress Mechanism if their
replacement cost standard of the Lenders.              compensation was inadequate or resettlement
                                                       remains incomplete due to the lack of amenities,
                                                       such as water supply. DFZ will provide additional
                                                       compensation, including in-kind support, to PAPs
                                                       who demonstrate that the compensation resulting
                                                       from the valuation of their houses and structures
                                                       was insufficient for them to purchase or build new
                                                       houses and structures sufficient to restore their
                                                       living standards.

Improving monitor of replacement house                 This is being done. It should be noted that
construction process and public service provision.     construction of resettlement houses takes at least 1
Where construction of replacement houses takes         to 1.5 years for all categories of PAPs.
more than 1.5 years, investigate whether these
                                                       DFZ has been making alternative arrangements to
households are vulnerable and require additional
                                                       deliver services (e.g. water) until the services in the
support. In cases of public service shortages,
                                                       resettlement sites are satisfactorily completed.
ensure alternative arrangements are in place to
facilitate public access to these services in new
resettlement sites.

Improving the grievance mechanism.                     DFZ has strengthened their community liaison
                                                       teams to help PAPs plan their relocation and use
                                                       the GRM for settling complaints about
                                                       compensation and other issues.




                                                                                                                 13
 Improving governance on livelihood restoration    DFZ is working closely with ministries, agencies and
 management and establish proactive livelihoods    jamoats to strengthen livelihood support. The
 support during transition.                        project will also benefit from financing under the
                                                   project for training stipends and the World Bank’s
                                                   Socio-economic Resilience Support project.



In addition to the above, the project is undertaking the following commitments during implementation of
the resettlement/livelihood restoration program:
1. DFZ has been keeping careful track of the adequacy of compensation. In consultations with the
   World Bank between December 2022 and December 2024 involving some 200 households (out of a
   total of 1,710), about 90% of PAPs said they received sufficient compensation to build new houses
   and other structures. About 10% of resettled PAPs said they applied for additional compensation
   and most of them (about 80%) said they received additional financial and/or in-kind compensation,
   such as land, seeds, farming implements and support in getting local jobs or setting up small
   businesses.
   A separate survey of 364 resettled households in July/August 2023 (during the second phase of
   resettlement), indicated that 73% of PAHs reported that the financial compensation for their houses
   and structures – even with the permitted depreciation of 30% by the government – was adequate to
   purchase or build new houses and structures at the resettlement sites. Almost all PAPs agreed
   strongly that their new homes are superior in quality to their original homes, with important
   amenities such electricity and water supply, and upgraded or new schools and medical facilities to
   accommodate the resettled people as well as the host communities.
   The remaining 27% of PAH surveyed stated that they needed additional support, as materials and
   labor costs were higher than expected. This was especially the case from 2022 onwards due to
   inflation for critical building materials, such as wood and iron. Few of the PAPs who had resettled in
   earlier years raised concerns about the cost of building new homes. The resettled PAPs said they
   received additional support through family connections. It should be noted there was no data on
   how many of this group filed complaints through the GRM, but about half of the PAHs overall in the
   second phase of resettlement have complained through the GRM.
   The PAPs noted that DFZ also provided transportation of all their movable assets to the new
   resettlement sites, which helped minimize losses. The new houses were of higher quality, but
   generally slightly smaller than their original homes because the number of persons in the household
   was reduced, as married children received separate plots of land.
   As indicated above, on July 1, 2024, the government ceased applying the depreciation for
   household structures. By this time 778 households (7820 PAPs) had been compensated and
   resettled. As part of the ongoing consultations on the resettlement process, DFZ has been asking
   PAPs to come forward to the Grievance Redress Mechanism if their compensation was inadequate
   or resettlement remains incomplete due to the lack of amenities, such as water supply. DFZ will
   provide additional compensation, including in-kind support, to PAPs who demonstrate that the
   compensation resulting from the valuation of their houses and structures was insufficient for them to
   purchase or build new houses and structures sufficient to restore their living standards. To date,


                                                                                                          14
   some 20 households have asked for additional compensation and most of the complainants have
   received additional compensation or in-kind support; some cases are in the process of being
   resolved.
   As for the households in the process of resettling, the survey indicates that 50% of the PAHs who
   are in the process of resettling have expressed concerns that their compensation may not be
   sufficient, not only due to the prices of construction materials. Another key challenge has been
   related to water supply to households: there is a problem with saline water in wells at some of the
   resettlement sites, which requires water to be provided by other means; and/or constructing water
   pipes has taken longer than expected due to challenges with terrain, water pressure, etc. Other
   concerns have been raised about construction quality for some houses and the timely construction
   of paved roads. Both resettled households and those in the process of resettling have noted that it
   takes time to restore livelihoods and income in the new resettlement areas.
2. The project aims to complete resettlement by 2032 but has built in some extra time if there are
   delays.
3. The resettlement lots have some flexibility in terms of the placement and orientation of the
   structures, but there are constraints due to the infrastructure related to electricity, water supply,
   sewerage and roads.
4. Fresh water supply is a challenge in some of the resettlement sites, given the presence of salt in the
   groundwater and/or the design of pipes with adequate water pressure. DFZ is working with relevant
   ministries and local authorities to build appropriate infrastructure to provide adequate water supply
   for drinking and irrigation.

5. For those families which have agricultural land, the project aims to make replacement land available
   near their homes, but, given the scarcity of suitable land in some places, land plots are sometimes
   made available to PAPs outside of their communities.

6. Small businesses may be able to re-establish in the new resettlement areas. Business owners are
   given equivalent land and can apply for preferential loans to set up their businesses. They also have
   the opportunity to undertake training to strengthen existing skills or learn new ones.

7. Some members of the communities at the end of the reservoir may not need to move from their
   current sites – if geological, hydrological, seismic and other data related to the safety and quality of
   land sites indicate that they can stay safely and have the requisite productive land they need for
   their livelihoods.

8. RAP 2/LRP 2 will, if necessary, include future provisions for adapting resettlement implementation in
   response to unanticipated changes in project conditions, or unanticipated obstacles to achieving
   satisfactory resettlement outcomes.




                                                                                                           15
      6.1 Livelihoods of RAP 2 PAPs


Table 3-2 indicates the current situation with regards to the resettlement process during the second phase of resettlement.


Table 3-2: Affected Populations in RAP 2 Villages as of July 2025

No.   Planned        Name of the       District &   New village/city    Lower      Upper         Number of the HH       Num    Number     Number       Status
      Year for       Village           city (out-   the resettlers      point of   point of      and Families           ber    of         of Project
      Completion                       migration)   that have           Village    the Village   (Projected Affected    of     Families   Affected
      of Resettle-                                  moved to.           (meters)   (meters)      Households-PAHs)       HH's              Persons
      ment
 1    2017           Sicharogh         Rogun city   Rogun city, Yoli       1,115        1,143                      95     38        57          380    Completely
                                                    Garmoba                                                                                            relocated.
                                                    Tursunzoda city,
                                                    Toichi village
 2    2017           Sari Pul          Nurobod      Danghara               1,153        1,196                    236     110       126        1,149    Completely
                                       district     district,                                                                                          relocated.
                                                    Chorsada 2
                                                    village
                                                    Nurobod district,
                                                    Darband city
                                                    Tursunzoda city,
                                                    Toichi village
 3    2017           Furudgoh          Nurobod      Danghara               1,165        1,185                      77     36        41          370    Completely
                     (Airport)         district     district,                                                                                          relocated.
                                                    Chorsada 2
                                                    village
                                                    Nurobod district
                                                    Darband city
 4    2018           Saidon            Rogun city   Rogun city,            1,210        1,301                      59     17        42          182    Completely
                                                    Saidoni Nav                                                                                        relocated.
                                                    Tursunzoda city,
                                                    Toichi
 5    2018           Makhallai poyon   Nurobod      Danghara               1,182        1,250                    173      77        96          806    Completely
                                       district     district,                                                                                          relocated.
                                                    Chorsada 2

                                                                                                                                                           16
No.   Planned        Name of the        District &   New village/city    Lower      Upper         Number of the HH       Num    Number     Number       Status
      Year for       Village            city (out-   the resettlers      point of   point of      and Families           ber    of         of Project
      Completion                        migration)   that have           Village    the Village   (Projected Affected    of     Families   Affected
      of Resettle-                                   moved to.           (meters)   (meters)      Households-PAHs)       HH's              Persons
      ment
                                                     Nurobod district,
                                                     Darband city
6     2018           Chanor             Nurobod      Tursunzoda city,       1,199        1,255                    359     177       182        1,795    Completely
                                        district     Toichi and                                                                                         relocated.
                                                     Namuna
                                                     Faizobod
                                                     district,
                                                     Sebiston
                                                     Nurobod district,
                                                     Darband city
7     2023           Roghuni poyon      Nurobod      Faizobod               1,242        1,265                      53     45         8       266       Completely
                                        district     district,                                                                                          relocated.
                                                     Sebiston
8     2025           Obiboriki poyon     Nurobod     Faizobod               1,259        1,327                      77     41        36                 Completely
                                        district     district,                                                                                330       relocated.
                                                     Sebiston
9     2025           Obiboriki bolo     Nurobod      Faizobod               1,327        1,487                      84     50        34                 Completely
                                        district     district,                                                                                412       relocated.
                                                     Sebiston
10    2025           Mehrobod           Nurobod      Nurobod district,      1,250        1,280                   1366     528       838                 Resettlement in
                     (formerly          district     Darband city                                                                            6016       progress (35%
                     Komsomolobod)                   Tursunzoda city                                                                                    resettled).
                                                     Toichi, Namuna
11    2025           Lughuri poyon      Rogun city   Faizobod district      1,222        1,293                      82     61        21       362       To be resettled.
12    2025           Bedikho            Nurobod      Explanatory            1,143        1,221                    118      58        60                 To be resettled.
                                        district     work ongoing                                                                             588
13    2025           Aligalaboni bolo   Nurobod      Faizobod               1,189        1,237                    316     166       150                 To be resettled.
                                        district     district,                                                                               1645
                                                     Tursunzoda city
14    2025           Khakimii poyon     Nurobod      Faizobod district      1,190        1,246                    210     119        91                 Resettlement in
                                        district                                                                                             1000       progress (3%
                                                                                                                                                        resettled)



                                                                                                                                                             17
 No.   Planned        Name of the        District &   New village/city    Lower      Upper         Number of the HH      Num     Number     Number       Status
       Year for       Village            city (out-   the resettlers      point of   point of      and Families          ber     of         of Project
       Completion                        migration)   that have           Village    the Village   (Projected Affected   of      Families   Affected
       of Resettle-                                   moved to.           (meters)   (meters)      Households-PAHs)      HH's               Persons
       ment
 15    2025           Khakimii bolo      Nurobod      Faizobod district      1,260        1,276                                       73                 Resettlement in
                                         district                                                                  172     99                  863       progress (6%)

 16    2025           Khumrog            Nurobod      explanatory            1,285        1,340                    166     88         78                 To be resettled.
                      (formerly Kumok)   district     work                                                                                     755
                                             Total                                                                3643   1,710      1,933      16,919


Source: DFZ data (July 2025).




                                                                                                                                                              18
For preparation of the Project’s ESIA (2025), RLRF and the 2017-2026 RAP 2 and LRP 2, socio-
economic baseline surveys were undertaken in July 2023 by the Project’s Consultant to provide
quantitative and qualitative insight on the affected populations, their livelihoods, vulnerabilities their
experiences relating to the Project and the resettlement process. These surveys, summarized in RAP 2,
aimed to supplement the census data gathered by DFZ in the first half of 2023 on the affected
communities.
From January to June 2024, DFZ, drawing on the data of the July 2023 survey, undertook a more
focused analysis of 1401 project-affected households: those that had been resettled (363 PAHs); those
which were in the process of relocating (21); and, those which were commencing the resettlement
process (1017). The survey analysis and conclusions on livelihoods are in Section 2.2.1 below.

              6.1.2. PAHs which have been resettled
In general, the average annual income of the resettled persons increased from TJS 26,269 before
resettlement to TJS 29,823 after resettlement. However, the situation differed from district to district. In
Nurobod, the average income increased from TJS 25,232 to 26,486. In Dangara, the average income
increased from TJS 20924 to 22077. In Tursunzoda, the most significant increase was recorded - from
TJS 27,173 to 34,102 per year. This is partly due to the proximity of the resettlement site to a large
secondary city, which has made it easier for people to transition from land-based labor to wage-based
labor (e.g. services, construction, small businesses). At the same time, in Faizobod there was a slight
decrease in the average income from TJS 29678 to 26552 after resettlement.
Although a significant part of households (46-50%) still had funds to cover the costs of food and clothing
with the possibility of small savings, there was an increase in the share of those who had difficulties
even with the purchase of food (from 3% to 5%). for whom the purchase of the necessary clothes is a
problem. At the same time, the share of families able to afford the purchase of expensive durable goods
slightly decreased. These data indicate a slight decrease in the income level of some resettled
households after moving, which may be due to the adaptation period and the need to establish sources
of income in a new place of residence.
Overall, the most noticeable increase in the cost of living after resettlement was in the cost of food and
rent, with some decrease in the cost of clothing, transport and communications.
There was also a significant change in the sources of household income after resettlement. The share
of households engaged in irrigated agriculture fell from 44% to 6% and cattle breeding, from 62% to
17%. At the same time, the importance of subsistence farming for household support increased (from
34% to 47%), along with daily/seasonal work (from 9% to 18%), pensions (from 12% to 24%) and labor
migration (from 50% to 61%) as sources of income. There was also a slight increase in the share of
wage labor in the private sector (from 5% to 6%), casual earnings (from 1% to 6%) and social security
recipients (up to 2%). In interviews and focus group discussions, many PAPs have indicated that the
new household land plots have been of sufficient size to enable them to grow fruits, vegetables, nuts
and other plants for household consumption, thereby helping food security. However, a significant
number of PAPs have moved away from doing commercial farming or pastoral activities and are trying
to shift into new professions such as construction, carpentry, masonry and services. They believe the
new professions are more compatible with living in towns and more lucrative than traditional farming.
In terms of commercial agriculture, the cultivation of crops, in particular potatoes and vegetables,
decreased. The proportion of households without market-bound crops increased. The number of fruit
trees, namely mulberries, walnuts and pears, has significantly decreased. The number of domestic

                                                                                                           19
animals such as chickens, cattle, goats and sheep decreased significantly. The proportion of pet-free
households increased from 19% to 56%.
The number of household appliances and communication equipment, especially refrigerators, washing
machines, the quality of the Internet connection and the number of bicycles increased. The number of
radios and cars/trucks decreased.

As for PAPs engaged in commercial agriculture, they generally received larger plots of land. Table 3-3
shows this data.


                  Table 3-3: Average Area of Agricultural Land Plots Before and After Resettlement

                       Resettlement Site             Average Area of Land              Average Area of Land
                                                      Plot for Agriculture              Plot for Agriculture
                                                    Before Resettlement (m²)            After Resettlement
                                                                                               (m²)13
                  Nurobod                                       2425                             15071

                  Tursunzoda                                    2555                             14898

                  Faizobod                                      2501                             15571

                  Dangara                                       2694                             15054

                  Average                                       2560                             14964



    •    In terms of agricultural yields, 31% of the resettled households rated the yield of their land highly
         after resettlement, compared to 48% before the resettlement. Almost half of the households
         (47%) saw opportunities for further expansion of planting areas or increasing production
         volumes. At the same time, 26% of households said that they do not see prospects for
         expanding agricultural activities and therefore do not want to engage in agriculture. Another 21%
         of the surveyed households denied the potential for further development, as they have already
         exhausted all possible resources. 7% of respondents had recently moved and could not answer
         this question.
    •    Based on the analysis of data by districts, the greatest potential for increasing planting areas or
         sales of agricultural products was observed in the Faizobod district, where 80% of relocated
         households see opportunities for further development. In the Tursunzoda region, this figure was
         53%. However, in Dangara, 62% of relocated households did not see the potential for further
         expansion of agricultural activities and did not show interest in continuing them. In the Nurobod
         district, the majority of relocated households believed they have already exhausted all possible
         resources to expand planting areas or increase production volumes. In Nurobod, Tursunzoda
         and Faizobod districts, 8% of recently displaced households found it difficult to answer the
         question about the potential for further expansion.



13 These figures include land plots for agriculture around the household as well as in discrete plots beyond the household. It

  should be noted that fewer households are engaging in agriculture after resettlement, but those which are have received
  more land than they had before resettlement.

                                                                                                                                 20
   6.1.3.     PAHs in the process of resettling
Some 932 households (9,099 PAPs) are in the process of resettling to the new resettlement sites. The
survey below summarizes key issues regarding these PAPs, including their current livelihoods, financial
situation and desired occupations.


Figure 3-1 includes the occupations of the PAHs:



                                Figure 3-1: PAH occupations (% of
                                           households)
                                                             1 1
                                                        33
                                                    3
                                                4
                                                                     22
                                                6

                                                14
                                                                         22
                                                            21



                                    1   2   3   4       5        6   7    8   9   10   11



              Legend:
              1.      Housewife
              2.      Pre-schooler
              3.      School child
              4.      Employed
              5.      Retired (due to age or illness)
              6.      Unemployed, looking for work
              7.      Labor migrant
              8.      Refused to answer
              9.      Student
              10.     Unemployed, not looking for work
              11.     Individual entrepreneur


Among the desired new occupations for households are: sewing (27%); repair and construction (14%);
driving a car for a living (13%); doctor/medical (12%); teacher (6%) and service worker (4%). There was
lesser interest in the following occupations: merchant/trader; computer programmer; banking;
engineer/technician; economist; and bee-keeping.
Among the 1038 households surveyed that had not yet been resettled, labor migration is the main
source of income for 54% of households. Pensions are the second most important source of income for
25% of households. Hired labor in the public sector provides income for 23% of households. Farming
activities, including cattle breeding, housekeeping and agriculture, are a source of income for 16-20% of
households. At the same time, it is more common in Rogun (33-43%) than in Nurobod (15-18%), which
can be explained by better access to agricultural land. Other types of employment, such as salaried
labor in the private sector (8%), day/seasonal work (8%), self-employment (4%), casual non-seasonal
work (4%), own business (4%) and remittances (4%) play a more modest role as sources of income.



                                                                                                      21
There are some regional differences, in particular, in Rogun, more households are engaged in farming,
and in Nurobod they rely more on labor migration.
The average household income was recorded as TJS 32,581 (TJS 32,559 in Nurobod and TJS 32,992
in Rogun). On average, migrant labor, public sector and private sector employment represented
significant percentages of total household income – 78%, 65% and 63%, respectively. Pensions
constituted an average of 38% of household income and remittances, 26%. Farming and household
activities contributed about 30% on average.
Average expenditures were TJS 32,052 (TJS 32,132 in Nurobod and TJS 30,759 in Rogun). The largest
share of expenditure falls on food - an average 47% of total expenditure. Spending on clothing, health,
education, communications and transport is in the range of 6% to 14%. Expenditures on agriculture and
livestock are 9% on average.
Figure 3-2 includes the financial circumstances of the 1038 surveyed PAH yet to be resettled:



                              Figure 3-2: Financial Circumstances of PAHs



                                                11%                                    1
                                              10%
                                                            40%                        2
                                                                                       3
                                                39%                                    4




                      Legend:
                      1.      Can afford bare necessities, difficulty buying clothes
                      2.      Enough income for food, clothing and some savings
                      3.      Extreme need, not enough money for food
                      4.      Comfortable standard of living


Among the 1038 surveyed households, the most common animals owned are cattle - 47% of
households have on average 3 heads per household. Chickens are kept by 34% of households, with an
average of about 9 chickens per household. Goats are owned by 26% of households, with an average
of 13 goats. Only 10% of farms have sheep, but in relatively large numbers - an average of 11 sheep.
Eight percent of households are engaged in beekeeping (hives), keeping an average of about 9 hives.
Donkeys are kept by 5% of farms, mainly one donkey. Only 1% of households own horses, with an
average of 2 horses. A significant proportion (43%) of households do not own any animals at all.
As for trees, the following predominate: cherries and mulberries are the most common - 77% of farms
have them, and in significant quantities (on average 40 cherry and 13 mulberry trees). Apricots, apple
trees and walnuts are also widespread - they are grown by 70-73% of households. Peaches, sweet
cherries, grapes, pears and plums are less popular but still present in 48-58% of farms. Such as quince,
persimmons, almonds, figs and lemons are less common - they are grown from 3 to 29% of
households. At the same time, only 8% of households do not have any fruit trees. Willows, tiraks and
chelon trees are also present in small quantities.



                                                                                                     22
The most common agricultural activity is the cultivation of potatoes - 69% of farms are engaged in it,
receiving an average of 685 kg of crops. 59% of households are engaged in vegetable growing,
harvesting an average of 179 kg of vegetables. Corn is grown in 24% of farms with an average yield of
about 97 kg. Wheat is cultivated by 15% of households, receiving fairly high yields - on average about
739 kg. Sunflower (8% of farms, 20 kg on average), sugar beet (8%, 37 kg), barley (4%, 547 kg) and
other cereals (2%, 34 kg) are less common. Almost a quarter of households (24%) do not grow any
crops at all.
Among the non-resettled households with farmland (405 PAHs), more than half (73%) rate the yield of
their land as average. Only 15% indicate high yields, while 11% report low yields.
A large majority of the surveyed households (64%) do not see any opportunities to further expand the
planting areas they would receive or increase production on this land. This is due to: a lack of financing;
lack of labor and difficulties in retaining qualified farmers; difficult weather and climatic conditions; costs
for fuels and lubricants, electricity and transportation; and difficulties in marketing and selling products.
Only 25% said there is potential for growth, and 11% said they do not want to engage in agriculture at
all.




                                                                                                            23
7. CURRENT LIVELIHOOD RESTORATION MEASURES
As a part of the livelihood restoration measures, in addition to cash compensation for homes and
structures, household land, agricultural land (on request), land for commercial enterprises (on demand)
and communal land (on demand), PAPs receive a transitional allowance for each member of the
household and a preferential loan. PAPs who are leaving employment receive up to three months of
their salary. PAPs also receive in kind agricultural support (seeds, seedlings, animals and equipment).
DFZ has also allowed PAPs to continue their livelihoods in their former places of residence as long as
possible to minimize the economic impacts of resettling to their new locations.

4.1 Financial Assistance, Loans, Training and Employment Support to PAPs

Table 4-1 sets out the amount of cash and in-kind support PAPs have received as of May 2025 to help
restore their livelihoods.

Table 4-1: Total Amount of Cash and In-kind Livelihood Support to PAPs as of February 2025

                            Type of Support                                      Amount (TJS)
 Cash allowances14                                                                               314,200
 Preferential loans                                                                             3,373,000
 Wage support                                                                                    360,000
 TOTAL                                                                                          4,047,200


In addition to ongoing cash, preferential, wage support and in-kind support to PAPs, by the end of 2025,
the project will commence providing USD 2 million (approximately TJS 18.7 million) to provide stipends
to PAPs taking training/vocational courses. The World Bank-financed Additional Financing for the
Socio-Economic Resilience Support project will also provide in-kind assistance to PAPs and host
communities in the Rogun HPP area, totaling USD 17.5 million (approximately TJS 164 million). (See
Sections 4.2.1 and 4.2.2 below.)


                4.1.1 Financial assistance and support in getting new employment
DFZ and MoLMEP have provided financial support through preferential loans (initially TJS 3,000,
increased to TJS 5,000 in 2024) and cash allowances (initially TJS 100 for the Head of Household and
TJS 50 per member of the household, increased to TJS 200 and TJS 100, respectively, in 2024). Table
4-2 lists the support provided from 2017 to end-2024.




14 Note that data on cash allowances and preferential loans is as of end-2024.



                                                                                                       24
Table 4-2: DFZ and MoLMEP Support Provided by District 2017 - 2024

                                                                           Preferential   One-time material   TOTAL (TJS)
                                                                           loan (TJS)     assistance (TJS)

           Cities and
                                 Cities and
                                                       Number of
                                Regions for
                                                      households
        Regions of origin
                               resettlement


                                                Year 2017
  1            Nurobod             Tursunzoda                220               660,000          48,400          708,400
  2            Roghun              Tursunzoda                  2                6,000            500             6,500
                                                               Year 2019
  1            Roghun              Tursunzoda                120               360,000          28,750          388,750
  2            Nurobod              Nurobod                   24                72,000           7,750           79,750
                                                               Year 2020
  1            Nurobod             Tursunzoda                 17                51,000           4,950          55,950
                                                               Year 2021
  1            Roghun                Roghun                    6                18,000           1,250          19,250
  2            Nurobod               Nurobod                  10                30,000           3,900          33,900
                                                               Year 2022
  1            Roghun               Faizobod                  76               228,000          21,900          249,900
  2            Nurobod              Faizobod                 202               606,000          58,400          664,400
  3            Nurobod             Tursunzoda                 29                87,000           7,550           94,550
                                                               Year 2023
  1            Nurobod             Tursunzoda                  5                15,000           1,450           16,450
  2            Nurobod              Nurobod                    2                 6,000            450             6,450
  3            Nurobod              Faizobod                 175               525,000          49,200          574,200
  4            Roghun                Roghun                   38               114,000           9,050          123,050
                                                               Year 2024
  1            Nurobod            Nurobod                     34               170,000           23,200         193,200
  2            Nurobod           Tursunzoda                   85               425,000           47,500         472,500
                            TOTAL                           1,045             3,373,000         314,200        3,687,200

Source: MoLMEP, February 2025.




                                                                                                                            25
In addition, MoLMEP has provided assistance to PAPs to obtain jobs (permanent, temporary, seasonal and public sector work) and
get vocational training to strengthen existing professional skills and/or add new skills. MoLMEP has also paid financial aid/allowances
paid to people who are unemployed as a result of resettlement.15 Table 4-3 provides data on this support.


Table 4-3: Number of RAP 2 PAPs Assisted by MoLMEP

                                                                          Provided with jobs                                     Provided with            Payment of financial aid to


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Total amount of allowance
                                                                         (number of people)                                    vocational training        unemployed for a business
          Cities and districts,                                                                                               (number of people)          activity (number of people)                Allowance paid for
         where the PAHs were

                                                                                                                                                                Amount (thousand

                                    Permanent jobs
                                                                                                                                                                                                   unemployment period

                                                     Temporary jobs
 No.            resettled


                                                                      Seasonal jobs   Public work                  Female                     Female                                      Female
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              paid (thousand TJS)
                                                                                                    Total   Male            Total    Male              Total                       Male
                                                                                                                                                                                                    (number of people)
                                                                                                                                                                     TJS)

  1     Rogun city                 54                15               27               -             96     79     17       15        -       15         9        -                 6       3          23                    -
  2     Tursunzoda city            102                -                -              100            202    192    10       340      176      164       13        -                 10      3           7                    -
  3     Nurobod district           22                52               63              20             157    125    32       60       20       40        18        -                 12      6          12                    -
  4     Faizobod district          93                13               18               -             124    107    17       16        -       16         5        -                 3       2           9                    -
  5     Dangara district           169               203              141             35             548    389    159      181      20       161       27        -                 19      8          53                    -
        Total                      440               283              249             155           1,127   892    235      612      216      396       72      360.0               50      22         104                 488.0
Source: MoLMEP, February 2025.




15 As set out in the Entitlement Matrix, people who lose employment as a result of resettling will get cash compensation for lost wages equal to three months of

  previous income or minimum subsistence income, with the additional possibility to get training for alternative activities for a period of up to another 6 months,
  during which the same amount will be paid. This also applies to persons who had a different income stream and/or are seeking employment now.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          26
Figure 4-1 shows the percentage of PAHs receiving assistance from MoLMEP.
Figure 4-1: Percentage of PAHs Receiving Livelihood Assistance from MoLMEP



                 Small business micro-credit


                                  Job counselling


 Technical and Vocational Education and
            Training (TVET)


                                  Preferential loan


            One-time transitional allowance


                                                      0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90%100%
                                               Yes       No   Don't know

Source: Household survey assessments, July 2023 and June 2024

                4.1.2 Small business sector and provision of financial aid
Targeted preferential loans (TJS 5000 in interest-free loans) are provided to the Rogun HPP PAPs to
start a business activity. More men have submitted applications than women. During LRP2, 72 people
(50 men and 22 women) from the resettled families have received preferential loans totaling TJS
360,000 to establish their small businesses.

According to MoLMEP’s records (2018-end 2024), a total of 2,660 household members16 in PAHs
could potentially benefit from the preferential loan scheme but only 1,740 household members (65%)
did so during the period in question. DFZ and MoLMEP have been reaching out to eligible PAPs to
consider obtaining the loans to establish or re-establish businesses in the areas where they have been
resettled.
In Faizobod, DFZ has received requests from 15 resettled people for providing land to start small scale
businesses like shops, cement block production, sewing shop, pharmacy, and auto service. The
jamoats and the local government actively support these requests for providing land to the small-scale
businesses as they promote new jobs in the area, improve lives and contribute to the local tax revenue.
Land designated for business development has already been incorporated into the general plan of the
new communities.
Amonatbank Loans: The government is providing business loans with low interest rates through
Amonatbank. These loans are available to local businesses and are not specific to PAPs. DFZ



16 There are 1,710 PAHs in the second phase of resettlement with 2,660 adult household members who would be eligible to

  apply for preferential loans.
                                                                                                                      27
provides support to PAPs who require training on financial products and procedures for managing
loans.

The jamoat shares information booklets during community meetings about local bank’s low-interest
loan products for both agriculture and business sectors, highlighting them as a priority for the
government.

Among PAHs, 6% had received job counselling and a further 2% received Technical and Vocational
Education and Training (TVET) training, which is provided to those who register as unemployed to
learn new skills. This was consistent with the number of households who stated that at least one
household member was registered unemployed (5%). Just 1% had received a small business micro-
loan; this form of support is the most complicated to access and requires the preparation of a business
case, as well as being registered unemployed.
The training programs are universal, but the PAPs are entitled to receive a stipend to facilitate their
participation. MoLMEP reports that from 2018-2024, 612 vocational training sessions were held at their
education centers, attended by 216 females and 396 men.
Training centers in Tajikistan include:
    • Adult Vocational Training Centre supported by MoLMEP offering training programs lasting 2-3
       months. These courses focus on practical skills and trades.
    • Vocational and Technical Lyceums: These institutions provide training programs lasting from 6
       months to one year, offering more in-depth technical education
Both the vocational training centre and the technical lyceums offer courses that are both free (under
the employment support program) and fee-based, offering options to different people.

The Centre for Development of Professional skills in Dangara offers free vocational training and skill
development courses for the local community including PAPs. The jamoat also organizes community-
based training programs within the PAP communities. These programs focus on skills like sewing,
knitting, and carpet weaving.

The Vocational Training Centre in Faizobod has a vocational training centre that provides courses in
such skills as: welding; bricklaying; construction; IT and accounting; and cooking and baking. DFZ and
MoLMEP are also actively collaborating to organize training courses directly within the community. DFZ
has secured a suitable space provided by a local resident and MoLMEP’s vocational training team is
preparing the location to deliver training to residents. The assessment of these initiatives would allow
for the determination of whether they were effective and, if so, whether they could be encouraged to
develop into higher levels.

Upon completion of these vocational training courses, individuals receive certificates that are valid both
within Tajikistan and internationally.

MoLMEP also provided various scholarship payments for training and supported teachers who
provided the training. Expenditures are indicated in Table 3-4 below:
Table 4-4: Scholarship Payments for Training and Teachers’ Salaries
 №      Years       Number of students     Scholarships for    Teachers' salaries        In total
                                           students (TJS)           (TJS)                 (TJS)
 1       2018             16,320             2,075,000            4,809,373            6,884,373
 2       2019             17,900             1,936,183            4,807,299            6,743,482
 3       2020             17,958             2,663,800            5,720,117            8,383,917
 4       2021             21,207             2,855,200            6,019,550            8,874,750
                                                                                                       28
 5       2022                 384            3,025,200           6,820,700          9,845,900
 6       2023               20,700           3,613,400           7,528,600          11,142,000
 7       2024               20,100           3,840,000           8,281,000          12,121,000
        In total            114,569          20,008,783          43,986,639         63,995,422
Source: MoLMEP, May 2025.

               4.1.3 Training and support for vulnerable groups
MoLMEP is supporting disabled people, especially women to learn skills. The Ministry reported that
five disabled women who were resettled in Tursunzoda received vocational training in sewing at the
Tajikistan Adult Learning Center. Jamoats are willing to support the requests of vulnerable families,
such as disabled people or single mothers. For example, in Faizobod, a shop was provided on the first
floor for a lady with a disability, making her sewing shop easily accessible.

               4.1.4 Employment assistance
The State Program for Assistance to Employment of the Population of the Republic of Tajikistan for
2023 – 2027 covers all cities and districts on a universal level. This framework provides access to
employment support, unemployment benefits, preferential loans, job fairs, and free vocational training.

MoLMEP reported the following information focused on employment support provided to the women
and youth of Tajikistan:

Table 4-5: Information on Labor and Employment – Women and Youth (2023 and 2024)
                                                                            % variation compared to
                                                                            the same period in 2023
                                        Total number      Total number
            LIST OF EVENTS
                                           in 2023           in 2024



 Appealed to the Agency
 - Women                                         70,308          73,188               +4,0
 - Youth                                         55,017          56,574               +3,0
 Unemployment status was granted
 - Women                                         27,580          30,264               +10,0
 - Youth                                         29,456          31,666               +7,5
 Assisted in getting permanent jobs
 - Women                                         36,797          36,634                -0,4
 - Youth                                         36,983          30,468               -17,6

 Quota system jobs received
 - Women                                          4,524            4,181              -7,5
 - Youth                                          4,293            4,120              -4,0


 Mobilized      for   personal work
 (preferential loans)
 - Women: (thousands of TJS)                      1,603             1,464              -8,6
                                                6,152.1           5,792.4

                                                                                                     29
  -Youth (thousands of TJS)                        1,051               642             -39,0
                                                 4,044.7           2,643.2
 Involved in public works
 - Women (thousands of TJS)                        2,437            2,740             +12,4
                                                   731,0            822,0
 - Youth (thousands of TJS)                        2129             2507              +17,7
                                                   638.7            752.1
 Enrolled in vocational training
 - Women                                          15,453           15,783             +2,1
 - Youth                                          11,701           13,110             +12,0
 Assisted in career guidance
 services                                          3,796           4,289              +13,0
 - Women                                           8,658          10,876              +25,6
 - Youth
 Unemployment benefits assisted
 with                                                 94              112             +19,1
 - Women (thousands of TJS)                        563.9            607.5
  - Youth                                         14,323          16,364              +14,2
 - (thousands of TJS)                           12,822.9        16,533.1

Source: (Ministry of Labor, 2025)


Drawing on this program and other support, for the Rogun PAPs, the following types of jobs have been
offered:

             ▪    Permanent
             ▪    Temporary
             ▪    Seasonal
             ▪    Public

The estimated monthly salaries indicated by MoLMEP varies between TJS 2,500 – 5,000.

During Phase 2 of the resettlement process, MoLMEP has assisted the cities and districts of Rogun,
Tursunzoda, Nurobod, Faizobod and Dangara in helping 1,127 PAPs obtain jobs: 892 jobs were
provided to males and 235 to women. This is out of a total of 7,820 PAPs which have been resettled
from 2017 to May 2025.

    •    Professional Re-integration: Individuals previously employed as teachers, doctors, and
         government clerks are generally placed in similar positions within the new resettlement areas
         as new schools, medical centres, and jamoats are established.

    •    MoLMEP reported that 104 people from families resettled from the flood zone of Rogun HPP
         received unemployment benefits totaling TJS 128,000.

    •    In new schools and health centers resettled people were given priority access to employment
         opportunities. Over a nine-month period in 2024, 37 job fairs were held in the cities and
         districts, resulting in the employment of employed 286 people, resettled from Rogun.

                                                                                                         30
   •   The jamoats have provided direct opportunities for seasonal work around resettlement sites
       related to harvesting fruits, nuts, and vegetables. Temporary work opportunities were found for
       283 people 249 people found seasonal jobs, and 155 people were engaged in public civil
       works.

   •   The jamoats have also assisted individuals who form part of their districts in applying for
       seasonal agricultural opportunities. The commercial farms publish openings on the national
       employer database and inform district offices of opportunities. For example, large-scale farms
       will do this when they need help during the harvest-picking season.

   •   Direct access to employment or income programs is available in or near the resettlement areas,
       where 440 people have been appointed to permanent positions.

   •   MoLMEP is also assisting PAPs in getting work abroad as migrant laborers (for example in East
       Asia, Europe and the Middle East). This involves identifying and communicating to PAPs about
       job opportunities and assisting PAPs in completing relevant documentation.

On a district level, the jamoats assist the project-affected people in registering on the national website
and applying for district or local employment opportunities. It is a requirement that individuals bring with
their identity documents and educational certifications as proof of their qualifications.

The government of Tajikistan also provides access to a country-wide employment database. The
database lists open vacancies, and anyone can register and apply for these positions. The PAPs may
register as job seekers on a district level, and the jamoats will refer their applications to suitable
vacancies. This opportunity also allows the PAPs opportunities to register for an unemployment fund to
help them until they manage to get a job.

              4.1.5 Agricultural Support to PAPs
Although agricultural activities have declined slightly since PAPs have moved to their new settlements
in some districts, they remain one of the key programs supported by the national government. The
agricultural program also allows female-headed households to create income by setting up nurseries
and vegetable and fruit gardens.

              4.1.6 Land, seeds, animals and implements
PAPs are offered support to lease additional agricultural land in addition to what they have received
under RAP 2 in the new residence (one-year lease contracts) through an application to the relevant
jamoat. According to the jamoats, these applications can be submitted to their offices. DFZ has
assisted with the negotiations of the land lease agreements for previously resettled PAPs, and copies
of them exist at the offices.

The Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) supports agricultural production at the new resettlement sites by
providing access to a national free seedlings program. The seedlings are delivered to the jamoat
offices yearly. The district distributes the seedlings upon request from farmers. Individuals may also
visit the MoA headquarters in Dushanbe to ask for assistance or email the Ministry requesting help.
This includes advice about preparing agricultural land and choosing crops which grow best on the land.

                                                                                                         31
If PAPs need guidance about grazing methods and maintaining the wellness of their livestock, they can
request assistance from MoA under a program available to all herders. Arrangements can be made so
that a livestock specialist from the national government visits PAPs who have requested support to
assess the methods they use. This includes new techniques to improve livestock rearing, beekeeping,
fisheries, etc.

PAPs have also benefited from the MoA’s Enhanced Agricultural Sustainability Program by receiving in-
kind support for agriculture and pastoralism.17 Vulnerable PAPs have received food assistance.

                  4.1.7 Agricultural training
The Agricultural Institute of Dushanbe has provided training to the resettled population on tree grafting
and growing crops, with a focus on sustainable agriculture and climate change adaptation.

The local branch of the Ministry of Agriculture in Faizobod has held meetings with
resettled individuals to explain the specific agricultural practices and conditions of the region, but there
are currently no structured or formal training programs specifically focused on educating PAPs about
advanced or sustainable farming methods.

The MoA has rolled out national education programs and is planning to use national TV programs as a
platform to train agricultural-based communities or interested individuals. This national-based
education program focuses on planting methods, management of different soil types, climate change,
grazing methods, and agricultural areas.

                  4.1.8 Support to vulnerable households for agricultural activities
At a national level, the MoA provides access to free seeds and seedlings as well as programs
specifically for female-headed households, disabled people, and the elderly. Interested individuals can
apply directly at the national offices in person, via email or by registering at the district level at the
jamoat offices. Free equipment, such as hand plows, is made available to vulnerable families. Female-
headed households with less than 5 hectares of land may also apply for support.

A specific program under the World Bank-financed Strengthening Resilience of the Agriculture Sector
Project (SRAP) Additional Financing also provides the following support to famers and vulnerable
households:

              •        Procuring and distributing emergency seeds, seedlings, planting materials and
                       fertilizers; and
              •        Procuring and distributing small agricultural machinery to simplify women's manual
                       labour.

While the above activities have national coverage, bbeneficiaries (rural households) are being
identified through the Farmers’ Registry maintained by TAJSTAT and based on a household survey that
will be conducted to identify vulnerable dehkan farmers, including women.18 PAPs who are farming are

17 The Enhanced Agricultural Sustainability Program in Tajikistan is part of a broader national and international efforts aimed

    at transforming the country’s agriculture—specifically through digital innovation, climate resilience, and sustainable food
    systems.
18 Indicative criteria include less than three hectares (ha) land plot and lack of access to water.

                                                                                                                                  32
eligible under this program but have to be included in the Farmer’s Registry maintained by TAJSTAT.
DFZ has been reaching out to farming households to ensure they are aware of the Registry.



     4.2 Additional Livelihood Support to PAPs during Project Implementation

The Rogun HPP project and a World Bank-financed project will also provide additional support to PAPs
to restore livelihoods and/or establish new ones.


          4.2.1 Community investments for livelihoods

The Government of Tajikistan’s Socio-Economic Resilience Support Project (SERSP) Additional
Financing (AF) is designed to complement the Sustainable Financing for Rogun Hydropower Project.
The AF aims to strengthen socio-economic resilience in Rogun-affected and disadvantaged jamoats
through inclusive, participatory investments in livelihoods and local infrastructure. By complementing
the Government of Tajikistan’s ongoing efforts, it will complement livelihood restoration, promote local
economic development, and build climate resilience through targeted investments, grants, training, and
institutional capacity building.
More specifically, it complements the needs identified through community consultations done as part of
the ESF engagement, including business training and grants to help set up agriculture and tourism
related enterprises. First, it will complement the livelihood restoration activities included in component
3 of the Rogun Project. While the government is providing livelihood restoration support to project-
affected persons (PAPs) who are resettled, livelihood restoration takes time and significant resources,
and stakeholders have requested additional funding and technical support to set up small businesses
as well as small local infrastructure investments. The AF will support host villages and jamoats and
other communities with additional infrastructure investments and livelihood training and technical
support for individuals, groups and small businesses. Second, the Government can use SERSP AF
resources to supplement the limited revenues for Rogun HPP benefit sharing that will be available in
the early years of Rogun construction.
The AF will include Rogun-affected jamoats (70% of AF community investments, totaling US$17.5
million) as well as disadvantaged jamoats (the remaining 30%) in other parts of the country (using
criteria such as population, investments per capita, and unemployment), in agreement with the
Government. In the Rogun-affected area, the AF will cover jamoats in the five districts and cities
(Faizobad, Nurobad, and Danghara districts, Rogun and Tursunzoda cities) that include resettlement
villages under the second Rogun HPP Resettlement Action Plan (RAP2) – – 5 jamoats and Darband
small town with 8 resettlement villages and an additional 27 jamoats across the five districts. This
program is being managed by the National Social Investment Fund of Tajikistan (NSIFT), which will
work with Rogun PMG, DFZ and other agencies involved in the Rogun area.
The AF is providing subgrants to Rogun-affected and other jamoats to finance local-level, climate-
resilient, socio-economic infrastructure that addresses priorities identified through additional two cycles
of a participatory village needs assessment and a decision-making process. It will strengthen the
capacity of jamoat administrations and community-level institutions, including mahalla committees, to
engage with citizens and deliver services efficiently, fairly, and in a way that responds to the needs of
citizens, including youth and women. This component will finance public goods, civil works, community


                                                                                                        33
mobilization and capacity building support for community members and local government staff.
Investments could include:
       •   Rehabilitation or construction of kindergartens, schools, local health clinics, energy
           generation and distribution, local transportation infrastructure and rehabilitation of village-
           level water supply and sanitation systems, on-farm irrigation systems, energy.
       •   Eligible subprojects could also include economic infrastructure, such as small-scale
           processing and storage facilities for horticultural products. The types of work may involve
           new construction, rehabilitation or maintenance. They may also include investments for
           nature-based tourism infrastructure or the restoration of degraded landscapes, involving
           nature-based solutions such as reforestation with local or drought-resistant species,
           nurseries, plantations and related infrastructure. Subprojects will integrate renewable
           energy and energy efficiency enhancements where feasible as well as support investments
           that strengthen resilience against climate-related impacts.


The allocation will be made per jamoat for social and economic investments and will average about
US$300,000. The funding in the participating districts will depend on the number of jamoats and vary
between US$0.60-US$2.7 million. Each jamoat will receive investment but it will vary up to
US$500,000 per jamoat, depending on evaluation and scoring of jamoat proposals.
In addition to the activities above, the AF will continue to finance mobilization and capacity building
activities both in the Rogun area and outside of it to ensure that: (i) communities, particularly women,
youth, and the vulnerable, are actively engaged in selecting poverty-focused project interventions; (ii)
village and jamoat committees use participatory, transparent approaches to identify, implement and
monitor local development projects; (iii) village and jamoats improve their capabilities to prepare, raise
funds for, and implement local development plans reflecting community priorities. It will mobilize
jamoats and community members to improve: (i) local economic development, including preparation
and implementation of the local development plans and market assessments, along with provision of
computer equipment and furniture;; (ii) climate resilience by raising awareness of climate change risks,
and promoting investments that support adaptation and mitigation and enhance local resilience; (iii)
women’s economic empowerment, gender grassroots leadership and approaches to combat gender-
based violence; (iv) participatory, inclusive, responsive and accountable local planning, project
implementation, and monitoring; and (v) social accountability processes. In addition, if needed the
component will include awareness raising and outreach to inform communities about the and benefit-
sharing support (BSP); and capacity strengthening of jamoats to potentially manage the future BSP
and related communication, depending upon final BSP design.
The AF will also finance inclusive livelihoods with a focus on women and youth. The activities under
this component are designed to be flexible and to complement the Government of Tajikistan’s
livelihood restoration support for Rogun-affected communities as they become clearer for the current
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) and the future RAPs. This subcomponent will target community
members, particularly women, youth, returning migrants and Rogun affected communities who don’t
qualify for more capital-intensive entrepreneurship support. Tailored mobilization efforts, gender-
responsive training modules, and outreach to returning migrants will help ensure equitable participation
of disadvantaged groups. The project will identify and provide 7,000 beneficiaries (individuals resident
in the Project areas) with entrepreneurship and business development trainings. These beneficiaries
will also get hands-on support to develop business plans (as individuals or common interest groups).
The project will select and support the top 1,600 applicants with tools and equipment in line with their
business plans. Individual beneficiaries can receive tools and equipment up to US$1,600 and groups
up to US$10,000. Following the selection of business plans, the beneficiaries will also complete

                                                                                                             34
additional training on topics such as marketing, financial literacy, digital business tools, climate change
and group cohesion. In addition to the tools and equipment, beneficiaries will also be provided
coaching and mentoring for at least 12 months that will include support with market linkages,
registration, financial management, amongst others.
In addition, the AF will support existing and registered MSEs in target districts as business partners to
improve local economic opportunities, create value chain linkages with downstream producers and
generate new jobs for women, youth, returning migrants and other beneficiaries. This subcomponent
will identify and support 100 MSEs through provision of core business expansion trainings. Following
completion of these trainings, the MSEs will be invited to submit a business plan to secure grants from
the project. These MSEs will also get hands on support to develop business plans. The selection of
MSEs for receiving grants will be competitive and on a rolling basis. The project will support
approximately 50 business plans from MSEs with individual grants up to US$20,000 each that can
finance tools, equipment, nature-based solutions and infrastructure, consultancies and technical
assistance needs. The coaching and mentoring will be tailored and include support with business
planning, registration, market linkages, financial management and other topics. The project will actively
target women, setting a 30% participation target for this component, which will be monitored through
the results framework.
The progress and quality of the program will be tracked progress through robust M&E including
baseline, midline and endline and feedback mechanisms (e.g., social audits, grievance redress
mechanisms, participatory M&E).

           4.2.2 Stipends for apprenticeships/TVET


This USD 2 million component for trainee/apprentice stipends, financed by the World Bank, is intended
to support men and women during the second phase of resettlement while they undergo vocational
training/education to improve or learn new skills and employability. This will thereby enhance their
livelihoods and promote their economic inclusion in their resettlement communities. The skills
training/education will facilitate their (re-)entry into the labor market and strengthen their ability to
engage in jobs and income-generating activities.

Stipends will be allocated during LRP 2 and beyond to future LRPs in proportion to the number of male
and female PAPs settled in each of the above-listed districts. DFZ will administer the program, which
will provide TJS 1000/month per person being trained. Courses usually last three to six months.

MoLMEP is responsible for designing and implementing the course. DFZ will be responsible for paying
the stipends, either in installments as students proceed through the training, or after they have passed
the relevant training course. DFZ has hired a financial management specialist to help administer the
stipends and certify expenditures.

Based on consultations with the PAPs, the following could likely be key areas of training:

   •       Agriculture

       o   Sustainable farming and diversity of crop planting: Although a portion of the training is
           executed by having national TV programs available, more on-the ground training and
           extension services in the resettled areas would assist PAPs in diversifying their skills. In this
           case, training PAPs in producing certain cultural foods which could tap into a larger tourism-
           focused market would benefit the entrepreneurs and the districts.

                                                                                                         35
       o   Specific agricultural training opportunities, especially in Danghara, where agriculture is the
           main income: The training center in Danghara could provide skills development in planting,
           understanding soil, using equipment, making financial investments, and understanding the
           market.

       o   Tourism in the agricultural areas: This could be a key income generator and remains one of
           the most promising sectors for increasing local income. Opportunities in the tourism sector
           could include camping and formal guest accommodation. Empty or old buildings not used
           for project or construction accommodation purposes could be converted into guest houses,
           further boosting the local economy. A government or private sector entity would be required
           to facilitate the process.

       o   Farm holidays: These are an opportunity for visitors to tour agricultural lands and participate
           in learning activities. Activities could align with farming methods, planting, and growing
           crops. Tursunzoda indicated they receive many foreigners interested in visiting the
           agricultural areas to gain an understanding of the methods they use.

       o   Developing arts and craft centers in these agricultural areas: This would allow tourists to
           purchase local goods and provide opportunities for local individuals to participate in
           community-based activities. This activity would require expertise in arts and crafts small
           business management.

       •       Technical Skills Development: Community-Based

Integrating the resettled communities with the new resettlement areas opens opportunities for
community members to share the knowledge they have brought with them, as well as newly developed
skills. Community members who arrive from different districts and individuals from the host
communities may have different sets of technical expertise in agriculture, brickmaking, vehicle
maintenance, technology, small business management, or information technology. Knowledge relates
to construction, preparation of fields, planting vegetables or fruits, constructing and maintaining homes,
etc. To allow for the development of the existing knowledge base, it becomes essential that
communities learn from each other.

A facilitated approach will involve scheduling weekend community workshops, focusing on different
topics. Community members with skills related to painting, setting up satellite dishes, and arts and
crafts can educate people interested in these fields. These community workshops will be arranged at
suitable venues. If it relates to brickmaking, a person involved could house a training session at a
facility already used for this purpose. People will use these skills at home, or they can assist other
members of the community who need support, such as the disabled or elderly.

       •   Trade skills and Associated Training

During the household survey, it became evident that refrigerators, telecommunication instruments,
satellite dishes, and bicycles were purchased more frequently. There is a growing demand for various
services to maintain these goods, especially in the technology arena. The increase in the use of more
goods that require specialized service to set up or maintain opens a niche market, especially for
individuals with certifications in electrical maintenance, satellite dish installations, or help with access to

                                                                                                            36
internet connections. Those individuals who already have the skills to assist the local community will be
identified and, through a skills assessment a determination made if additional training is required that
would allow them to serve a higher-end market. The more advanced the skills become, the more
individuals receive an opportunity to become certified and provide services to a larger market.

       •   Construction

Developing work packages for resettled PAPs is critical for existing construction businesses to ensure
individuals receive local business market opportunities. ring-fencing a portion of construction-related
contracts allocated to the resettled communities will help them establish their businesses in the new
resettled areas. Existing construction companies should negotiate work packages to allow resettled
people to integrate with the local economic environment.

Smaller businesses could support households in need of construction. These could include trades
related to painting, roofing, and basic construction. Allocating credits to these local construction
businesses aligned with international standards allows entrepreneurs to gain credibility in the general
construction environment. In this case, PAPs can utilize interest-free loans or one-time assistance
opportunities.

In addition, PAPs will be provided initial financial support and small business development training. A
financial training program equipped to educate new businesses in business management skills would
improve entrepreneurs' success rates.

       •   Businesses or Entrepreneurship – Fruit trees


It was noted during the field visits that communities rely significantly on planting apple trees. Although
not all areas are adaptable to apple and other fruit trees, communities have become used to storing
and selling fruits at the market in some places. As part of business management and financial training,
resettled communities will be provided opportunities to learn how to establish a market and sell the fruit
at local market prices. Newly resettled communities will be educated on the the supply chain, from
planting, production, and selling. Established businesses and financial advisors funded by the
government would be identified to train and guide the new entrepreneurs.

       •   Business Opportunities - Small-scale farming

PAPs have also raised the development of other farming ideas or facilities, such as beekeeping, fish
farms, and small-scale forestry. Although only 1% of PAPs show interest in beekeeping, this training on
beekeeping, as well as fish farming and small-scale forestry will be developed.developed. These
opportunities can be linked with tourism opportunities. Honey and fish can be sold locally in markets
but also used at local restaurants. Guesthouses and camping sites in agricultural areas could stock
these goods. Honey can be exported to neighboring districts and regions.

       •   Business Opportunities – Restaurants / Food Industry

Local restaurants are key in purchasing foods from local small-based farmers, grocery stores, or home-
based providers. These opportunities allow individual owners to sell goods from home or link with a
street vendor, grocery store, or market. Establishing linkages between the market with the farmers or
home-based suppliers will be explored.
                                                                                                      37
       •   Marketing Opportunities

A marketing program or venue where local small businesses can advertise their services could be
established. For businesses to succeed, it will become critical to provide them with the opportunity to
market their industries. The Government of Tajikistan has a website for employers and companies to
market open vacancies. However, expanding the website to allow small business owners to advertise
will be useful. The local jamoats could make space available at their offices for small business owners
to place brochures or pamphlets.

       •   Tourism

Tajikistan has various opportunities to develop the tourism industry and create employment
opportunities for the country's people. The growth in the tourism sector can start with identifying the
key interest areas, such as camping, fishing, hunting, hiking, winter sports, or recreational areas typical
of the local environments. The next step would include identifying the professions or vacancies typical
of the tourism environment. Individual employment opportunities may include tourist guides or hotel
managers.

Other opportunities could relate to small tourism businesses responsible for travel bookings. Local
events scheduled by the local communities could be marketed as part of the tourism sector. Finally,
tourism could be linked to exploring local cultural heritage, including archaeological sites, historial sites,
landscapes and intangible heritage, such as music, dance, etc.

Training tourism entrepreneurs as part of the existing Adult Training Centers or developing tourism-
specific colleges would allow Tajikistan’s tourism sector to grow and help households to establish new
livelihoods.

   •   District-Specific Main Livelihood Restoration Ideas

During consultations in some of the districts where PAPs are resettled/resettling, some additional
proposals were raised, which the Districts are developing into local plans:

   •   Nurobod

Joint infrastructure and training projects among various lenders, such as the World Bank, ADB, and
AIIB, would allow space for PAPs to receive short-term to longer-term local employment and training in
the infrastructure environment. These programs could facilitate PAPs' attending technical schools over
a short duration and receiving certification in technical fields such as painting, building maintenance, or
supervision. Individuals who register for formal courses may apply for a stipend that will allow them to
receive income during this time.

   •   Tursunzoda

Creating opportunities for women to generate additional income and integrate with the new community
is critical. Labor migration to Russia has been seriously curtailed, and there are changes in the
availability of employment opportunities in different areas and countries. Women are interested in
                                                                                                   38
developing skills, but they also want a robust childcare system beyond the establishment of local
kindergartens.

   •   Faizobod

Some subsistence farmers in Tajikistan have reverted to agroforestry to assist them with growing their
crops in a dry country where plots are relatively small (only a few hectares of land). For this reason,
planting fruit trees with crops such as cabbage has become popular. According to GIZ, using
sustainably managed irrigated crops allows for regular generation of food security (GIZ, 2019). Training
PAPs by using available programs sponsored by existing cooperations, for example, GIZ and the
Ministry of Agriculture, could benefit local communities.

   •   Danghara

Danghara forms part of the free economic zones in the Republic of Tajikistan and is defined as an
agro-industrial district (Republic of Tajikistan , 2024). The district invests in the processing of food and
metals and the production of associated infrastructure. Depending on the levels of education, existing
industries and related businesses should make on-the-job and competency training available for
resettled PAPs. PAPs in Danghara have also been able to establish service-related businesses and
have asked for support to develop business plans for additional businesses, given local demand.

   4.3 Outreach about Government Programs
During site visits and discussions with the PAPs in Faizobod and Nurobod in 2024 and 2025, it was
evident that not all PAPs were aware of the full range of livelihood restoration options available from
MoLMEP, MoA, other ministries and jamoats. Therefore, to fully benefit from the available livelihood
restoration support, PAPs must first be fully aware and informed about government support programs
at all levels,, take the initiative and register with relevant agencies, engaging in training opportunities,
as well as taking proactive steps to access loans and resources.

DFZ and PMG are increasing the number of Community Liaison Officers to 24 (i.e. approximately one
per PAP resettlement location) to strengthen their outreach and assistance to PAPs in their ability to
access jobs, training opportunities, business opportunities and loans within the existing national
programs. This is being done through increased and targeted information sharing about existing
program opportunities at household level as well active provision of assistance in registrations and
applications. This is especially important for women, and those members of the resettled population
who are vulnerable or literacy constrained.

These measures are supplemented with ongoing efforts by MoLMEP and the jamoats. Every three
months, local MoLMEP branches and jamoats organize meetings with the resettled communities to
provide information about available government programs, vocational training opportunities, and the
services of the vocational centre.

During these meetings, information is shared verbally. The support programs are explained and how
individuals can register and access assistance with their job applications.

Job opportunities and information about the support programs are also disseminated via local
newspapers. In addition, announcements are posted in prominent public locations, including: local
jamoat doors; mosques; and marketplaces (bazaars).


                                                                                                           39
The MoLMEP branches also organize job fairs to connect PAPs to local labour markets. Different
companies participate and provide informational booklets about job opportunities.

The MoLMEP branches share information about available job opportunities in government agencies,
such as schools, hospitals, and clerk positions in different agencies.




                                                                                                  40
