Public Disclosure Authorized
                                         The World Bank
                                         Sustainable Financing for Rogun Hydropower Project (P181029)



                                  @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                       Project Information Document (PID)



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                      Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 01-Oct-2024 | Report No: PIDA0261




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Oct 01, 2024                                                                                        Page 1 of 10
          The World Bank
          Sustainable Financing for Rogun Hydropower Project (P181029)


   @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
   BASIC INFORMATION


   A. Basic Project Data

   Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                         Operation ID                   Operation Name
                                  EUROPE AND CENTRAL                                            Sustainable Financing for
   Tajikistan, Tajikistan                                        P181029
                                  ASIA                                                          Rogun Hydropower Project
   Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date       Estimated Approval Date        Practice Area (Lead)
   Investment Project
                                  04-Oct-2024                    17-Dec-2024                    Energy & Extractives
   Financing (IPF)
   Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                                  Rogun HPP Open Joint
                                  Stock Company, Rogun
                                  Project Management
                                  Group for the Power Plant
   Republic of Tajikistan
                                  Construction under the
                                  President of the Republic,
                                  Directorate of the FLooding
                                  Zone

  Proposed Development Objective(s)
   The project development objective is to increase supply of clean, affordable and climate resilient hydroelectricity for
   consumers in Tajikistan and Central Asia region.

  Components
   Component 1: Construction activities
   Component 2: Project supervision support
   Component 3: RAP and LRP implementation
   Component 4: Hydro meteorological activities

   @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
   PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

   Maximizing Finance for Development

   Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                     No
   Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?               No

   SUMMARY



Oct 01, 2024                                                                                                           Page 2 of 10
          The World Bank
          Sustainable Financing for Rogun Hydropower Project (P181029)



     Total Operation Cost                                                6,290.00

     Total Financing                                                     6,290.00
                  of which IBRD/IDA                                       350.00
     Financing Gap                                                           0.00

   DETAILS
     World Bank Group Financing
        International Development Association (IDA)                       350.00
           IDA Grant                                                      350.00
     Non-World Bank Group Financing
        Counterpart Funding                                              3,390.00
           Borrowing Agency                                              1,250.00
           Borrower/Recipient                                            2,140.00
        Other Sources                                                    2,550.00
           OPEC FUND                                                      100.00
           KUWAIT: Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development              100.00
           ABU DHABI: Abu Dhabi Fund for Arab Economic Development        100.00
           SAUDI ARABIA: Saudi Fund for Development                       100.00
           Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank                           500.00
           Islamic Development Bank                                       150.00
           EC: European Investment Bank                                   550.00
           Foreign Multilateral Institutions (unidentified)               500.00
           Bilateral Agencies (unidentified)                              450.00




   @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
 Environmental And Social Risk Classification
 High


   Decision
   The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate




Oct 01, 2024                                                              Page 3 of 10
          The World Bank
          Sustainable Financing for Rogun Hydropower Project (P181029)



  Other Decision (as needed)




Oct 01, 2024                                                             Page 4 of 10
          The World Bank
          Sustainable Financing for Rogun Hydropower Project (P181029)


  B. Introduction and Context

  Regional and Country Context

 1. The Rogun Hydropower Plant Project (HPP) is an export-oriented green energy project, which once completed, will
    bring significant domestic and regional welfare benefits, contribute to the decarbonization of regional power grids
    in Central Asia (CA) and potentially transform the Tajik economy. The US$650 million Rogun Hydropower Program
    under Multi-Phase Approach (MPA) (with Phase 1 for US$350 million) would support the completion of the Rogun
    HPP, which has been under construction since 2017, and crowd-in grants and concessional funds from ten
    International Financial Institutions (IFIs). With a planned installed generation capacity of 3,780 megawatt (MW), the
    Rogun HPP epitomizes the World Bank efforts to help address climate change at scale. About 70 percent of the energy
    generated is expected be exported, thus helping to replace fossil-fired generation in Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan,
    whose economies have a high fossil fuel intensity, while increasing the resilience of water resources regionally. This
    financing package would also contribute to a sustainable macro-economic framework, which will help free up space
    for expenditures in the social and other priority sectors, and to significant spillovers on energy and structural reforms
    in the broader economy.

 2. The Rogun HPP is a transformative clean and green domestic and export-oriented energy project that aims to
    become the main pillar of Tajikistan’s electricity system and an anchor for a regional electricity market in Central
    Asia. The project will ensure reliable electricity supply to meet growing domestic demand at an affordable cost, help
    address electricity shortages, and enhance energy security in Tajikistan. At the regional level, the Rogun HPP will play
    a crucial role in underpinning the development of a regional electricity market and providing reserve and balancing
    services conducive to the integration of intermittent solar photovoltaic (PV) and wind capacity in Central Asia. The
    project will also improve the resilience of the entire Vakhsh cascade of HPPs, accounting for 95 percent of total hydro
    generation in Tajikistan, through mitigation of flooding risks. Additionally, the large reservoir of Rogun HPP will provide
    significant economic benefits to the region in terms of energy supply, flood mitigation, and enhanced reliability of
    water supply for irrigation and domestic uses. The project will also finance priority social needs through the use of a
    share of revenues that will finance a Benefit Sharing Program (BSP) and to augment the social safety nets in the
    country. Overall the Rogun HPP is expected to contribute to accelerated economic growth, strengthening economic
    and social resilience, and promoting the financial viability of the energy sector.

 3. The Rogun HPP is expected to contribute to the development of a regional electricity market through a
    complementary program under an MPA on Regional Electricity, Market, Integration and Trade (REMIT). The purpose
    of REMIT is to establish market and commercial principles in regional cooperation in Central Asia, including piloting
    short-term trading and supporting the gradual evolution of the pilot market to a modern market structure with a wide
    range of market products, such as day-ahead, intraday, balancing services, over a 2024-2035 timeframe. The Rogun
    project will also support the Government to achieve its development vision of accelerating economic growth,
    strengthening economic and social resilience to shocks, and promoting the financial viability of the energy sector. The
    Rogun HPP has benefited from a multi-donor platform, and the Government has committed to reforms to unleash the
    development potential of Tajikistan to help promote a more competitive and private sector-driven economy, as well
    as an ongoing Program-for-Results operation to improve the financial viability of the electricity sector.
  Sectoral and Institutional Context

 4. Central Asian countries are prioritizing reforms to ensure financially sustainable and creditworthy utilities, essential
    for maximizing regional electricity trade benefits. Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan have advanced their energy reforms,

Oct 01, 2024                                                                                                          Page 5 of 10
          The World Bank
          Sustainable Financing for Rogun Hydropower Project (P181029)


      with Uzbekistan establishing an independent energy regulator and unbundling its power transmission company, and
      Kazakhstan focusing on private sector involvement and investment promotion. Both countries aim for full-cost
      electricity recovery by 2026, with current tariffs at 75 percent and 85 percent cost recovery, respectively. These
      reforms support the Rogun Hydro Power Plant (HPP) and reduce off-taker risks in Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs).

 5. Tajikistan is also reforming its electricity sector to improve financial viability, crucial for the Rogun HPP's success.
    Reforms include tariff increases, unbundling of the state electricity company, debt restructuring, loss reduction, and
    corporate governance improvements. The government is committed to achieving full cost recovery by 2027 and has
    taken steps to improve payment discipline and transparency, particularly with its largest electricity consumer, the
    Tajikistan Aluminum Company (TALCO).

 6. The completion of the Rogun HPP is guided by sustainability principles, including macro-fiscal sustainability, dam
    safety, environmental and social standards, commercial frameworks through PPAs, and water flow management.
    The Tajik government is seeking coordinated support to finance the project sustainably, with a financing plan
    comprising state budget funds, project revenues, and grants and loans. This financing is critical for maintaining the
    country's debt sustainability and allowing for social spending.

 7. The project is expected to significantly impact job creation, with the construction phase creating numerous direct
    and indirect jobs. The development of transmission assets for electricity evacuation and regional connectivity is
    progressing, with the potential to benefit from projects like CASA-1000, enabling electricity exports to Pakistan.
    Increased regional energy trade is becoming a key agenda for Central Asia, with Tajikistan resuming electricity exports
    to Uzbekistan and contributing to the region's energy resources.

  C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

  Program Development Objective and key outcomes
  8. The PrDO is to increase the supply of clean, affordable, and climate resilient hydroelectricity for consumers in
     Tajikistan and the Central Asia region. The key Program outcome indicators, which will be measured across all
     Program phases, include:
         (a) Indicator One (Core): Renewable energy capacity enabled (baseline: 0.04 GW; end target 3.78 GW);
         (b) Indicator Two (Core): People with enhanced resilience to climate risks (baseline: 0; end target 9.75 million);
         (c) Indicator Three (Core): People with access to electricity (baseline: 0; end target 9.75 million);
         (d) Indicator Four (Custom): Project electricity exports to Central Asia region (baseline: 0; end target: 6 TWh);
         (e) Indicator Five (Core): Net GHG emissions reduction per year (baseline: 0 MtCO2/year; end target 1.14
             MtCO2/year).




Oct 01, 2024                                                                                                        Page 6 of 10
          The World Bank
          Sustainable Financing for Rogun Hydropower Project (P181029)


    Project Development Objective and key outcomes
 9. The PDO is to increase supply of clean, affordable, and climate resilient hydroelectricity for consumers in Tajikistan
    and the Central Asia region by 2 TWh.

           PDO Level Indicators
 10. The key outcome indicators of the proposed Project (i.e., Phase 1 of the MPA), include:
           (a) Indicator One (Core): Renewable energy capacity enabled (GW);
           (b) Indicator Two (Core): People with enhanced resilience to climate risks (Number);
           (c) Indicator Three (Core): People with access to electricity (Number);
           (d) Indicator Four (Custom): Electricity exports to Central Asia region (TWh);
           (e) Indicator Five (Core): Net GHG emissions reductions per year (MtCO2/year).

    D. Project Description

 11. The Program is structured in two phases. The phasing takes into account macro-fiscal sustainability considerations.
        (i) Phase 1 includes achieving by 2029: (i) dam height of 1,185 masl; and (ii) installed capacity of 1,660 MW (400
             MW for units 5/6, 1,260 MW for Units 3/4).
        (ii) Phase 2 includes achieving by 2035: (i) dam height of 1,300 masl.; and (ii) installed capacity of 3,780 MW (630
             MW in all six Units).

 12. The Project (i.e., Phase 1 of the Program) will have four main components as described below.

 13. Component 1: Construction activities. IDA financing will support (i) the design, supply, and installation of electro-
     mechanical equipment for generating units 3 and 4 including turbines, generators, frequency governor, excitation
     system, electrical systems, unit-related monitoring system, cooling water system; compressed air system for the
     governor, fire detection and suppression system; and (ii) design, supply and installation of replacement runners for
     Units 5 & 6 and other turbine rehabilitation works and control system integration; (iii) discharging structures on the
     right bank including the construction of diversion tunnels and spillways, carrying out investigations for the atypical
     zone, excavation and lining of grouting galleries, and grouting of the right abutment. Other activities include
     completion of the main dam, completion of the left bank structures, and construction of a control room.

 14. Component 2: Project management and supervision support. This component will support Rogun Open Joint Stock
     Company (OJSC) and Rogun Project Management Group (PMG) with the management and supervision of the Project
     and would cover the supervision of all main large construction contracts and other smaller early works contracts.
     There are four sub-components including the Project Management Consultant (PMC), Employer costs, and
     implementation support.

 15. Component 3: Implementation of Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) and Livelihood Restoration Plan (LRP). This
     component will finance the implementation, evaluation and monitoring of RAP and LRP requirements, including costs
     related to: (i) stipends for apprentices; (ii) payment of compensation and other assistance to project affected people.
     This component will also finance roads on the left bank necessary to ensure villages maintain connectivity after
     reservoir filling.



Oct 01, 2024                                                                                                         Page 7 of 10
          The World Bank
          Sustainable Financing for Rogun Hydropower Project (P181029)


 16. Component 4: Hydro meteorological activities to finance activities in three sub-components (i) upper Vakhsh Hydro
     meteorological instrumentation; (ii) lower Vakhsh Hydro meteorological instrumentation; and (iii) technical
     assistance to support the Basin Water Organization (BWO) “Amudarya” in Tajikistan reporting both to the Ministry
     of Energy and Water Resources (MEWR) and the headquarters of BWO Amudarya in Urgench, Uzbekistan and fulfill
     the mandated tasks of the Intestate Commission on Water Coordination for information management and water
     accounting. Real-time water level data transmitted continuously from the hydroposts will be integrated into the
     national Water Information System at MEWR and shared with riparian countries.

   @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate
   Legal Operational Policies                                                              Triggered?
   Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                             Yes
   Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                       No


 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts

 17. The project is rated High for both Environmental and Social (E&S) risks and impacts. Key E&S risks and impacts are
     related to (i) water resource management; (ii) dam safety; (iii) Occupational Health and Safety (OHS); (iv) large-scale
     resettlement; (v) labor management; (vi) gender issues, including social inclusion and management of gender based
     violence, sexual exploitation and abuse and sexual harassment risks; (vii) waste and material management; (viii) air
     and water quality; (ix) soils and geology; (x) traffic and transport; (xi) noise and vibration; (xii) stakeholder engagement
     and grievance management; (xiii) community health and safety; and (xiv) cultural heritage. Stakeholder consultations
     have been ongoing since 2008, focusing on resettlement and key environmental impacts. The project has been
     managing E&S issues through instruments that were initially prepared by the Government and then updated and
     enhanced through the Bank’s support of the 2014 Techno-Economic Assessment Studies. The E&S instruments are
     being updated as part of the ongoing Rogun TA Project, with the updated ESIA already published.

 18. OP 7.50 is triggered since the location of the Rogun HPP is on the Vakhsh, a tributary of the Amu Darya, and thus on
     an international waterway. In accordance with the Policy, other riparian countries were notified (Afghanistan,
     Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz Republic, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan) and the OP 7.50 process was duly followed.




Oct 01, 2024                                                                                                            Page 8 of 10
          The World Bank
          Sustainable Financing for Rogun Hydropower Project (P181029)


  E. Implementation

  Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
 19. Rogun OJSC, through the PMG, and Directorate of the Flooding Zone (DFZ) will be the Project Implementation Entities.
     Rogun PMG will implement components 1, 2 and 4; and will also manage all procurements under the Project for all
     four components. DFZ will implement Component 3. Rogun OJSC will be responsible for technical aspects of
     Component 1, and BWO Amudarya and Hydromet will be responsible for technical aspects of Component 4. A project
     implementation agreement will be signed between entities involved in project implementation, to define roles and
     responsibilities.

   @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
   CONTACT POINT

   World Bank
     Christopher Philip Trimble
     Senior Energy Specialist

     Manuel Berlengiero
     Lead Energy Specialist

   Borrower/Client/Recipient
    Republic of Tajikistan
    Faiziddin Qahhorzoda
    Minister of Finance
    faiziddin@inbox.ru

   Implementing Agencies
    Rogun HPP Open Joint Stock Company
    Khaiyrullo Safarzoda
    General Director
    m.tohirzoda@rogunges.t

    Rogun Project Management Group for the Power Plant Construction under the President of the Republic
    Pulod Muhiddiniyon
    Director of Rogun PMG
    grpsgs@gmail.com

    Directorate of the FLooding Zone
    Manuchehr Jamilzoda
    Director
    mdmmz@internet.ru




Oct 01, 2024                                                                                                     Page 9 of 10
          The World Bank
          Sustainable Financing for Rogun Hydropower Project (P181029)


   FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

   The World Bank
   1818 H Street, NW
   Washington, D.C. 20433
   Telephone: (202) 473-1000
   Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

   @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
   APPROVAL


   Task Team Leader(s):                     Christopher Philip Trimble, Manuel Berlengiero

   Approved By

   Practice Manager/Manager:                Stephanie Gil                          01-Feb-2024

   Country Director:                        Tatiana A. Proskuryakova               01-Oct-2024




Oct 01, 2024                                                                                     Page 10 of 10
