Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Terms of Reference
                                   Environmental And Social Assessment for the
                               Upgrade of the Belize City Wastewater Treatment Plant




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                  Belize Blue Cities and Beyond Project (P181064)



                                                        Draft 1
                                                       May 2025



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                            BELIZE WATER SERVICES LIMITED
                                              7 Central American Boulevard
                                                    Belize City, Belize
                                                                 Table of Contents
1      INTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................................................... 5
2      BACKGROUND ....................................................................................................................................... 5
3      OBJECTIVES OF THE CONSULTANCY...................................................................................................... 8
4      SCOPE OF WORK ................................................................................................................................... 9
    Task 1: Environmental and Social Description of the Existing WWTP ...................................................... 9
    Task 2: Description of the Proposed Project............................................................................................. 9
    Task 3: Legal and Institutional Framework ............................................................................................. 10
    Task 4: Baseline Data .............................................................................................................................. 10
    Task 5: Audit of the Environmental and Social Aspects of the Existing WWTP. ..................................... 11
    Task 6: Assessment of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts ..................................................... 12
    Task 7: Environmental and Social Management Plan ............................................................................. 13
    Task 8: Analysis of Alternatives............................................................................................................... 13
    Task 9: Stakeholder Engagement ............................................................................................................ 14
    Task 10: Grievance Mechanism (GM) ..................................................................................................... 14
    Task 11: Environmental and Social Capacity Assessment....................................................................... 14
5      TIMETABLE AND DELIVERABLES.......................................................................................................... 14
    Deliverable 1: Environmental and Social Assessment Report ................................................................ 14
    Deliverable 2: BWS Environmental and Social Capacity Assessment Report ......................................... 15
    Deliverable 2: Environmental, Social, Health & Safety (ESHS) Requirements for the Bidding Documents
    ................................................................................................................................................................ 15
6      KEY STAFFING REQUIREMENTS ........................................................................................................... 15
7      DURATION OF THE CONSULTANCY ..................................................................................................... 16
8      REPORTING REQUIREMENTS .............................................................................................................. 16
The environmental and social assessment report shall be concise and limited to significant
environmental and social issues. The main text must focus on findings, mitigation measures,
conclusions, and recommendations, supported by summary of data collected and citation for any
references used in interpreting those data. ............................................................................................... 16
LOGISTICS .................................................................................................................................................... 16
9      CODE OF CODUCT (CoC)...................................................................................................................... 16
10 Annex I: Structured Process for the Borrower Capacity Assessment ................................................. 17
    STEP 1: Identify key Environmental and Social (E&S) tasks .................................................................... 17
    STEP 2: Mapping the Institutions and other Actors ................................................................................ 19
    STEP 3: Analyse institutional arrangements and linkages ...................................................................... 22

                                                                                  2
  STEP 4: Assess the capacity of individual institutions ............................................................................. 23
  STEP 5: Recommend actions to strengthen institutional capacity ......................................................... 26
  STEP 6: Monitor capacity development indicators and adapt activities as needed .............................. 27
11 Annex II: Potential indicators to assess E & S capacity development................................................. 29




                                                                   3
                           Abbreviations and Acronyms


BOD    Biological Oxygen Demand
BWSL   Belize Water Services Ltd
COD    Chemical Oxygen Demand
DOE    Department of the Environment
EHS    Environmental Health and Safety
ESA    Environmental and Social Assessment
ESF    Environmental and Social Framework
ESMP   Environmental and Social Management Plan
ESS    Environmental and Social Standards
GHG    Greenhouse Gas
OHS    Occupational health and safety
PUC    Public Utilities Commission
WWTP   Wastewater Treatment Plant
WB     World Bank




                                         4
     1 INTRODUCTION
These Terms of Reference (ToR) are developed to guide the environmental and social due diligence
provisions for activities financed by the World Bank in the Upgrade of the Belize City Wastewater
Treatment Plant. The project will support to improve the management, and quality of wastewater
treatment in Belize City, which is vital for ensuring environmental protection, including protection of the
Belize Barrier Reef system. Belize Water Services Ltd. (BWSL) will be implementing the Project activities.

This ToR follows the national laws and regulations of Belize and the World Bank Environmental and Social
Framework (ESF) including the relevant requirements of the Environmental and Social Standards (ESSs),
and the World Bank Environmental Health and Safety (EHS) Guidelines.

The Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA) will be required to properly assess major impacts during
the pre-construction, construction, operation, and maintenance of the upgraded wastewater treatment
plant. The ESA will incorporate the establishment of the baseline environmental parameters which will
become a base for the analysis of impacts. The ESA process will result in the formulation of the
Environmental Social Management Plan (ESMP) for the purpose of avoiding, mitigating, or offsetting
potential environmental impacts identified.

     2 BACKGROUND
The Belize City Wastewater treatment system, which was completed in 1979, extends over an area of 13.8
square miles and currently services a population of 37,500 residents with a total of 8,200 connections.
The 2.56% population growth in this part of the country has demanded the expansion and upgrade of the
current wastewater treatment plant.

The existing sewerage collection system in Belize City is a conventional gravity system comprising of sewer
lines that collect sewage, grey waters, and some storm water runoffs. The system has been examined and
is currently undergoing improvements to facilitate and aid with the upgrades on the wastewater
treatment plant. The importance of the collection and treatment of wastewater in urban areas cannot be
overstated; it is essential for the protection of human health and the environment. New challenges such
as those from climate change require substantial investment for the maintenance of existing
infrastructure and the implementation of mitigating measures. The proposed project, through the
rehabilitation of the wastewater treatment plant in Southside Belize City, will benefit those at greater risk
to these challenges, and will decrease marine pollution through improved wastewater treatment.

The existing wastewater treatment plant is located at the Faber’s Road Extension area in the Southside of
Belize City. Demographically, this area is considered one of the most impoverished and is often the focus
of poverty alleviation efforts. Approximately 69% of the city’s population live in this area, with the
population density also being much higher than the affluent Northside of Belize City (SIB, 2013).
Moreover, the Port of Belize is also adjacent to the plant.

While most of Belize City is susceptible to the effects of climate change, the most vulnerable are those
without the resources to adapt and mitigate. The topography of the Faber’s Road Extension area is prone
to flooding and residential infrastructure is inadequate for even tropical storm force winds. The lack of
adequate infrastructure in the wastewater treatment echoes the marginalized state in the area.


                                                     5
The wetland surrounding the wastewater treatment plant includes an ecosystem for endemic birds and
reptiles that co-exist under the current conditions, however, deteriorating water quality could pose a
threat to their habitat. The Faber’s Road Extension area is also subjected to industrialized activity from
the Port of Belize, subjecting the already vulnerable area to further impacts to their environment. Extreme
rainfall events also pose additional risks to the wetland due to possible sewer overflow that could present
a threat to public health and the environment, either through consumption of contaminated water or
direct contact with polluted water bodies.

The risks associated with the inadequate operation and installation of the WWTP will be significantly
reduced with the upgrade. The water quality and environmental conditions will be improved for the
ecosystems and surrounding community. The upgrade of the current WWTP will also provide safe and
secure installations for the surrounding residents as well as the operating staff.

On a wider scope the project will benefit additional population of Belize City, an efficient plant will provide
the capacity to install more service connections to the WWTP, alleviating the threat of wastewater
pollution to the groundwater and wetland areas seeping to the Caribbean Sea. The upgraded WWTP will
also be a model for education, outreach, and awareness on the importance of adequate management of
wastewater.




Figure 1 Belize City Wastewater Treatment Plant

The wastewater treatment plant consists of only secondary treatment which includes two facultative cells
each covering an area of 15 acres and with a capacity of 20.5 million gallons. The project’s main objective
is to renovate the existing system, improve and potentially expand the WWTP capacity considering
population growth for the next 25 years and accommodate for future expansions for similar consecutive
periods of time. The upgrade of the infrastructure must include i. desludging and disposal of the sludge


                                                      6
built-up and sludge treatment; ii. Construction of preliminary and primary treatment; iii. Upgrade of
secondary treatment; iv. Construction of tertiary treatment; and v. Installations for operational and safety
features including perimeter fencing, adequate lighting and security and office and laboratory workspace.
All these above-mentioned activities will deliver a complete upgrade of the Belize City Wastewater
Treatment Plant.

•       Phase 1: Desludging and Disposal of the sludge built-up and Sludge treatment

Includes the desludging of Facultative Cells 1 & 2 and the construction of drying beds. This phase aims to
solve the inefficiency of the facultative cells in its current state by removing 75% of waterlogged sludge.
Desludging will assist the system to operate as intended between its aerobic and anaerobic zones
permitting for a lower TSS and BOD in the effluent in addition to the elimination of unwanted digestion
on its surface removing the chance for short circuiting and formation of noxious gases. The sludge drying
beds will work in conjunction with the facultative cells allowing for direct sludge loading and recirculation
of filtrate to the cells providing for a higher quality effluent. Construction of drying beds will reduce the
carbon footprint by having low energy and chemical consumption. Sludge treatment from the WWTP will
also be incorporated into the updated design, as this is a by-product of the treatment and is a combination
of organic matter from human waste, food waste particles, microorganisms, trace chemicals and inorganic
solids. The sludge treatment will reduce the harmful microorganisms (such as pathogens) in sludge,
lessening the health risks for the public and the environment. The drying beds will also used by the septic
cleaning trucking services, to also treat their sludge.

•       Phase 2: Preliminary and Primary Treatment

Consist of the redesign and adequately sized preliminary treatment components, keeping the existing
system fully functional and undisrupted. Initial works will entail the implementation of a preliminary
filtration system with bar screens to remove large inorganic matter from the influent. The construction of
a properly sized septic waste manhole will also be included, to facilitate the disposal of waste from sewer
sludge trucks. Additional components include the installation of proper flow meters and sensors for the
control and monitoring of the inflow. This primary treatment will increase the reduction of BOD from 70%
in the current plant to a total of 90%.

•       Phase 3: Upgrade of Secondary Treatment

The secondary treatment upgrade will include the installation of an anaerobic pond after the facultative
lagoons. The installation of the Anaerobic Pond after the preliminary treatment will foster the growth of
bacteria to break down the organic matter in the wastewater. The gases produced from this process will
be captured for potential re-use as biogas to eliminate any GHG emissions into the atmosphere. The
existing lagoons will then be adequately dimensioned for an efficient and feasible treatment. The berm
around the ponds will be redefined and an access road will be built on it for an easy access for proper
supervision, monitoring, maintenance, and operations of the plant.

•       Phase 4: Tertiary Treatment

The existing plant does not have a tertiary system in place. Due to the high levels of Heterotrophic
Bacteria, a UV system will serve as the tertiary treatment to further purify and disinfect the treated water
to acceptable levels of faecal coliform with the main objective to reassure the treated water is up to


                                                     7
standards before being discharged into the environment. This treatment will also incorporate the
realignment of the effluent canal, dredging to the design dimensions and the incorporation of a proper
berm system along the channel. With the tertiary treatment the Wastewater treatment plant will be fully
functional and operating up to standards. The current efficiency of the plant will be doubled, and the
capacity of monitoring and operation of the plant will be significantly increased.

•       Phase 5: Improvements to operational safety features

This upgrade of the project includes the development and improvement of the entire compound
considering the safety, security, and commodity of the wastewater treatment plant staff. It incorporates
the construction of a perimeter fence to enclose the entire 294.95 acres of land and complete site lighting
of the entire property. Cameras are to be installed in key areas for the secure monitoring of the property,
lagoons, and water treatment plant. Additional landscaping for proper storm water drainage and
maintenance of the property for future development and plant expansions and the incorporation of buffer
trees for air filtration.

     3 OBJECTIVES OF THE CONSULTANCY
The objective of this consultancy is to assess the potential environmental and social impacts associated
with the wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) upgrade and future operations and to design
implementation measures to avoid, minimize, mitigate, and monitor the impacts. The consultancy will
also assess and propose positive environmental and social impacts to be incorporated in the design,
construction, and operation of the upgraded WWTP.

The consultancy will conduct an Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA) of the WWTP that will consist
of:

1. An Environmental and Social Audit to assess key environmental and social areas of concern associated
   with the existing WWTP operations.
2. An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) of the potential environmental and social risks
   and impacts of the planned upgrades and future operations of the WWTP.
3. An Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) that will detail measures to avoid, minimize,
   and mitigate negative environmental and social impacts as well as propose positive environmental
   and social measures during the design, construction, and operation of the WWTP.
4. An Environmental and Social Capacity Assessment of the Belize Water Services to address
   environmental and social issues.

The ESA shall be conducted, and the report finalized prior to the finalization of the technical design of the
WWTP upgrade. The draft reports shall be reviewed by the Employer (Belize Water Services) and the
World Bank, and the consultant shall satisfactorily incorporate the feedback received before the final
report is accepted. Therefore, the consultant shall budget sufficient time and resources considering these
reviews.

If separate consultancies are selected to conduct the ESA and the technical design, the two consultancies
shall collaborate to ensure an integrated technical, environmental, social, health and safety evaluation. If
one firm is selected to conduct both the ESA and the technical design, the ESA shall be an independent



                                                     8
assessment to support the objectivity of the ESA per the requirements of the ESF 1. To ensure
independence, the individual consultants conducting the ESA will report to a separate environmental and
social manager from the technical design team who will report to a technical manager, and the two
managers shall report to the overall project manager.

     4 SCOPE OF WORK
Task 1: Environmental and Social Description of the Existing WWTP
1. Provide a comprehensive overview (including through desktop studies, consultations with key
   stakeholders, and fieldwork) of the E&S aspects of the existing WWTP and a detailed description of
   the geographic, environmental, social, and temporal context. The overview should include
   information on the specific location and characteristics of the site. Include relevant maps and layout.
2. Describe the location of the existing WWTP and surrounding area and general layout, size and
   capacity, environment, land uses, future development, sensitive receptors, communities,
   demography, land ownership, structures of historical significance, cultural heritage etc.
3. Describe the current operation of the existing WWTP. This shall include its efficiency (including energy
   and water efficiency where relevant), compliance with applicable permits and discharge standards,
   identification and description of the exact location, pathway and extent of WWTP effluent discharge
   into the Caribbean Sea, emergency and disaster preparedness, WWTP labor and operations
   personnel, occupational health and safety, and community health and safety.
4. Review the design and performance requirements of the four drying beds that are under construction.
5. Identify and assess the current stakeholder and community engagement policies and practices of the
   WWTP operator.
6. Identify and assess if there is a grievance procedure, and designated personnel, for dealing with
   WWTP employees and working conditions and community complaints. Assess whether the operator
   has received community complaints and how these have been dealt with. Conduct interviews as
   necessary.
Task 2: Description of the Proposed Project
7. Describe the proposed activities to be financed under the Project. Focus on activities that are likely to
   introduce adverse direct, indirect and if relevant cumulative impacts and positive impacts to the
   environment and communities including pre-construction activities, construction activities, operation
   and maintenance activities, any off-site investments etc.
8. Identify and delineate the project’s direct, indirect and cumulative (if applicable) areas of influence
   on maps of appropriate scales, highlighting the site layout and sensitive receptors such as flora, fauna,
   water bodies, residential areas etc.



1
  ESS1 Para 25. The environmental and social assessment will be an adequate, accurate, and objective evaluation
and presentation of the risks and impacts, prepared by qualified and experienced persons. For High and
Substantial Risk projects, as well as situations in which the Borrower has limited capacity, the Borrower will retain
independent specialists to carry out the environmental and social assessment.

                                                          9
9. Ensure that the area of influence includes locations that will be directly and indirectly impacted by
   project activities such as (i) the area affected by the project activities and facilities that are directly
   owned and managed by the project e.g., the physical project footprint, greenfield areas earmarked
   for upgrades or expansion activities, areas adjacent to the project site that are affected by emissions
   and effluents, effluent discharge, noise, traffic, odor, etc, and sensitive receptors that may be affected
   in each case; (ii) any associated facilities per the definition in the ESF 2, (iii) indirect areas of impact
   such as effluent reaching interconnecting receiving water bodies, management of sludge, and
   sensitive receptors that may be affected in each case; (iv) cumulative impacts (if applicable) when
   considering other current and foreseeable future stressors that may cause additional environmental
   and social impacts such as additional sources of effluent discharge into the Caribbean Sea etc.
Task 3: Legal and Institutional Framework
10. Analyze the legal and institutional framework for the project, within which the ESA is carried out.
11. Ensure that the ESA considers in an appropriate manner all issues relevant to the project, including:
    a) Belize’s policies, legislation and institutional capabilities (including implementation) relating to
       environment and social issues. The Effluent Limitations Regulations are enforced by the
       Department of the Environment (DOE). They came into force in 1996 and prohibit the discharges
       of effluent from new and altered point sources. The Effluent Limitations Regulations established a
       licensing system for discharging effluents under specific conditions. The Effluent Limitations
       Regulations also established the requirement for the treatment of effluent, as well as limitations
       or standards for physical and chemical parameters to be monitored for various industries. The
       regulations in the Forestry Act and Mines and Minerals Act must also me considered.

12. Relevant international conventions or treaties, global or regional, to which Belize is signatory, and
    which are directly applicable to the project activities. The upgrade will advance Belize’s obligation to
    the Cartagena Convention, whose one of the main objectives of the convention is on pollution control,
    it emphasizes on the implementation of measures to prevent, reduce, and control pollution from
    various sources, including land-based activities and wastewater discharge from watersheds that drain
    into Caribbean coastal waters that directly impact the marine environment. The outfall of the Belize
    City wastewater treatment plant is into the Caribbean Sea, this upgrade will improve the water quality
    of the outfall with the integration of tertiary treatment.
13. Compare the existing applicable national laws and regulations with the relevant Environmental and
    Social Standards (ESS) of the World Bank Environmental and Social Framework and identify the gaps
    between them. Present this comparison in a table format.
Task 4: Baseline Data
14. Assemble, evaluate, and present available baseline data on the existing environmental and social
    characteristics, with a focus on the aspects to be potentially affected by the upgrade of the WWTP.

2
 ESS1 Para 11 and footnote 12: For the purpose of this ESS, the term “Associated Facilities” means facilities or
activities that are not funded as part of the project and are: (a) directly and significantly related to the project; (b)
carried out, or planned to be carried out, contemporaneously with the project; and (c) necessary for the project to
be viable and would not have been constructed, expanded or conducted if the project did not exist. For facilities or
activities to be Associated Facilities, they must meet all three criteria.

                                                           10
    Include information on any changes anticipated before the start of the WWTP upgrade activities.
    Identify key data gaps, and uncertainties associated with predictions. The consultant shall use
    nationally or internationally accepted standards and accredited laboratories where sampling and
    testing is required.
   a) Physical aspects: Topography, soils, climate and meteorology, ambient air quality, existing sources
       of air emissions and odors, surface hydrology and hydrogeology, coastal water parameters,
       existing water pollution discharges, receiving body water quality, cultural heritage etc.

   b) Biological aspects: Flora including mangroves; fauna including avifauna, ichthyofauna, any pests
      and vectors; and habitats including the Burdon Canal Wildlife Sanctuary which is classified under
      IUCN Management Category Ia, wetlands, and coastal environments. Conduct a biodiversity
      baseline survey to classify the habitat as natural and/or modified and to identify any critical habitat
      features in the Project direct and indirect area of influence following the requirements of ESS6.
      Acquire an Integrated Biodiversity Assessment Tool (IBAT) report for the project location to
      provide a summary of terrestrial and marine biodiversity data available. Supplement the IBAT data
      with national, regional and international databases e.g., national red list, National Biodiversity
      Strategic Action Plan, and any other sources of information available for the project location
      including databases and community sources such as eBird for avifauna.

   c) Social aspects: Demographic and socio-economic data, including description on the types of
      community organization in the project area, stakeholder engagement.
15. Conduct field surveys, sampling, interviews and/or consultation to complement secondary data. At a
    minimum, field and primary data to be collected shall cover: (i) water samples from surface water,
    groundwater and coastal water and test for relevant wastewater parameters (e.g., BOD5, COD,
    Nitrogen, Phosphorus, E.coli, Fecal Coliforms etc.); (ii) surface and subsurface soil samples for pH,
    organic carbon, nutrients and heavy metals; (iii) sludge samples; (iv) ambient air quality samples; (v)
    samples at the WWTP outfall including coastal water samples and sediment sampling at the outfall
    location in the Caribbean Sea; (vi) terrestrial and marine biodiversity survey.
16. Describe the current and proposed development activities within the project area but not directly
    connected to the project.
17. The consultant should carefully define the scope of the baseline study to meet the needs of the ESIA.
    The baseline data collected should be specific and relevant to the project and proportionate to the
    level of risks and impacts. The consultant shall collect only the necessary information required to
    develop baseline information and present it in a succinct manner. Irrelevant information or
    information that is not distilled to provide useful baseline information shall not be accepted by the
    Employer.
Task 5: Audit of the Environmental and Social Aspects of the Existing WWTP.
18. Describe the current management and maintenance of the WWTP with respect to relevant
    environmental and social aspects. This shall include occupational health and safety (OHS), emergency
    preparedness and response, and the environmental and social management system of the operating
    entity.
19. Assess and describe significant environmental and social issues associated with the existing WWTP
    operations. The audit will assess environmental and social issues in line with the applicable laws and

                                                    11
   regulations of Belize, the relevant requirements of the World Bank ESF including relevant ESSs and
   the World Bank EHS Guidelines. The consultancy will narrow down and focus only on the most
   significant/key environmental and social issues.
Task 6: Assessment of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
20. Identify and assess all relevant environmental and social risks and impacts associated with the
    upgrade of the WWTP including the construction and future operations.
   a) Environmental risks and impacts include but are not limited to:
       •   Soil, water and air pollution associated with the desludging of facultative ponds; drying,
           disposal and management of biosolids/sludge, construction and operation of anaerobic
           ponds, and effluent discharge.
       • Earthworks activities that include drainage works and could impact the natural hydrology due
           to such construction activities.
       • Waste management including management of sludge, chemicals currently in use or proposed
           to be used, hazardous waste, non-hazardous waste, and general construction and operation
           stage waste management.
       • The anticipated energy consumption of the upgraded WWTP
       • The capacity of the discharge area in the Caribbean Sea to receive the additional effluent.
       • Risks to terrestrial and marine biodiversity including the Burdon Canal Wildlife Sanctuary,
           mangroves, wetlands, marine areas etc.
       • Natural disasters such as floods and hurricanes and risks related to accidents that could result
           in release of pollutants.
       • Community health and safety including impacts from odor, soil and water pollution, natural
           disasters, accidents, emergencies etc.
       • Occupational health and safety risks including any hazardous work conditions that may
           expose workers to unsafe work practices or exposure to hazardous materials.
       • Climate change risks and impacts including from leakages and emissions of greenhouse gasses
           (GHGs) from the upgraded WWTP and other project components, as relevant, following ESS3
           requirements. The consultancy shall propose a suitable tool to calculate the GHG emissions.
       • Other risks and impacts such as any new or complex technologies proposed to be used in the
           WWTP; traffic disturbance and other road safety risks; noise, dust and other nuisances as
           applicable.
   b) Social risks and impacts include but are not limited to:
       •   Risks to neighboring residential areas and businesses.
       •   Risks that project impacts fall disproportionately on individuals and groups who, because of
           their particular circumstances, may be disadvantaged or vulnerable. This includes the risk of
           inequitable distribution of benefits.
       •   Potential labor influx.
       •   Economic and physical displacement/resettlement.
       •   Cultural heritage risks
       •   Inadequate community engagement and participation,
       •   Designs that do not properly consider universal access.


                                                   12
21. Describe the above impacts quantitatively and classify each negative impact as High, Substantial,
    Moderate or Low. The risks and impacts shall be classified into the design, construction and operation
    stages of the project.
22. Identify positive environmental and social measures to improve the design of the upgraded WWTP
    including aspects such as water and energy efficiency, disaster and climate resilience measures,
    measures to avoid release of GHG emissions into the atmosphere, community notification
    procedures, emergency response measures etc. Describe other positive environmental and social
    impacts following a similar procedure as described above.
Task 7: Environmental and Social Management Plan
23. Describe detailed measures, including technical details, to manage the environmental and social risks
    assessed above following the mitigation hierarchy 3, including measures to avoid, reduce, and mitigate
    impacts. The consultant shall ensure that the proposed measures are useful in decision making and
    can be executed within the scope and resources of the project. The consultant shall identify the
    contents that will comprise the ESMP depending on the findings of Task 5. This may include a Waste
    Management Plan, OHS Management Plan, Hazardous Materials Management Plan, Water and
    Energy Use Plan, Traffic Management Plan, Community Health and Safety Management Plan,
    Biodiversity Management Plan, Emergency Preparedness Plan, Climate and Disaster Risk Resilience
    Plan and Wastewater Effluent monitoring plan and others as relevant.
24. Develop a Chance Finds procedure for excavations, demolitions, earth movements, flooding or
    changes to physical environment in case previously unknown cultural heritage is encountered during
    project activities.
25. Develop a monitoring program as part of the ESMP. The program shall include the monitoring
    objectives, parameters, methods, frequency, procedures, budget estimates, schedules, responsible
    parties, staffing, training requirements, and other necessary support to implement the ESMP.
26. The ESA consultant shall coordinate with the technical consultant to ensure that the ESMP budget is
    integrated into the project’s overall planning, design, budget, and implementation.
Task 8: Analysis of Alternatives
27. Conduct an analysis of alternatives for the environmental and social aspects of the design,
    construction and operation of the WWTP.
28. Compare the alternatives in terms of potential environmental and social impacts, assuming
    reasonable implementation of environmental and social mitigation measures and monitoring.
29. Quantify the environmental and socio-economic cost and benefits for each alternative, inclusive of
    mitigation measures, and attach an economic value where feasible.
30. Identify the most suitable environmental and social alternative that will feed into the overall project
    analysis of alternatives (e.g., technical, financial).




3
    The mitigation hierarchy is defined in The World Bank ESF under ESS1, paragraph 27.

                                                         13
31. Coordinate with the team undertaking the detailed design of the WWTP upgrade to identify the final
    project alternative, taking into account the preferred and most feasible environmental and social
    alternatives.
Task 9: Stakeholder Engagement
32. Conduct stakeholder consultations, in coordination with the Employer, following the Stakeholder
    Engagement Plan (SEP) of the project.
33. Identify perceived environmental and social impacts outside of those identified by the consultancy.
    Acknowledge and analyze stakeholder concerns and determine as appropriate whether the project
    area of influence, baseline, risks and impacts should be expanded to assess additional areas of
    stakeholder concern.
Task 10: Grievance Mechanism (GM)
34. Develop two GMs, one for project workers, and another for community complaints. The GM shall be
    in accordance with ESS2 and ESS10 of the World Bank ESF and the requirements of BWS. The GM will
    have channels to update sexual exploitation and abuse / sexual harassment (SEASH) related
    complaints, consistent with the WB Guidance notes.

Task 11: Environmental and Social Capacity Assessment
35. Conduct an institutional capacity assessment of BWS as part of the ESA. The assessment shall cover
    environment, social, and health & safety staffing, capacity and performance, and environmental and
    social management systems. The consultant is recommended to follow the standardized approach to
    conduct the capacity assessment in the Annex or a similar robust approach.

36. Recommend actions to strengthen the institutional capacity of BWS on environmental and social
    aspects.

     5 TIMETABLE AND DELIVERABLES
Deliverable 1: Environmental and Social Assessment Report
37. Prepare an Inception Report to document outlining the firm’s overall approach, timeline, detailed
    methodology, stakeholder engagement plant, sampling points and budget.

38. Prepare an ESA Report to document the findings of Tasks 1-10.

39. Prepare an Executive Summary to highlight significant findings and recommendations. The proposed
    length of this section is approximately 5 pages, and it should not exceed 10 pages.

40. The Report shall be concise, efficiently structured, and limited to significant environmental and social
    issues. The main text should focus on findings, conclusions and recommendations, supported by
    summaries of the data collected and other references used in interpreting the data. The proposed
    length of the main Report is 70 pages, and it should not exceed 90 pages. Useful data and
    supplementary information should be presented in an Annex which is not counted as part of the main
    Report. Therefore, the Consultant should emphasize the importance of conciseness and prioritize the
    inclusion of relevant, high-impact data and analysis that contributes significantly to the understanding


                                                    14
    of the project's environmental and social implications. Irrelevant data or superfluous information
    should be avoided.

Deliverable 2: BWS Environmental and Social Capacity Assessment Report
41. Develop a stand-alone BWS E&S Capacity Assessment Report to document the findings and
    recommendations of Task 11. The Report shall follow the indicative outline provided in the Annex.
    The proposed length of the final report is 20 to 30 pages.

Deliverable 2: Environmental, Social, Health & Safety (ESHS) Requirements for the Bidding
Documents

42. Prepare detailed ESHS requirements for the bidding/procurement package for Works. The ESHS
    requirements shall specify the Management Strategies and Implementation Plans (MSIPs) that
    bidders will need to submit as part of their proposal and the subsequent MSIPs that will eventually
    comprise the Contractor’s ESMP (C-ESMP). The ESHS requirements shall cover both the construction
    and operation phases of the project.

 Report                                                        Timetable (from contract signing)
 Inception Report                                              3 weeks
 First draft of the ESA                                        3 months
 Second draft of the ESA                                       4 months
 First draft of the E&S Capacity Assessment Report             5 months
 Third draft of ESA                                            6 months
 Second draft of the E&S Capacity Assessment Report            6 months
 Final ESA                                                     7 months
 Final E&S Capacity Assessment Report                          7 months
 ESHS Requirements for the Bidding Documents                   8 months

     6 KEY STAFFING REQUIREMENTS
The Consultant team shall include professionals covering all skills and relevant experience (at least 10
years), including experience in similar projects, required to carry out the described tasks. The selected
team shall have knowledge of the current national environmental legislation and procedures, the WBG
EHS Guidelines, as well as the World Bank ESIA requirements, including experience on organizing public
consultations. The team will include the following experts:
(i) project leader: graduate engineer with extensive experience in environmental management aspects
related to wastewater treatment plants; minimum 10 years of working experience in the relevant field,
including minimum two assignments with tasks as a projects leader of similar projects;
(ii) environmental engineer/specialist: with expertise in pollution control, mitigation and knowledge of
marine biology; minimum 10 years of working experience in the relevant field, with at least two
assignments that included similar tasks;

                                                   15
(iii) Health and safety specialist: graduate degree in the field of health and safety, minimum 10 years of
working experience in the relevant field, with at least two assignments that included similar tasks;
(iv) Social Scientist/Socio-economic specialist: with expertise in social and economic impact assessment
and social science research methods with; minimum 10 years of working experience in the relevant field,
with at least two assignments that included similar tasks.


      7 DURATION OF THE CONSULTANCY
                                                                                  Month
                                                                   1     2    3   4   5      6     7   8
  1   Inception report
  2   Review of existing data
  3   Carry out necessary field assessments and social surveys
  4   First draft of the ESA
  5   Second draft of the ESA
  6   First draft of the E&S Capacity Assessment Report
  7   Third draft of ESA
  8   Second draft of the E&S Capacity Assessment Report
  9   Final ESA
 10   Final E&S Capacity Assessment Report
 11   ESHS Requirements for the Bidding Documents



      8 REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
The environmental and social assessment report and the ESMP shall be concise and limited to significant
environmental and social issues. The main text must focus on findings, mitigation measures, conclusions,
and recommendations, supported by summary of data collected and citation for any references used in
interpreting those data.
All the ESA deliverables will be subject to review and approval by BWSL and the World Bank. Adequate
time and resources should be allowed for this review and approval process.

LOGISTICS
The consulting firm is to provide its local transportation, visas and all necessary documents for
international travel and conducting assessments in Belize.


      9 CODE OF CODUCT (CoC)
The consultant shall sign and adhere to a BWS Non-Disclosure Agreement and code of conduct.


                                                    16
     10 Annex I: Structured Process for the Borrower Capacity
        Assessment
STEP 1: Identify key Environmental and Social (E&S) tasks
Based on the project objectives, activities and location, identify the key tasks that are required to avoid,
mitigate, or manage significant potential E&S risks and impacts. While the environmental and social
assessment of the project will consider capacity in relation to a range of potential risks and impacts of the
project, the assessment will focus specifically on labor and working conditions (ESS2), community health
and safety (ESS4) and stakeholder engagement (ESS10). As noted above, this is because these are three
areas where it is anticipated that Borrowers’ capacity may need to be strengthened. It is important to
prioritize and focus on assessment and management of risks or impacts identified as significant in order
to keep the scope of the assessment manageable and appropriate to the needs of the project. In addition,
it is important to recognize that the nature and significance of various risks and impacts may need to be
revisited as further information becomes available during project preparation.

The relevant ESS and associated Guidance Notes for Borrowers help in identifying the types of risks and
impacts and the key tasks required to address them. Table 1 below identifies different tasks which may
be relevant in applying ESS1, ESS3, ESS5, ESS6, ESS7 and ESS8, while Table 2 identifies different tasks which
may be relevant in applying the three standards (ESS2, ESS4 and ESS10) which would be subject to an in-
depth assessment. The list is illustrative and should be adjusted or augmented as appropriate, based on
the project-specific activities and associated potential E&S risks and impacts. Where it is known that
several related tasks will be carried out by the same institution, these can be consolidated into a single
task. If the list of tasks is too long the assessments and analyses outlined in Steps 2-5 may become
impractical or impossible to complete within a reasonable budget and timeframe.

Table 1. Typical tasks for project-level E&S risk management.
 Task                          Specific responsibilities
 ESA                           Scope and preparation of TORs
                               Carry out assessment process (including specialized assessments as
                               appropriate 4)
                               Public disclosure and consultation
                               Clearance or approval of ESA documents
                               License or permits for construction and operation
 E&S mitigation planning       Preparation and/or adaptation of mitigation and management plans
 (such as ESMP,                based on results of E&S assessment process
 biodiversity plan, etc.)      Public disclosure and consultation
                               Allocation of institutional responsibilities for mitigation and monitoring
                               measures
                               Identification of organizational, financial and human resource
                               arrangements for implementing every mitigation and monitoring
                               measure
                               Supervision

4 e.g., biodiversity assessment, social conflict analysis, cumulative impact assessment, etc.


                                                     17
 Ensure implementation      Enforcement
 of E&S management          Contractor and subcontractor (if applicable) management
 measures                   Monitoring and reporting
                            Training and other capacity development activities
                            Adaptive management (adjusting project design and/or mitigation
                            measures based on changing circumstances and/or results of monitoring
                            progress of indicators)
 Land acquisition and       Carry out baseline survey
 resettlement planning      Carry out detailed survey, including property valuation
 (preparation of            Definition of eligible parties and their respective entitlements
 Resettlement Policy
                            Identification of resettlement site
 Framework [RPF] and/or
 Resettlement Action Plan   Identification or development of livelihood restoration support plan
 [RAP])                     Design of grievance mechanism or dispute resolution for land acquisition
                            or resettlement
                            Public disclosure and consultation
 Land acquisition and       Disbursement of compensation
 resettlement               Physical resettlement, including development of resettlement site
 implementation             Implementation of livelihood restoration plan
 (including financing)
                            Title transfer and/or mutation (for land and/or physical assets)
                            Monitoring of resettlement process
                            Grievance management for land acquisition/resettlement
                            Adaptive management (revising plans as needed based on monitoring,
                            grievances, etc.)
                            Public disclosure and consultation
                            Post resettlement review or audit

Table 2. Typical tasks for project-level E&S risk management with focus on ESS2, ESS4 and
ESS10.
 Issue                      Specific tasks
 Labor    and     Working Identify different types of project workers
 Conditions (ESS 2)
                          Identify key labor risks

                            Prepare Labor Management Procedures

                            Prepare and implement Labor Management Plans

                            Monitor compliance with Labor Management Plans/Procedures

                            Identify OHS measures

                            Establish and maintain grievance mechanism(s) for workers
                            Prepare procedures for managing third parties
                            Identify primary suppliers and assess risks related to primary supply
                            workers


                                                18
 Community health and Identify infrastructure or other elements of a project which could present
 safety (ESS 4)       safety risks to affected communities or other parties, including exposure
                      to operational accidents or natural hazards such as extreme weather
                      events

                              Establish and enforce design and construction standards to minimize the
                              above safety risks
                              Review design and construction of structural elements of the project
                              which have been identified as potentially presenting safety risks to
                              communities (e.g. dams)

                         Conduct road safety assessments, and preparation, implementation and
                         enforcement of traffic and road safety plans
                         Plan and carry out measures to protect provisioning and regulating
                         ecosystem services identified as important to communities and
                         potentially adversely affected by the project
                         Monitor incidences, implement measures to minimize exposure, and
                         (where needed) provide treatment for communicable and non-
                         communicable, water-related and vector-borne diseases.
                         Identification/analysis, safe removal, storage and/or destruction of
                         hazardous materials
                         Prepare risk/hazard assessments and development and implementation
                         of emergency response plans
                         Identify and incorporate climate change considerations in project designs
                         Establish and enforce quality standards, and advise on incorporation of
                         health and safety considerations (and universal access, where feasible) in
                         provision of services to communities
                         Establish and enforce standards of conduct for security personnel,
                         including providing training, verification of past records, reporting
                         unlawful or abusive acts and punishing perpetrators
 Stakeholder engagement Identify and map stakeholders
 planning            and
 implementation (ESS10)
                         Develop stakeholder engagement plans
                         Implement stakeholder engagement activities
                         Establish and operate grievance mechanisms
                         Conduct Information disclosure for stakeholder engagement and project
                         as a whole
                         Conduct ongoing stakeholder engagement
                         Practice adaptive management, revising project design or implementation
                         as appropriate, based on ongoing stakeholder engagement

STEP 2: Mapping the Institutions and other Actors
Step 2 involves identifying the institutions and major actors that will be involved in project preparation
and implementation and clarifying their respective roles and responsibilities in implementing each of the
tasks identified in Step 1. The information on which this institutional mapping is based is likely to come


                                                   19
from legal documents, consultations and interviews as well as secondary sources such as previous
environmental and social assessment reports.

While the specific institutions and actors responsible for project development and implementation will
vary, the ones most commonly involved are set out in Box 1. For some projects, some of the entities may
have multiple or overlapping roles.
It is useful at this stage to carry out a general mapping of the institutions and other actors involved. Table
3 illustrates such a mapping for the stakeholder engagement tasks identified in Step 1. By identifying
different responsibilities, the mapping helps to clarify the institutional structure for project preparation
and implementation. This includes identifying potential areas of overlapping responsibilities or possible
gaps in responsibility. This mapping provides the basis for a more thorough analysis of the institutional
arrangements, responsibilities and links in Step 3. A second example of institutional mapping is provided
in Table 3.


                           Box 1. Most common institutions and actors responsible
                                for project development and implementation

          •   Project sponsors and developers: Government ministries and agencies, state owned
              enterprises, entities overseeing projects, and private sector investors.
          •   Project implementers: Project Implementation Unit (PIU), Program Management Unit
              (PMU), and central and local government entities (ministries or other departments with
              supporting roles).
          •   Other actors: Entities that may be responsible for developing and/or implementing specific
              aspects of a project (e.g., NGOs and CSOs).
          •   Legislators and policymakers: Legislative entities and policymakers at the national and
              subnational level.
          •   Regulators: Government ministries, compliance, and enforcement authorities at the national
              or subnational level.
          •   Advisors and Consultants: Engineering firms or government bureaus providing technical
              design or operational services, law offices providing legal services, or other consultancies
              providing E&S risk management related services.
          •   Contractors and subcontractors: Contracted or subcontracted providers of construction and
              other project-related services
          •   Stakeholders: Parties likely to be affected by the project or have an interest in it (project-
              affected parties and other interested parties, per ESS10), including local communities,
              national and local authorities, suppliers, NGOs
          •   Lenders and development partners: Multilateral development banks (MDBs), bilateral
              donors, Multi-donor Trust Funds, and commercial banks.




Table 3: Example of a mapping for the stakeholder engagement tasks
                      Institution/Party Responsible for Task
 Key Task             Ministr Sector       Local         Regulat         Project          Supervisin Contract
                      y     of ministry governmen or                     Implementi       g engineer or
                      Financ ,             t unit                        ng
                      e         authorit                                 Unit
                                y

                                                       20
 Stakeholder                     X          X                           X
 identification &
 mapping
 Develop                                    X                           X
 Stakeholder
 Engagement Plan
 Implement                       x          X                           X                             x
 stakeholder
 engagement
 activities
 Establish                       x          x                           X                             X
 grievance
 mechanism
 Operate                         X          X                           X                             X
 grievance
 mechanism
 Disclose                        X          x                           X                             x
 information for
 stakeholder
 engagement
 Conduct ongoing                 X          x                           X                             X
 stakeholder
 engagement
Mapping Example
The following Table (Table 4) provides another example of mapping the roles and responsibilities of
various institutions and actors, with respect to implementing specific tasks identified in Step 1 for a
component of a hypothetical sanitation project. This matrix helps to clarify the institutional structure for
project implementation, including identifying potential areas of overlapping responsibilities, gaps, etc. In
this example, the significant role of the PIU is clear, as its responsibilities extend across all project tasks.
At the same time, there are multiple and potentially overlapping responsibilities for some aspects such as
supervision and information disclosure which are spread among almost all project institutions.

Table 4. Example of a matrix for analyzing the roles of institutions and actors for project-level
tasks
 Project: Supporting construction of a wastewater treatment plant
                  Institution Responsible for Task
 Key Task         PIU            Environment Water           Local         Water       Supervisin    Contractor
                                 al regulator     authorit   governmen     company     g engineer
                                                  y          t unit
 Supervision      X              X                X          X             X           X
 Enforcement      X              X                           X
 Contractor       X                                                        X
 management
 Monitoring       X                                                        X           X
 and reporting



                                                      21
 Training and         X                 X                   X                                                             X
 other capacity
 development
 Adaptive             X                                     X             X                X              X               X
 management
 Information          X                 X                   X             X                X                              X
 disclosure

X indicates a role in implementation of the task

STEP 3: Analyse institutional arrangements and linkages
Step 3 takes a broader view of the overall institutional structure for project implementation. It focuses
on:

(i) clarifying the specific roles and accountabilities of the institutions and other actors identified in Step
      2 in implementing the tasks identified in Steps 1.
(ii) identifying any gaps, areas of overlap, excessive fragmentation of responsibilities, potential
      redundancies or conflicts, etc.
(iii) evaluating the effectiveness of lines of communication and coordination mechanisms among the
      institutions, with emphasis on those with overlapping or complimentary roles.

This analysis is important for identifying potential issues that could undermine project development and
implementation. It provides the basis for designing measures and providing recommendations aimed at
ensuring that the project’s institutional structure is as clear, effective and efficient as possible. Box 2
provides suggested questions that would be asked for each of the tasks identified in Step 1.


        Box 2. Key questions to assess institutional roles and responsibilities for implementation of identified tasks
 •     Is there a clear governance structure for this task?
 •     If the responsibility for implementation of the task is shared among two or more institutions/actors, are there effective lines of
       communication and coordination mechanisms among the institutions involved?
                 What structures, mechanisms and forms for agreed communications and coordination among and within
                  organizational units exist?
                            Structures can be formal, e.g. units established for specific communications purposes such as committees,
                             working groups, individuals tasked with specific responsibilities etc. or informal, like existing reporting lines
                             which are not officially recognized or mandated, but nonetheless efficient.
                            Mechanisms of communications might include progress review meetings, inter-agency planning sessions,
                             complaint or grievance reviews, public hearings or briefings among others.
                 Is the communication and coordination structure effective?
                       Are information flows timely and of sufficient quality? Do they result in:
                        •    decision makers remaining informed of overall project progress and of the need for remedial actions such
                             as re- deployment of staff and financial resources;
                        •    the elimination or minimization of redundant actions;
                        •    avoidance of tasks not being completed due to confusion over roles and responsibilities.
     • If there are areas of overlap in roles and responsibilities for a task, are these likely to lead to conflict, redundancy,
         inefficiency?
     • If responsibility for a task is not clearly established in the institutional structure, is there agreement on who will complete it in
         the context of the project, and do they have the resources?
     • Is there excessive fragmentation of responsibility, which could lead to confusion or inefficiency, can the structure be
         simplified or unified?
     • Are there any other potential issues related to the governance structure for this task?



                                                                  22
STEP 4: Assess the capacity of individual institutions
It is important to go through Steps 1 – 3 to provide the operational context for assessing the capacity of
the individual institutions or actors responsible for implementation of different aspects of the project.
Step 4 involves evaluating the capacity of each of the identified institutions or actors to undertake the
tasks identified in Step 1. This will require examining existing systems and the resources available to carry
out the tasks for which the institution or actor will be responsible, and, where possible, reviewing its track
record in carrying out similar tasks in the past. This includes, for example, its ability and commitment in
practice to implement its enabling legislation and its own institutional policies, the effectiveness of
institutional and individual incentives for performance, and its ability to adapt to changing circumstances.
For a recently or newly created institution, which will have little or no track record, it may be useful to
review the performance of institutions that had the same or similar responsibilities previously (while
recognizing that the new institution might have been created specifically to achieve better outcomes).

STEP 4 (a): Track Record
An institution’s past performance should be evaluated both in the context of implementing previous or
current projects financed by the Bank (or by other development partners with similar E&S policies and
standards), and when implementing activities under national laws and systems. This is particularly
important for tasks where national requirements differ significantly from Bank requirements. Key aspects
to consider are compliance and enforcement, monitoring, stakeholder engagement, and documentation
and recordkeeping. Box 3 provides questions for evaluating an institution’s likely capacity and
commitment to implement tasks for which it will be responsible, based on its track record.
                           Box 3. Questions to assess the track record of an institution or actor
 Can you provide documentation and other evidence that this institution/actor …?

   •   has performed this task before?
   •   has a system for monitoring and assessing performance?
   •   has a track record of compliance with relevant national or regional regulation?
   •   has a track record of compliance with Bank safeguards or ESF, Equator Principles and/or other MDBs policies?
   •   has an effective system for quality management?
   •   takes E&S information and monitoring into account when making decisions and taking actions?
   •   effectively manages the E&S performance of contractors, including contractor selection, routine supervision, quality control
       and corrective actions?
   •   has systems in place for institutional learning and improvement, learning lessons from past mistakes and experiences?
   •   can hire staff and/or recruit consultants in a reasonable timeframe, and retain well-qualified and high-performing staff?


Step 4 (b): Assess current capacity
The assessment considers four elements of institutional capacity that are relevant for E&S risk
management: external enabling environment; organizational arrangements; human resources; and
financial and other resources. Because national and local institutions will have been established and
designed to implement existing laws and regulations, their internal administrative structures, procedures,
staffing and skills, and previous operational experience will reflect those laws and regulations. If the
project requires them to carry out other tasks, or to operate in another way this could have implications
for the nature or extent of capacity-building that may be required. Step 4 therefore looks at different
aspects of institutional performance that will be relevant for delivery of the tasks identified in Step 1.
Table 5 lists questions and aspects to review in evaluating current capacity of an institution/actor.

                                                             23
Table 5. Aspects of individual institutional capacity.
 Question                        Aspects
 Does the external enabling      This focuses on Government policies, laws and regulations, the
 environment         support     mandates of the institution/actor, institutional incentives or pressures,
 completion of the task?         political commitment to E&S issues
 Does the institution have       This focuses on the institution’s own policies and procedures including
 appropriate internal policies   vision statements, quality assurance and accountability systems,
 and operating procedures?       outreach and communications, as well as overall institutional culture

 Does the institution have This focuses on technical and managerial skills; appropriate job
 adequate and appropriate descriptions and performance management, appropriate allocation of
 human resources?          tasks to staff; training programs and opportunities, staff retention;
                           ability/timing to recruit additional staff or consultants; human resources
                           policies
 Does the institution have This focuses on the level of financial and other resources available for
 appropriate financial and the task, and systems for allocation of such resources, including budget
 other resources?          processes; cash flows to deliver funds when needed; financial planning;
                           transportation, equipment and supplies; information technology
                           infrastructure and databases

Table 6 provides some specific guiding questions and examples of potential findings for assessing these
elements and sub-elements of institutional capacity. These points should be considered as they relate to
the specific E&S risk management tasks for which the institution will be responsible.

Table 6. Guiding questions and examples for assessing elements of institutional capacity.
 Element          Question for Assessing Sub-Element
 External         What external factors could prevent the institution from carrying out its identified project—
 enabling         related E&S tasks appropriately?
 environment      Government policies
                  Example: The Ministry of Agriculture has a policy to promote expansion of the total area of
                  estate crops (such as rubber plantations, palm oil plantations) onto “currently unproductive
                  lands” including native grasslands and forests
                  Laws and regulations
                  Example: National law prohibits payments to people without land titles.
                  Institutional incentives
                  Example: The Forest Department, which is responsible for forest conservation, relies on
                  revenue from logging concession payments as its main source of funding.
                  Mandate
                  Examples:
                      • Wildlife authority is responsible for wildlife everywhere in the country, but has no
                           mandate for regulating land use outside protected areas.
                      • No institution has a specific mandate to protect the rights or interests of Indigenous
                           Peoples in the country.


                                                    24
               National-level commitment
               Examples:
                    • The Ministry of Finance does not prioritize funding for the project; government has
                        not ratified a relevant international convention.
                    • Government failed to fulfil E&S-related commitments in a timely fashion under
                        previous Bank-financed operations.
Organizational Does the institution have the following elements in place to support implementation of the
policy,        identified tasks in a manner consistent with the relevant standards of the ESF?
procedures,    Institutional Policies and Procedures
structure, and Example: E&S risk mitigation manual or portion of Operational Manual.
culture        Reporting lines and other arrangements which promote effective implementation, and
               measures are in place to detect and discourage conflicts of interests or fraudulent practices.
               To whom do the environmental and social staff report?
               Quality assurance and control systems
               Example: There is an internal review system for documents, and decision-making and
               compliance systems include checks and balances.
               Transparency measures
               Example: There are appropriate information disclosures, communications and outreach, and
               grievance mechanisms.
               Institutional-level commitment
               Example: The National Park Authority has approved park management plans, and has a history
               of implementing and enforcing those plans
               Appropriate staff incentives
               Example: Adequate salaries and contract terms and conditions, performance management
               practices that encourage environmental and social staff to flag risks, to voice concerns and
               take appropriate actions rather than to conceal/ignore risks.
Human          Does the institution have the human resources and human resource policies in place to
resources      support implementation of the identified tasks in an appropriate and effective manner?
               Is the institution adequately staffed, in terms of skills, qualifications, and number of personnel
               for implementation of the relevant tasks? Take into account that some staff may have
               additional responsibilities beyond the project.
               If the institution does not have, or plan to create, sufficient in-house capacity, do they have
               the authority, means and capacity to engage and manage external consultants in a timely
               fashion?
               Does the institution have a human resources management system to support the
               performance of the necessary tasks and provide working conditions consistent with ESS2?
Budget,        Does the institution have the financial and other resources in place to support implementation
equipment,     of the identified tasks in an appropriate and effective manner?
and means      Amount, control over allocation, availability, and process
                    • Are sufficient resources allocated for the task?
                    • Do staff undertaking the task have any control or voice in allocating resources?
                    • Is there a process or a system in place where units performing the task can request
                        additional funding to meet newly emerged needs?
               Budgetary projections


                                                   25
                       •   Is a there an annual or more frequent process or system in place for making budget
                           projections, and for intermediate reallocations?
                       • To what extent do units involved in the task have opportunities to give feedback on
                           the adequacy of funding?
                   Does the institution have the necessary facilities, transportation, equipment and supplies to
                   carry out the relevant tasks in a timely fashion throughout the implementation of the project?
                   Does the institution have sufficient information sources and information technology
                   management systems to carry out the relevant tasks? Such as databases, infrastructure,
                   Geographic Information Systems, sufficient access to the Internet.

STEP 5: Recommend actions to strengthen institutional capacity
Where the process set out in Steps 1 to 4 indicates that capacity to carry out a specific taks needs to be
strengthened, Step 5 involves identifying specific measures to help address those needs. These actions
may target individual institutions or actors (or elements of them) or be aimed at improving the overall
institutional framework including linkages.

Recommendations should be for concrete and feasible operational actions. Specific recommended actions
should be designed to address the need for strengthened capacity in an efficient manner and within a
timeframe that is meaningful to support project preparation and/or implementation. The description of
actions should include assignment of responsibility, timelines for completion and budgets, and where
possible targets and indicators for tracking progress and successful completion. Where training is called
for, the target audience, approximate time commitment and source of training materials/ and trainers
should be indicated.

As part of this step, indicators and targets should be identified for implementation of the actions and for
effectiveness and achievement of their goals. For example, indicators for a training activity could include
numbers of individuals trained or numbers of training courses delivered (implementation indicators) as
well as a measure of the effectiveness of the training and indication that those who received it are putting
their improved knowledge and skills to use (effectiveness/achievement indicators).                    Actual
implementation and monitoring of the capacity strengthening measures would take place during the
implementation phase of the project and are therefore beyond the scope of these TOR.

Box 4 provides examples of the types of capacity strengthening actions that may be considered. If
underlying problems are noted in this process, they can be identified for discussion and possible action in
other contexts.




                                                    26
                              Box 4. Examples of measures to develop institutional capacity
  Activities at the project level:
       •     Develop improved standards and technical guidance, such as procedures for verifying the age of workers or water or air
             quality guidelines
       •     Develop clear operating procedures and reporting lines
       •     Develop business standards and monitoring requirements
       •     Establish clear job descriptions and accountability
       •     Recruit staff in areas of institutional capacity weakness
       •     Conduct targeted recruitment of consultants with terms of reference that include transfer of knowledge and skills within a
             specified timeframe
       •     Train existing staff in areas of identified need and improve opportunities for professional development, such as on-the-job
             coaching, hands-on experience in specialized fields, support participation in professional associations
       •     Mobilize additional financial resources to cover recruitment of staff, procurement of equipment, vehicles and logistical
             support
       •     Plan and acquire key equipment, and providing training and resources to operate such equipment
       •     Develop public awareness and community outreach programs, such as preparation of public service announcements, web-
             sites, brochures, and other supporting documents

STEP 6: Monitor capacity development indicators and adapt activities as needed
Step 6 embeds precise capacity development measures and results monitoring in the capacity
development activity, to evaluate progress and make timely adjustments as needed. Further, tracking and
documenting outputs and outcomes will contribute to knowledge for developing project-level borrower
capacity in the future.

Successful capacity development activities are characterized by continued engagement, regular
consultations, and demonstrated evidence of changes in capacity. Situating activities within a series of
other relevant capacity development activities at different levels will assure better impact toward
sustainability.

Table 7 provides an example of a framework to evaluate the progress made in developing capacity in the
four elements described in Step 4. A more complete list of potential indicators is provided in Annex 1. A
template for linking analysis to actions and follow up is also provided. 5

Table 7. Examples of indicators to evaluate progress toward changes in capacity
     Capacity          Activity/Tasks          Indicator           Data type and          Timing of            Responsibility
     Element                                                          source                data
                                                                                          collection

 Enabling              Issue new            Decree               Endorsement           Condition of         PIU
 Environment           national             drafted              of document           effectiveness        Drafting
                       decree on                                 by technical                               committee
                       resettlement                              drafting
                       compensation                              committee
                       entitlements                                                    Condition of         Minister of State
                                                                                       disbursement


5 Both will be finalized after endorsement of the draft concept


                                                              27
                                  Decree          Decree issued                     Legislature as
                                  approved        and published                     relevant or
                                                  by relevant                       required by law
                                                  legislative body
Organizational, Prepare and       Draft manual    Confirmation       Condition of   PIU
procedural or   adapt             prepared and    of                 negotiation    Drafting
cultural change resettlement      endorsed        endorsement                       committee
                management                        by drafting                       Minister of
                manual by                         committee                         Transport or
                road agency       Ministerial                                       delegated
                                  decree or sub- Decree                             authority
                                  decree issued published and
                                                 communicated
                                                 to project staff

Human           Recruit and       TOR and         Confirmed      Condition of       PIU
Resources       train 6           recruitment     through direct effectiveness      HR staff at
                additional        notices         communication                     Ministerial level
                resettlement      published       with PIU HR
                specialists in                    team
                PIU field         Interviews
                offices           completed       Arrangement
                                  and offers      confirmed in
                                  made            writing (letter
                                  New staff       or email)
                                  mobilized
Budget,         Secure annual     Annual          Annual budget      Annual         PIU budget office
equipment,      budget            budget          plan
means           allocations for   authorized      Annual or          Quarterly      Resettlement
                resettlement      and included    quarterly          progress       Field office
                field             in project      project            reports
                operations        budget plan     progress
                                                  reports
                Construct and     Offices
                equip             construction
                resettlement      completed                          Annual or
                field offices     and                                quarterly
                with furniture,   equipment                          progress
                computers,        procured                           reports
                and logistical    Confirmation
                support           that
                                  equipment is
                                  in place and
                                  functional




                                                 28
     11 Annex II: Potential indicators to assess E & S capacity
        development
The Capacity Development Results Framework (CDRF) developed by the World Bank Institute for example
provides lists of questions and indicators to assess the capacity to achieve a given Development Goal (WBI,
CDRF, 2009, p.74-82). In practice the indicators could be assessed at the level of the borrower system as
a whole or for specific ESS. The following list of potential indicators is based on the CDRF model but the
indicators and their possible measures are grouped according to the four analytical elements proposed in
the operational methodology recommend in this GN. This includes: the conduciveness of the enabling
environment; Organizational policy, procedures and culture; Human Resources; and Budget, equipment
and means.

The indicators are offered as suggestions only. It is not expected that every project would use all of these
indicators as specific indicators may not be relevant in a particular project context or may be difficult to
measure. It is also likely that other context-specific indicators could be developed.

POSSIBLE INDICATORS AND MEASURES

I. Conduciveness of the Enabling Environment

Commitment of political and sectoral leaders to the ESS development objectives.

Political and sectoral 6 leaders consistently and frequently make statements or take leadership actions and
decisions supporting the principles and objectives of the relevant ESS.

Possible measures include:
   • Share of statements supporting the ESS relative to all statements related to the ESS by the
        borrower or counterpart leadership or decision-makers
    • Adoption of improved legislation or supporting regulations, decrees, or other legal directives
        adopted by national, sub-national or local level government or sectoral authorities
    • Public statements and official decisions of political and sectoral leaders in support of the ESS
        objectives or desired outcomes
    • Public actions of political or sectoral leaders in support of the ESS objectives
    • Public actions of political leaders in support of the ESS objectives
    • Proportion of political or sectoral leadership who commit significant time or funds to achieve the
        ESS objectives

Clarity of the policy instruments relating to ESS objectives and the related rights and responsibilities of
stakeholders

The rights and responsibilities of stakeholders related to policy instrument relevant to ESS are clearly
defined and communicated. Stakeholders have a common understanding of the policy goal and the

6
 Sectoral leader in this context is used to refer to leadership within a borrower agency, implementing entity or
other government authority that has the jurisdiction to issue policy or procedural measures related to one or more
ESS (for example, Minister of Environment, Minister of Water Resources, Secretary of State for Energy, Provincial
Directors of Natural resource etc.).

                                                       29
targets of any specified regulations. The authorities and processes concerning the policy instrument are
clear. Policy instruments related to the ESS are consistent with each other.

Possible measures include:
   • Share of stakeholders who find that objectives and goals of policy instruments related to ESS are
        clearly specified
    • Formulation, application, revision, appeal, monitoring and enforcement authorities and processes
        concerning the policy instrument are specified
    • Number of public announcements, articles, documents, etc. in which the policy instrument is
        described for stakeholders
    • Development and execution of a communication plan for the policy instrument and proactive
        assessment of outcomes of communication efforts
    • Share of stakeholders who report that information about the policy instrument was
        communicated to them
    • Share of surveyed stakeholders who responded accurately to questions about their rights and
        responsibilities with respect to the policy instrument
    • Policy instruments related to the ESS are consistent with each other
    • Adherence of policy instrument to internationally recognized standards

Consistency of policy instrument relating to ESS with policy instruments for other ESS

Policy instruments related to the ESS are consistent with policy instruments for other ESS. Stakeholders
have a common understanding of the policy goal and the targets of any specified regulations.

Possible measures include:
   • Share of surveyed stakeholders who report that the development policy relating to various ESS is
        coherent, consistent, and predictable
    • Number of instances of rights and responsibilities conferred by different policies conflicting with
        each other (target is zero)
    • Independent review by experts familiar with the country situation finds that policy instruments
        relating to ESS are mutually reinforcing

Perceived legitimacy of policy instrument in relation to the ESS

Processes for decisions about policy instrument are informed, transparent, participatory, and deliberate.
Policy instrument is perceived as desirable and appropriate within the local system of norms, values,
beliefs, and definitions. The actions and sanctions prescribed by the policy are perceived as fair by
stakeholders. Rights to appeal are assured.

Possible measures include:
   • Share of stakeholder survey respondents who feel that the policy instrument related to the ESS is
        desirable and appropriate within local system of norms and values
   • Share of stakeholder survey respondents who believe that the sanctions and incentives specified
        by policy instrument related to ESS are consistent with its declared goal
    • Stakeholders’ rights to voice concern, grievance, appeals or seek resolution of disputes are
        assured by the policy instrument
    • Share of regulated stakeholders responding in surveys that the policy instrument is fair

                                                   30
Compatibility of social norms and values with the ESS Development Objectives.

Social norms and beliefs that underpin the behavior of stakeholders are compatible with the objectives of
ESS.

Possible measures include:
   • Extent of public debate, advocacy and expression of public concern when the political or sectoral
        leadership violates expected norms and values related to ESS
   • Values and norms espoused by stakeholders are compatible with the ESS objectives
   • Behavior of stakeholders is compatible with the objectives of the ESS
    • Proportion of stakeholders who express support for the objectives of the ESS

II. Organization procedures, culture

Clarity of borrower mission about the development objectives of ESS

The vision and mission of the organization are strongly aligned with the ESS and clearly articulated, and
provide its members with clear points of reference for formulating strategy, making decisions and gaining
commitment from management, staff, and other stakeholders to work toward the objectives and
expected outcomes of an ESS. The mandate of the organization is recognized by relevant stakeholders.

Possible measures include:
   • Explicit statement of the organization’s vision and mission with respect to the ESS
    • Internal stakeholders surveyed accurately describe the organizational goals with respect to the
        ESS that have been communicated to them.
    • External stakeholders surveyed accurately describe the organizational goals with respect to the
        ESS that have been communicated to them.

Stakeholder participation in decisions about the ESS

    Decision-making processes relating to the ESS considers all stakeholder opinions, and government and
    other organs of the state are responsive to the views of civil society and the private sector.

Possible measures include:
   • Existence of a formal consultative process for decisions about issues related to ESS
    • Number of stakeholder groups claiming not to have been included in the decision-making process
        relating to ESS (target is none)
    • Number of stakeholder groups who boycott or express significant concerns over the decision-
        making process by the end of the engagement process (target is none)
    • Number of stakeholder groups whose views were partially or totally reflected in final decision
        relating to ESS risk management
    • Number of people represented by the stakeholder groups who have seen some of their views
        included in final decisions relating to ESS
    • Extent to which government engages in dialogue with stakeholders about the ESS risks and
        management options



                                                   31
    •   Extent to which borrower decisions on ESS risk assessment and management can be traced to
        consultation with stakeholders
    •   Extent of borrower responses to stakeholders’ communications about the ESS
    •   Quality of borrower responses to stakeholders’ communications about the ESS

Stakeholder voice in decisions about the ESS

Stakeholders understand the borrower obligations and commitments related to an ESS and communicate
their support for project initiatives or express grievances and proposals for change to the project’s political
and sectoral leadership.

Possible measures include:
   • Share of stakeholder survey respondents who accurately responded to questions on their
        understanding of commitments and obligations with respect to an ESS
    • Share of stakeholder respondents to a confidential survey, who report being free to express their
        views with respect to the ESS issues in a project context
    • Number of public gathering related to the ESS issues per year
    • Number of people attending public gatherings related to the ESS per year
    • Number of signatories to petitions or other expressions of concern related to the ESS
    • Extent to which stakeholders understand the borrower obligations and commitments with
        respect to the applicable ESS in a given project
    • Existence of a formal grievance, appeals and dispute resolution processes relating to an ESS
    • Extent of communication from stakeholders about their experiences concerning the ESS
    • Quality of communication from stakeholders about their experiences concerning the ESS

Accountability of borrower and project implementing entities for achieving objectives of ESS
Government and other public service entities take account of and responsibility for the appropriateness
of their policies and actions in relation to an ESS. If public officials and other public service providers fail
to meet expectations about achievement of the ESS, stakeholders hold them accountable for their
conduct and performance.

Possible measures include:
   • Existence of functioning instruments of accountability, e.g. government or borrower scorecard
        information is available to the public
    • Number of instances of stakeholders holding government officials and other service providers
        accountable for the ESS-related policies and actions, either through use of the defined
        accountability instruments or in other ways
   • Share of stakeholder respondents to a confidential survey, who believed that public officials and
        other public service providers would be held accountable for meeting obligations related to
        achievement of the ESS
   • Frequency of examples of stakeholders holding government officials and other service providers
        accountable for the ESS-related policies and actions
   • Stakeholders’ perception about likelihood that public officials and other public service providers
        will experience negative consequences if they fail to meet obligations related to achievement of
        the objectives of ESS

Transparency of project information dissemination regarding the ESS

                                                      32
Government and borrower project entities provide accurate, relevant, verifiable, and timely information
about the ESS and explain actions concerning the ESS in terms that stakeholders and other stakeholders
can use to make decisions.

Possible measures include:
   • Frequency of borrower communications related to the project related ESS
    • Extent to which borrower communications content related to the ESS whose aligns with
        information provided by independent sources
    • Share of stakeholder survey respondents who reported receiving borrower communications
        related to the ESS
    • Share of stakeholder survey respondents who were satisfied with the information provided by the
        borrower about the ESS
    • Frequency of borrower communications related to the ESS
    • Existence of an information sources related to the ESS that stakeholders can consult on an open,
        transparent and timely basis
    • Extent to which stakeholders are aware of borrower communications related to the ESS
    • Extent to which stakeholders find that information provided by the borrower about the ESS is
        satisfactory

Organizational incentives for project compliance provided by the policy, regulatory and procedural
instruments
The policy instrument imposes low transaction costs for compliance, facilitates desired economic and
social exchange activities related to the ESS by reducing uncertainty and other costs to the participants in
these transactions, and provides sanctions for non-compliance.
Possible measures include:
    • Time and information costs of compliance with the policy instrument and/or ESS (target is low or
         zero)
    • Time and information costs associated with ESS elated transactions (target is low or zero)
    • Credible individual incentives for compliance and sanctions for non-compliance with policy
         instrument and ESS as determined through stakeholder consultations

Administrative ease of policy, regulator or procedural instrument implementation
Possible measures include:
   • Cost to borrower of implementing the policy instrument (target is low)
   • Cost to borrower of monitoring and evaluating effectiveness of the policy instrument
    • Extent to which borrower can easily administer the policy instrument within the existing or
        expected socio-political, policy and organizational context

Freedom of policy, regulatory or procedural instrument from unintended negative consequences
The policy, regulatory or procedural instruments minimize unintended negative impacts in project level
ESS related transactions.
Possible measures include:
    • Incidence of unintended negative externalities on targeted beneficiaries
    • Number and scope of unintended negative externalities on non-beneficiaries
    • Number and scope of unintended negative externalities on non-regulated stakeholders

Flexibility of the policy, regulatory or procedural instrument in addressing varying project situations

                                                    33
Policy instruments are predictably flexible in addressing varying situations. Policy instruments allow for
timely revision when the underlying social and political circumstances have changed.
Possible measures include:
    • Share of surveyed stakeholders affected by the policy instrument that express confidence that
         policy covers relevant contingencies in a predictable manner and is suitably flexible in addressing
         changes in DG context
    • Number of instances in which policies are revised in a timely manner when there are changes in
         social and political circumstances underlying the DG

Resistance of policy, regulatory or policy instrument to project level corruption, rent seeking, and
regulatory capture
Policy instruments minimize opportunities for corruption, include mechanisms to monitor and report
corruption, and provide credible and enforceable penalties for corrupt behavior. Policy instruments do
not reflect the efforts of vested interests to manipulate the economic and/or legal environment to secure
undue privileges or compensation at the expense of the greater public good.

Possible measures include:
   • Number of instances of rent-seeking, elite or state capture, or corruption in ESS-related
        transactions (target is zero)
   • Policy instrument contains provisions for effective monitoring and reporting on corruption in ESS
        related transactions
    • In a confidential survey, officials whose position might allow opportunities for corrupt behavior
        indicate that one reason for refraining is that the policy instrument provides for credible and
        enforceable punishment/penalty for corrupt behavior related to the ESS

Achievement of outcomes that lead directly to ESS objective and goal attainment
The organization consistently achieves outcomes that lead directly to the ESS expressed in its mission
statement.
Possible measures include:
    • Organization’s self-assessments of its achievement of the ESS objectives and goals
    • Stakeholder assessment of organization’s contribution to the achievement of the ESS objectives
        and goals
    • Independent external assessment of the organization’s contribution to the achievement of the
        ESS goals and objectives

Adaptability in anticipating and responding to change
The organization regularly monitors its internal and external environment for information relevant to the
ESS and is proactive in adapting its strategy accordingly. The organization encourages innovation,
manages knowledge, and creates and/or adapts to new technologies.
Possible measures include:
    • Organization proactively scans its internal and external environments for relevant innovations to
        improve its processes, products and strategies
    • Organization periodically revisits its strategy, processes and results related to achievement of the
        DG
    • Existence of formal structures and processes that support organizational learning
    • Use of organizational knowledge repositories

                                                    34
    •   Instances of collaboration between teams
    •   Instances of participation in communities of practices

III. Human resources
Borrower implementing entities mobilize, retain, and provide adequate incentives for appropriately
qualified staff to carry out identified ESS tasks
Possible measures include:
      • Existence of organizational units dedicated to ESS tasks
      • Staff have appropriate credentials, training and experience to carry out tasks
      • Existence of work plans, Terms of reference for key positions
      • Sufficient budgets are available and approved to support project ESS tasks
      • Existence of human resources policies to efficiently recruit and retain staff
      • Staff understand their roles and have adequate resources to complete tasks
      • Policy, regulatory and procedural instruments are understood by all staff

IV. Budget, Equipment and Means

Operational efficiency in producing goal-related outputs
The strategies, inputs, processes, and technology of the organization are managed to optimize the
quantity and quality of output relative to the cost of accomplishing its ESS-related goals.
Possible measures include:
   • Quantity of output
    • Quality of output
    • Timeliness of product/service delivery
    • Unit cost

Sub-measures for each of the above:
   • Quantity of output
      o Review of records of the organization (e.g., output volumes compared with performance
      benchmarks)
   • Quality of output
      o Review of documents of the organization (e.g., decision rules meet certain performance
      benchmarks or criteria)
      o Analysis of records of the organization (e.g., calculate average score on the exam)
      o Internal or external random testing (e.g., compute estimates for error rates)
      o Customer satisfaction surveys (ones that ask for the quality of, e.g., the service delivered)
      o Publicly available indices (e.g., index on the quality of products)
   • Timeliness
      o Review of records of the organization (e.g., toolkit delivered at the specified date)
      o Analysis of records of the organization (e.g., calculate average delivery time)
      o Customer surveys/interviews (ones that ask how long, e.g., the product took to be delivered)
   • Unit cost
      o Review of records of the organization (e.g., total expenses for developing a toolkit)
      o Analysis of records of the organization (e.g., calculation of cost per student)

Financial viability and probity


                                                   35
The organization sustainably secures the funds needed to cover its operating costs. Sound financial
management, including reporting of externally verified accounts, helps to ensure that the resources of
the organization are allocated effectively to achieve its ESS goals.
Possible measures include:
    • Adequacy of financial resources to implement ESS tasks
    • Transparent allocation of funds for ESS tasks
    • Funds are allocated only in accordance with identified business needs
    • Internal and external auditing of the financial management process

Supportiveness of stakeholders on goal-related activities
The organization seeks the support of stakeholders for its ESS-related work. Organizational decision-
making and operational processes involve consultations with appropriate stakeholders.

Possible measures include:
   • Frequency with which the organization provides stakeholders with relevant and timely
        information concerning its ESS-related performance (target is quarterly)
   • Existence of a mechanism for stakeholder involvement in organizational decisions and frequency
        of its use
    • Accounts that feedback from stakeholders was included in operational processes
    • Actions taken by stakeholders support organizational activities that contribute to achievement of
        the ESS




                                                  36
