Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Philippines First Energy Transition and Climate Resilience DPL (P181389)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprdpfcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Program Information Document (PID)

                                                Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 27-Oct-2024 | Report No: PIDDA00128




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     Philippines First Energy Transition and Climate Resilience DPL (P181389)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprdpfbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                   Operation Name
                                                              Philippines First Energy Transition and Climate Resilience
Philippines                    P181389
                                                              DPL
Region                         Estimated Approval Date        Practice Area (Lead)           Financing Instrument
                                                                                             Development Policy
EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC          12-Dec-2024                    Energy & Extractives
                                                                                             Financing (DPF)
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                               Department Environment
                               and Natural Resources,
Republic of the Philippines    Department of Energy,
                               Energy Regulatory
                               Commission

Proposed Development Objective(s)
The Program Development Objective is to support Government of the Philippines reforms to (1) scale up adoption of
clean energy technologies; (2) increase the security, flexibility and competition of electricity markets; and (3) improve
water management across water uses.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
Financing (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                     Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?               Yes

SUMMARY
  Total Financing                                                                                                 600.00

DETAILS
  Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                                600.00
    World Bank Lending                                                                                            600.00

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprdecision#doctemplate


                                                                                                                       Page 1
       The World Bank
       Philippines First Energy Transition and Climate Resilience DPL (P181389)



 Decision
 The review did authorize the preparation to continue


 Explanation




 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context

Climate change poses major development challenges in the Philippines. It requires development policy reforms to
address the new or elevated threats to inclusive growth and prosperity aspirations. The Philippines has been one of
the most dynamic economies in the East Asia Pacific (EAP) region, with GNI per capita more than tripling, poverty
declining sharply from 33.5 to 15.5 percent and income distribution improving from 2000 to 2023. While the economy
has rebounded from the disruptions of the COVID-19 pandemic, there remain considerable risks and challenges to long-
term growth and prosperity, prominent among them: dependency on imported fossil fuels, high cost of electricity, and
climate-induced stresses and disasters.

The positive growth outlook of the Philippines entails steadily increasing demand for energy and heightens energy
security and carbon footprint concerns. Fueled by robust domestic consumption, and strong performance of its services and
industry sectors GDP growth is expected to average 6.0 percent between 2024-2027. The government expects such growth rate
to sustain beyond 2040 and to drive up energy demand substantially. The Philippine Energy Plan 2023 – 2050 (PEP 2023-
50) projects electricity demand to more than quadruple between 2023 and 2050, requiring a similar expansion in
supplies. The Philippines has substantial RE resources, particularly solar and wind, but they are underdeveloped and
underutilized. Out of the 29.23 GW total installed generation capacity in 2023, hydro, geothermal, biomass, and
solar/wind accounted for 3.87, 2.0, 0.65, and 2.41 GW, respectively, with a combined share of 30 percent. There is total
untapped hydro power of 13.1 GW in the country, while the estimated geothermal potential is 4.4 GW. Wind and solar
have the greatest potential but so far are the least developed. The total onshore and offshore wind technical potential is
estimated at 76 GW and 178 GW, respectively. The abundant solar insolation translates into potential power generating
capacity of 4.5–5.5 kWh per square meter per day. Despite having introduced the Renewable Energy Act in 2008, the
country lags behind regional leaders such as Vietnam and Thailand in installed solar and wind capacity by a significant
margin. Without deliberate efforts to accelerate the deployment of RE, particularly solar and wind, much of the surging
demand in electricity will be met by fossil-fuel-based generation, locking in carbon-intensive technologies, and
increasing energy security risks.

The high cost of electricity in the Philippines is a persistent concern for domestic affordability and international
competitiveness. The increased dependence on imported oil and coal over the last twenty years alongside limited
progress in reforms to increase competition in the electricity market has stymied the government’s efforts to reduce the

                                                                                                                      Page 2
       The World Bank
       Philippines First Energy Transition and Climate Resilience DPL (P181389)


cost of electricity. Based on July 2024 data, Philippines had the second highest average electricity tariff in the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) after Singapore. For example, residential and industrial electricity tariffs
in the Philippines were US¢21 and 13/kWh, respectively, significantly higher than US¢9 and 6/kWh in Indonesia and
US¢12 and 10/kWh in Vietnam. While subsidies (or lack thereof) explain much of the differences, studies also point to
factors such as limited competition in power generation, lack of competition at the retail level, domestic taxation and
red tape (e.g., lengthy permitting process). They also suggest that the sustained high cost of electricity in the Philippines
may have suppressed the growth of industries for which electricity is an important production factor.

Energy transition - away from fossil fuels towards indigenous RE, EE, and other clean energy sources - can help the
country lower electricity generation costs while increasing energy security and lowering emissions. Decarbonizing the
power and transport sectors through large-scale deployment of cost-competitive RE is essential for Philippines’
transition to a prosperous low carbon economy. In fact, solar and onshore wind power generation is already competitive
against coal-fired power. While greater grid integration of solar and wind will require additional investment in energy
storage systems, grid expansion and upgrades, the long-term cost of RE (including cost of grid integration) is expected to
be competitive against fossil-based electricity. Modeling work undertaken by the World Bank indicates that the levelized
cost of electricity of the Philippine power system would decline as more solar and wind are integrated into the system.
Power generation and transport together account for 90 percent of fossil fuel consumption and 80 percent of GHG
emissions in the Philippines. Coal-fired power plants (CCFPs) contributed to 58 percent of power generation in 2023 up
from 34 percent in 2010. Transport, which almost entirely relies on imported oil, is the largest energy end-user in the
country. Reducing fossil fuel consumption in power generation and electrifying urban transport, would reduce ambient
air pollution in urban areas, improving public health. A transition also help the country fulfil its Nationally Determined
Contribution and commitments under the Paris Agreement.

Climate resilience through adaptation and mitigation in water is critical for the Philippines. The Philippines is one of
the countries most vulnerable to climate change and extreme weather events. Its archipelagic nature is an important
factor that also shapes its water management challenges. The impact of climate change is already felt through changes
in rainfall patterns that affect water availability and quality and increase the risks of floods and droughts. As recognized
in the World Bank Water Security and Climate Adaptation Global Challenge Program, efficient and sustainable water
resource management across water uses is central to climate resilience, and WSS delivery is a key building block to this
resilience. In the Philippines, while the National Climate Change Action Plan (NCCAP) 2011-2028 targets water
sufficiency as Action Item 2, including strategic actions on restructuring water governance and ensuring access to
sustainable WSS, important policy and institutional challenges remain to achieve those objectives from the national to
the local levels. At the national level, with more than 30 institutions involved and with overlaps and gaps on their
mandates, governance on water resource management needs clarity. This clarity will enable planning of water resources
that ensures efficient and sustainable long-term use and promote climate resilience to floods and droughts. The
responsibility of providing WSS services lies with local government units (LGUs). But most LGUs are operating with
manpower limitations and water tariffs that do not reflect the real cost of providing water services. These result in low
funding, poor maintenance, neglection of sanitation, and inefficiencies in operations as reflected in huge volumes of
non-revenue water (NRW) or water lost in distribution systems. These water losses limit the improvement and
expansion of critical water services – only around 48 percent of the population in the Philippines have access to safely
managed water services, most of them in rural and poor areas. The lack of sanitation services contributes to pollution of
water sources. It is important that water resources and service deliveries are managed sustainably for climate resilience,
especially for poor and vulnerable areas which have lower socio-economic resilience. In the Philippines: disasters are a

                                                                                                                         Page 3
            The World Bank
            Philippines First Energy Transition and Climate Resilience DPL (P181389)


cause of poverty and poverty magnifies the impact of climate stresses and disasters by making people more vulnerable
and less resilient.1 Poverty and climate vulnerability rank high for sectors that have agriculture-dependent livelihoods
such as farmers and fisherfolk, who are exposed to floods, droughts and sea level rise.

The macroeconomic policy framework is adequate for the proposed operation. The growth outlook is positive,
anchored on robust domestic demand, more accommodative monetary policy, and an improving external environment.
Structural reforms will increase competitiveness and support growth. The financial sector remains stable, while asset
quality continues to improve, even with the removal of most pandemic-related forbearance measures. Potential
liabilities from the expansion of Public Private Partnerships pose marginal risks to the country’s fiscal position and are
managed by a contingency allocation in the budget. It is also managed by the realization of sellable asset value in the
event of default, and the decreasing risk to projects in operation and those that are reaching completion within the
portfolio. The credibility of both monetary policy and fiscal policy remains strong. The Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP)
remains committed to its inflation-targeting objective (2-4 percent) and is responsive to global interest rate movements.
Gradually declining inflation and associated monetary easing is expected over the medium term. The government is
targeting a steadily declining fiscal deficit until 2028. Fiscal consolidation is led by a decline in current expenditures while
additional revenues will be generated through tax policy and administration reforms. The credibility of the medium-
term fiscal program is supported by a solid track record of fiscal prudence, and a legislative pipeline supportive of fiscal
consolidation. The combination of fiscal consolidation and the strong growth will keep debt levels sustainable.

    Relationship to CPF

The reforms supported by this DPL series are aligned with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) and the
corporate priorities. The main filters for the selection of the policy areas were government demand, robust analytical
underpinnings, reform impact, and availability of technical assistance to support implementation. The Prior Actions (PAs)
contribute to the World Bank Group’s 2019-2023 CPF objectives and supports the global challenge programs in energy,
transport and water. The PAs are aligned with the Paris Agreement, promote gender equality, promote climate
mitigation and adaptation, and enable private capital investment.

    C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

    The Program Development Objective (PDO) of the operation is to support Government of the Philippines (GOP)
    reforms to (1) scale up adoption of clean energy technologies; (2) increase the security, flexibility, and competition of
    the electricity markets; and (3) improve water management across water uses.


    Key Results

        •     Pillar 1: Increased share of renewable energy in the electricity generation mix, including offshore wind;
              increased energy savings in the public sector, and increased electric vehicles in the public sector motor vehicle
              fleet.

1
 Walsh, B. and Hallegatte, S. 2019. Measuring Natural Risks in the Philippines: Socioeconomic Resilience and Wellbeing Losses.
Policy Research Working Paper 8723.

                                                                                                                                 Page 4
        The World Bank
        Philippines First Energy Transition and Climate Resilience DPL (P181389)


    •     Pillar 2: Increased availability of reserve and ancillary services generation capacity; lower electricity costs for
          consumers participating in Retail Aggregation Program and Green Energy Option Program.
    •     Pillar 3: Strengthened institutions for water resources management and water and sanitation services,
          improved funding mechanism for water sector investments; and improved resilience of agriculture and
          marine ecosystem.


D. Project Description
The proposed operation is the first in a programmatic series of two operations. It is structured around three pillars
corresponding to the development objectives:

         •    Pillar 1 will support reforms to accelerate private sector investments in and delivery of RE projects, as well
              as promote EE market transformation and electrification of transport.
          •   Pillar 2 will support reforms to address critical gaps in the electricity markets that restrict greater integration
              of RE or weaken competition among electricity suppliers.
          •   Pillar 3 will support reforms to improve water management across uses especially in poor and vulnerable
              areas. The initial set of reforms include measures in water resources management and WSS service delivery.

The reforms supported by this DPL series are well aligned with the Philippines Development Plan 2023-28. The
PDP’s strategic framework is guided by AmBisyon Natin 2040, the long-term development aspirations of the country
organized according to three objectives a) develop and protect capabilities of individuals and families; b) transform
production sectors to generate more quality jobs and produce competitive products; and c) foster an enabling
environment encompassing institutions, the physical and natural environment. Underlying these priorities is a
commitment to expand and upgrade infrastructure, accelerate climate action, and strengthen disaster resilience
among others.

E. Implementation

Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

Progress on the results indicators will be monitored and evaluated by implementing agencies and the Bank. The
proposed implementing agencies for the operation include the Department of Energy (DOE), Energy Regulatory
Commission (ERC), and Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR). The monitoring of the result
indicators will draw on a mix of publicly available and private data, which the relevant agencies are committed to
collect along with the Bank for this purpose.

F. Poverty and Social Impacts, and Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects

Poverty and Social Impacts

The reforms supported by the DPL series are generally expected to have a positive impact on poverty and inequality
reduction. The reforms will affect the income distribution through two main channels: first, changes in prices in goods
and services will affect household incomes, and second, transformations in the labor market will affect workers—both


                                                                                                                              Page 5
      The World Bank
      Philippines First Energy Transition and Climate Resilience DPL (P181389)


via transitory churning and via structural change in the long run. Some of the proposed prior actions may have an
adverse short-term impact on poverty and thus complementary interventions will be needed to ensure that the long-
term welfare gains, especially in lower income households, are attained.

Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects

The proposed DPL is unlikely to cause significant adverse effects on the environment, forests, or other natural
resources. The government’s existing policy framework provides an adequate system to address these adverse
environmental effects especially through the environmental impact assessment process.

G. Risks and Mitigation

The overall risk of the operation is rated to be moderate. Of the eight risk categories assessed, six are rated moderate
and two are rated substantial. The institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability risk is substantial on
account of the need for inter-agency coordination. While the Bank is providing technical assistance to mitigate capacity
risks under all three pillars, residual risks remain. Stakeholder risk is also rated substantial as reforms under Pillar 1 and
2 to increase share of RE and increase competition may face resistance from incumbents that would gain from
preserving the status quo and reforms under Pillar 3 involve the Local Government Units. To mitigate these risks, it will
be important that the central government agencies, DOE, DENR and DOF, play a coordinating and advocacy role to
keep the reforms on track and to ensure that any potential adverse impacts of reforms are mitigated. The Bank will
remain engaged on these reforms, convene, and share knowledge with stakeholders who have shown an interest in
reforming these sectors.


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
CONTACT POINT

World Bank
  Feng Liu
  Senior Energy Specialist, Program Leader

  Ma Fiorella Delos Reyes Fabella
  Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

  Ralph Van Doorn
  Lead Economist, Program Leader

Borrower/Client/Recipient




                                                                                                                            Page 6
     The World Bank
     Philippines First Energy Transition and Climate Resilience DPL (P181389)


 Republic of the Philippines
 Ralph Recto
 Secretary of Finance
 osec@dof.gov.ph
 Joven Balbosa
 Undersecretary
 jbalbosa@dof.gov.ph

Implementing Agencies
 Department Environment and Natural Resources
 Carlos David
 Undersecretary
 cpdavid@denr.gov.ph

 Department of Energy
 Felix Fuentebella
 Undersecretary
 repwimpy.fuentebella@doe.gov.ph

 Energy Regulatory Commission
 Sharon Montaner
 Director of Market Operations
 somontaner@erc.ph

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                     Feng Liu, Ma Fiorella Delos Reyes Fabella, Ralph Van Doorn

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:                Jie Tang                               10-Sep-2024

Country Director:                        Zafer Mustafaoglu                      27-Oct-2024


                                                                                                      Page 7
The World Bank
Philippines First Energy Transition and Climate Resilience DPL (P181389)




                                                                           Page 8
