Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Mali Water Security Project (P181538)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                                Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                         Date Prepared/Updated: 09/30/2024 | Report No: ESRSA03679




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Oct 19, 2024                                                                          Page 1 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Mali Water Security Project (P181538)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                 Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P181538                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)      Mali Water Security          2025
                                                                                       Project

                     Operation Name            Mali Water Security Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries           Region                      Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Mali                      Mali                                    WESTERN AND CENTRAL          Water
                                                                                       AFRICA

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     Republic of Mali          Direction National de l'Hydraulique     21-Oct-2024                  10-Dec-2024
                                               (DNH), Societe Malienne de Gestion de
                                               l'Eau Potable (SOMAGEP), Societe
                                               Malienne de Patrimoine de l'eau



Public Disclosure
                                               Potable (SOMAPEP)

                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost
                     Review Date

                     08-Oct-2024               100,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     Increase access to improved drinking water supply and enhance conservation of water sources in selected cities.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     21. Given the current water security challenges faced in Mali - water scarcity in a changing climate, increasing demand,
                     and complex water-sharing dynamics-, an integrated approach is crucial to sustain economic development and reduce
                     fragility and conflict in Mali. The proposed project addresses these issues through a comprehensive water management
                     strategy, focused on improving access to drinking water supply service as a continuation of Kabala investment program

                    Oct 19, 2024                                                                                                    Page 2 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Mali Water Security Project (P181538)



                     in Bamako and in priority areas while promoting climate resilience through the protection of associated water resources
                     at the sub-basin level. To this end, the project will support keystone climate resilient water investments for water
                     supply and water source conservation, as well as operational and institutional measures to enhance sector
                     performance, such as non-revenue water reduction and support to define priority reforms. The project will not only
                     tackle immediate water access and quality concerns but also lay the groundwork for long-term resilience and contribute
                     to water-related job growth and economic activity. It will also learn for the implementation of sanitation component of
                     PRUBA project to lay the ground for future water project. Improvements in monitoring and data sharing for water
                     quality and quantity are critical in helping Mali anticipate and adapt to the challenges posed by a changing climate, and
                     coordinate water uses among users. In supporting these activities, the project contributes to building a more stable,
                     sustainable future for the country, reducing the risks of water-related conflicts, and supporting economic growth in
                     vulnerable regions.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The project will be implemented in urban and peri-urban areas in the south and central regions of the country. Mali
                     faces a range of internal and external shocks that hamper its progress toward inclusive and sustainable development.
                     Climate change, social conflicts, security risks, and COVID-19 pandemics worsened the state's vulnerability and fragility.
                     The project area, as everywhere else in the country, remains highly vulnerable to climate change impacts, such as
                     increasing severity and incidence of floods and droughts. Habitats in the project area, even the classified forests, have
                     been significantly modified by uncontrolled urbanization and the cutting of firewood. Because land degradation
                     adversely affects water quality, project activities include landscape restoration such as reforestation.



Public Disclosure
                     In Mali, the 2 companies: Malian Society of Water Patrimonia (SOMAPEP-SA) and Malian Society of Management of
                     Potable Water (SOMAGEP) in charge of supplying drinking water have in general financial difficulties to reach their
                     objectives. In areas not covered by the 2 companies, the supply of drinking water is done through simplified water
                     supply system (AES), the improved village water supply system (SHVA), and human-powered pumps (PMH). In addition,
                     there are large diameter wells and wells as sources of supply. In families, women, while remaining in her traditional
                     role, is at the forefront in providing water to the family, especially in peri urban areas. This activity for women in remote
                     areas is not without risks, particularly security risks and sexual violence. About 80 percent of Mali’s poor population
                     lives in the project area. In this area, access to basic services and infrastructure is low—and highly unequal. Poverty
                     rates were highest in regions amongst which Mopti (61 percent) where families mostly depend on rainfed sorghum and
                     millet cultivation.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Project will be implemented by the Ministry of Mines Energy and Water which will establish a central project
                     management unit to coordinate the intervention of several implementing agencies including from other Ministries.
                     Component 1 will be implemented by the Malian Society of Water Patrimonia (SOMAPEP-SA) that has experience
                     implementing World Bank financed project: AF Urban water supply project (P157438)-Parent project: Urban water
                     supply project (P122826). Both projects where on Ops and performed well. However, the management of non-revenue
                     water (NRW) activities of component 1 will be implemented by the Malian Society of Management of Potable Water
                     (SOMAGEP) for operational reason. Component 2 will be implemented by the National Directorate of Hydraulics (DNH)
                     – Ministry of Mines Energy and Water – and they do not have any experience implementing World Bank-financed
                     operations. The Borrower's institutional capacity to implement the project in accordance with ESF requirements will be
                     assessed by the Bank's task team during preparation. This assessment will be carried out through amongst others, by a

                    Oct 19, 2024                                                                                                         Page 3 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Mali Water Security Project (P181538)



                     live questionary related to team members experience in conception and implementation of ESF instruments in the last
                     six months and years. Any capacity building will be outlined in an Institutional Capacity Strengthening Plan that will be
                     financed under Component 4.

                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                           Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                    Substantial
                     At this stage, the environmental risk associated with the project is considered substantial due to the impacts
                     associated with Component 1: Investment in water supply. This level of risk is attributable to the nature and
                     geographical extent of the activities under this component, the specificities of the areas of intervention, the
                     associated EHS risks, and the limited experience and institutional capacity of the borrower to meet ESF requirements.
                     In addition, the limited capacity of local authorities to effectively manage the operational risks of the infrastructure
                     also contributes to this level of risk. Component 1 covers the construction and supervision of water supply systems, as
                     well as transport and distribution infrastructure, in the regions of Sévare/Mopti, San, and mainly Bamako. During the
                     construction phase, potential risks and impacts include: (i) pollution caused by hazardous and non-hazardous waste
                     (oils, paints, asbestos), as well as dust, noise, vibrations and accidental spills; (ii) temporary traffic congestion; (iii)
                     disruption of surrounding ecosystems; and (iv) health and safety issues for workers and members of the community.
                     However, these risks will be considerably mitigated during the operational phase. The security situation in the project
                     area, the safety of beneficiaries and access to sites during implementation do not present high risks, given that the



Public Disclosure
                     activities take place mainly in urban areas and peri-urban. The risks and impacts mentioned can be avoided, reduced
                     or mitigated through appropriate assessments and adequate mitigation measures, as well as through compliance with
                     national regulations, the World Bank's Environment, Health and Safety Guidelines (EHSG), and International Good
                     Practices (GIIP).
                                                                                                                                      Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social sisk rating is Substantial, given the nature of the activities and their implementation in densely populated
                     urban areas of Bamako, and secondary cities, which also host displaced populations (Mopti/Sévaré, San). The planned
                     water supply system in Bamako – Djcoroni Para – Missira – Kati sud will consist, among others, of the construction of
                     water transport infrastructure crossing several districts, water distribution , water storage and associated
                     infrastructure within crowded urban areas, which is likely to require some land acquisition leading to physical and/or
                     economic displacement. According to site visits undertaken, the project is expected to generate a wide range of
                     significant adverse impacts on human populations such as community health and safety, working conditions, SEA/SH.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                    Relevant

                      This Standard is relevant. Environmental and social (E&S) risks and impacts are primarily associated with civil
                      engineering works. These include occupational health and safety, pollution, traffic congestion, ecosystem disruption,

                    Oct 19, 2024                                                                                                         Page 4 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Mali Water Security Project (P181538)



                      and effects on community health and safety during the construction, operation, and maintenance phases. Social risks
                      also encompass potential impacts on land rights, land use, and local economic activities. To mitigate these risks and
                      impacts, the ESIAS/ESMP tools already available for the identified sites (Sévaré/Mopti and San) will be updated to
                      ensure that appropriate E&S measures are implemented. The ESIAS/ESMP reports for the Sévaré/Mopti and San sites,
                      prepared by the government, will be updated. Additionally, EHS requirements will be incorporated into future tender
                      documents and works contracts, and the impacts of civil engineering works will be considered in the companies'
                      ESMPs. Public health risks during maintenance and service operations will be addressed through appropriate design
                      measures and capacity building for water and sanitation operators as well as community representatives. These ESIAS
                      will be finalized before before start of works. For the Bamako sites (Djicoroni-para-Missira and Missira-Kati), a single
                      ESIAS is also planned. This study will be conducted as soon as technical details are available. Consequently, this ESIAS
                      will not be available before project approval but will be finalized before the start of project implementation.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                      Relevant

                      The project will have impacts on various stakeholders. To ensure engagement throughout the project cycle, the
                      Borrower has developed an inclusive stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) which has identified and consulted key
                      stakeholders in water sector including water committees, other beneficiaries with special focus on women, people
                      living with disability, directly impacted project affected people (PAPs). The SEP has identified vulnerable groups such
                      as women in peri urban and urban areas in charge of providing water to the families, people living with disability,
                      wedowed women, eldery people, and outlined their characteristics and interests and timing, methods of engagement
                      throughout the project life cycle. The Stakeholders’ consultation has been held in all concerned municipalities of
                      Bamako District and in secondary centers, notably in San, Kangaba, Sélingué, Sansanding, Kati and Dioïla as well as



Public Disclosure
                      Mopti/Sévaré, from August 1 to 20, 2024. In total, 459 people participated in the consultations: 64.05% men, 35.95%
                      women. In this total of 459 participants, 23.96% were from vulnerable groups and 17.64% from people with
                      disabilities. As generally feedback, all stakeholders expressed their favorable opinion for the project and wish to be
                      involved in all phases. SEP includes a SEA/SH sensitive grievance management system to be put in place before the
                      start of project civil works.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                            Relevant

                      The PIU and implementation agencies will hire direct workers, contract workers and primary supply workers .
                      Following a careful assessment of the labor requirements and types of employees engaged in the project, a , labor
                      management procedures (LMP) was prepared to address key issues, such as working conditions and the management
                      of worker relationships, protecting the workforce, non-discrimination, minimum age of work, measures to prevent
                      forced labor, occupational health and safety requirements, as well as relevant guidance for the employment of youth
                      and women through the project's job placement activities. The LMP will include an effective labor-specific workers’
                      grievance mechanism that is SEA/SH sensitive, based on national laws and regulations and the provisions of ESS2 and
                      management of labor issues. Finally, the LMP will include a code of conduct highlighting the prohibition of SEA/SH
                      and sanctions in case of misconduct.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                             Relevant

                      This standard is relevant because the construction, operation, and maintenance of water infrastructure can generate
                      dust and noise emissions, hazardous waste (such as asbestos), non-hazardous waste, wastewater, sludge, and


                    Oct 19, 2024                                                                                                      Page 5 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Mali Water Security Project (P181538)



                      vibrations that can significantly impact local communities. However, the updated ESIA will incorporate measures to
                      enhance water use efficiency, reduce losses through improved network management, and lower greenhouse gas
                      emissions by installing energy-efficient pumping equipment. It will also provide recommendations for pollution
                      prevention and resource efficiency, addressing air, water, and soil pollution, as well as waste treatment and disposal
                      (including asbestos) and material transportation.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                               Relevant

                      This standard is relevant. Project activities may present significant health and safety issues, especially during the
                      construction phase as some intervention sites are located in densely populated and very active urban and rural areas.
                      As part of the ongoing update of the ESIAs/ESMPs, appropriate measures will be identified and monitoring
                      arrangements will be clearly defined. Additionally, each site-specific Environmental and Social Management Plan
                      (ESMP) will require contractors to secure the work site with fencing and employ security personnel to protect
                      property and local communities from construction-related risks. The risks associated with these security measures
                      must be assessed, and the relevant measures outlined in the Good Practice Note (GPN) on the use of security
                      personnel should be implemented. A safety management plan, based on an assessment of the safety situation in the
                      project areas, has been prepared..

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                   Relevant

                      ESS5 is relevant because project activities may require some land aquisition for water supply infrastructure. The
                      installation of the water pipes along the right-of-way may affect homes, assets and economic activities of the local




Public Disclosure
                      populations. Works in urban areas may lead to economic activity disruption on a temporary and permanent basis. All
                      the project sites are known and a RAP will be prepared for each of the 3 sites for the planned water supply system in
                      Missira – Kati sud, San, Mopti/Sevaré . For the Bamako – Djcoroni Para water system, a RAP will be prepared after
                      appraisal and before starting works. Drafts RAPs of San and Sevare will be available by project appraisal. In these 2
                      sites, according to first collected datas, projects works will temporary affects economic activities for 190 people in
                      Sevare and 40 people in San.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                    Relevant
                      Resources

                      The standard is relevant. The project involves the construction of water storage and transport infrastructure
                      (boreholes, Ground water tanks, elevated water towers, etc.) and the laying of new water pipes in urban areas
                      (Bamako, Sevare/Mopti, and San). The connection zone between Bamako (missira) and Kati will cross the Koulouba
                      classified forests, a modified habitat, which could be affected by the work planned as part of the installation of the
                      distribution pipes. Aside from these activities, which may affect certain modified habitats, land restoration activities
                      are expected to have positive effects on ecosystems. The ESIA/ESMP will include guidance to assess and address
                      these risks to ensure that the project has no significant impact on protected areas.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities




                    Oct 19, 2024                                                                                                        Page 6 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Mali Water Security Project (P181538)



                      There are no known Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Undeserved Traditional Local Communities
                      in the project area.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                       Relevant

                      Since the project will be financing significant civil works for the construction of water pipeline, water supply system,
                      earth movement and disturbance are to be expected. These types of activities pose the possibility of encountering
                      cultural heritage. The risks, and likely impacts on cultural heritage will be addressed in the ESIAs which will identify
                      known heritage in the areas of project intervention. The Borrower will consult with local communities and other
                      stakeholders as part of the ESIA process to identify any possible cultural heritage that could be affected by the
                      project. The procedures for Chance Finds will be included in the bidding documents, to be further developed in the
                      site-specific ESMPs. Though the possibility is not considered significant, the Borrower will avoid having any impact on
                      known cultural heritage sites and, where such avoidance is not possible, will identify and implement measures in
                      collaboration with the National Directorate for Cultural Heritage to address the impacts in accordance with the
                      mitigation hierarchy.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                  Not Currently Relevant

                      The project will not involve an FI.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply



Public Disclosure
                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                         Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                   No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                              No
                       NA


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                 No
                       NA

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     1.Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP): prior to appraisal,
                     2. Labor Management Procedures (LMP): prior to appraisal,
                     3. Security risk assessment and security management plan : before project approval,
                     4. ESIA/RAP for the works on the transfer pipeline from Missira to Kati Sud: before starting project works,
                     5. ESIA/RAP for the works to strengthen the drinking water supply in the city of San: draft by appraisal,


                    Oct 19, 2024                                                                                                       Page 7 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Mali Water Security Project (P181538)



                     6. ESIA/RAP for the works to strengthen the drinking water supply in the city of Mopti/Sévaré: draft by appraisal,
                     7. ESIA/RAP for the works on the water transfer pipeline from Djicoroni Para to Missira: after appraisal and before
                     starting project works,
                     8. CERC Manual including a description of the E&S assessment for the CERC component, in accordance with the ESSs
                     (same timeframe as the project manuals, will be specified in the A-ESRS).


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Taibou Adamou Maiga                  Title:         Senior Water Specialist

                      Email:                  tmaiga@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Karamoko Sanogo                      Job Title:     Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

                      Email:                  ksanogo@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank



Public Disclosure
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                               Taibou Adamou Maiga, Karamoko Sanogo

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                      Mohamed Youba Sokona

                     ADM Social Specialist:                             Mahamadou Ahmadou Maiga




                    Oct 19, 2024                                                                                                  Page 8 of 8
