Public Disclosure Authorized
                               The World Bank
                               BR Enhancing Prosperity and Sustainability in the State of Sergipe Development Policy Financing (P181501)




Public Disclosure Authorized

                                                 Program Information Document
                                                              (PID)



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 12-Dec-2023| Report No: PIDC37068




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                                      Page 1 of 6
     The World Bank
     BR Enhancing Prosperity and Sustainability in the State of Sergipe Development Policy Financing (P181501)


BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE

Country                        Project ID                       Project Name                    Parent Project ID (if any)
Brazil                         P181501                          BR Enhancing Prosperity
                                                                and Sustainability in the
                                                                State of Sergipe
                                                                Development Policy
                                                                Financing (P181501)
Region                         Estimated Board Date             Practice Area (Lead)            Financing Instrument
LATIN AMERICA AND              Aug 01, 2024                     Macroeconomics, Trade           Development Policy
CARIBBEAN                                                       and Investment                  Financing
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
State of Sergipe               State Secretariate of Finance



Proposed Development Objective(s)

 To support the State of Sergipe to: (i) enhance fiscal sustainability and improve public financial management; and (ii)
 promote inclusive and sustainable development through clean energy and climate resilience.

Financing (in US$, Millions)
 FIN_SUMM_PUB_TBL
SUMMARY

 Total Financing                                                                                                 120.00

DETAILS   -NewFin3




Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                                  120.00
   World Bank Lending                                                                                             120.00


Decision
 The review did authorize the preparation to continue




                                                                                                                Page 2 of 6
       The World Bank
       BR Enhancing Prosperity and Sustainability in the State of Sergipe Development Policy Financing (P181501)


 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context

Sergipe is Brazil’s smallest state by area and its 2.2 million people account for only about one percent of the Brazilian
population. In line with other states in Brazil’s northeast region, its development indicators are relatively low, with a
human development index (HDI) of 0.70 compared to the national average of 0.75 (as of 2021). More than half of the
population is subject to relative poverty (Brazilian definition of household per-capita income below half of the minimum
wage) and almost 14 percent are suffering from extreme poverty (poverty line of R$168 per month). The State has faced
a fiscal crisis during the national economic downturn of 2015 to 2017, endangering its ability to adequately provide key
public services such as health, education and public safety. Therefore, safeguarding the State Government’s fiscal
sustainability and improving the quality of public expenditures and taxation is critical. The State is also experiencing
environmental sustainability challenges and is subject to significant climate change risks. Over half of the State’s territory
is in areas which have endured worsening droughts in recent years, making water insecurity and management of water
resources in the State’s several river basins a critical climate change adaptation challenge. On the other hand, the State
also has great potential for production of renewable energy (especially solar) and provision of environmental services,
which is yet to be realized.

The proposed standalone DPF supports the State of Sergipe to: (i) Strengthening fiscal sustainability and (ii) Improving
environmental sustainability. The proposed US$120 million International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(IBRD) loan supports critical reforms in areas related to two key pillars. The first pillar seeks to strengthen fiscal
sustainability through fiscal rules, improved procurement, and asset management as well as tax policy measures. The
second pillar supports policies and regulations that promote environmental sustainability through improvements to
sanitation, water-resource management, and use of solar energy. This operation is part of a broader package of support
by the World Bank (WB) to improve fiscal and environmental sustainability and resilience at the sub-national level in Brazil
and is fully aligned with the Green, Resilient and Inclusive Development (GRID) approach.

 Relationship to CPF

The proposed DPF is aligned with the World Bank Group’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the period FY2018–
23. CPF is built on three pillars: (i) fiscal consolidation and government effectiveness; (ii) private sector investment and
productivity; and (iii) inclusive and sustainable development. The operation is fully aligned with CPF objectives 1.1
(Strengthen fiscal management at all levels of government) under CPF Pillar 1, which supports fiscal consolidation, public
assets and investment management and government effectiveness. The operation is also aligned with CPF objective 2.1
(Reduce regulatory barriers and other microeconomic distortions to competition, investment, and trade) under CPF Pillar
2 (modernizing environmental licensing). In addition, the operation is aligned with CPF objectives 3.1 (Support the
achievement of Brazil’s NDC with a Particular Focus on Land Use) and 3.3 (Promote socioeconomic development of small
rural producers and protecting vulnerable groups) under CPF Pillar 3, which supports inclusive and sustainable
development. This pillar is also consistent with the WBG Climate Change Action Plan 2021-2025 and the LAC Climate
Roadmap.

 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

 To support the State of Sergipe to: (i) enhance fiscal sustainability and improve public financial management; and (ii)
 promote inclusive and sustainable development through clean energy and climate resilience.



                                                                                                                     Page 3 of 6
       The World Bank
       BR Enhancing Prosperity and Sustainability in the State of Sergipe Development Policy Financing (P181501)


Key Results

The policies supported by the proposed operation are expected to yield positive results for the fiscal and environmental
sustainability of the State. The implementation of a new fiscal framework is expected to tame primary current spending
growth and open fiscal space for investments. Improving public procurement practices and the management of the public
real estate assets will reduce costs, improve quality of procurement, and reduce the vacancy rate of properties and allow
the state to increase revenues from the exploitation of real estate assets. Opening the State’s water and sanitation sector
is expected to result in significant private investment, allowing progress towards universalization of sanitation services.
Raising selected taxes on goods with negative health externalities will increase State revenue while reducing damages to
human health. Introducing bulk water fees will result in more rational use of water and will generate revenues to be
invested in improved water resource management at the basin level. Brining solar energy to public buildings, including
though partnership with private operators, will reduce energy costs for the State while also reducing Greenhouse-Gas
emissions. Payments for Environmental Services (PES) programs will compensate individuals or communities for their
ability to produce environmental benefits or refrain from causing environmental damage. By providing financial incentives
for the conservation and sustainable use of natural resources, PES can help address environmental challenges and
promote the maintenance of ecosystem services.




 D. Concept Description

The Development Objective of this standalone DPF is to support the state of Sergipe to: (i) Strengthen fiscal
sustainability and (ii) Improve environmental sustainability. The proposed DPF is articulated around two pillars:
       i.   The first pillar of the DPF supports reforms that improve fiscal sustainability through the adoption of: (i) fiscal
            rules aimed at controlling current expenditures and ensuring fiscal space for public investments, including in
            support of environmental sustainability and climate change adaptation; (ii) improved procurement processes;
            (iii) more efficient management of the State’s real estate assets; (iv) attract private investment to broaden
            access to sanitation services and (v) increased revenues from taxation of goods with negative health effects.
      ii.   The second pillar of the DPF promotes sustainability through a package of reforms to: (i) improve water
            resource management (ii) promote the use of solar energy in public installations (iii) enable payments for
            environmental services.

This DPF also seeks to help the state reduce the cost of its debt and improve its debt service profile. The State of Sergipe
plans to use the proceeds of the IBRD loan to restructure approximately US$120 million in domestic debt, thus lowering
its debt service costs. The comparison between the total Net Present Value (NPV) of all contracts to be pre-paid (US$
100.7 million) and the NPV of a loan with the Bank (US$ 80.1 million) shows that the state could save US$ 20.6 million
(17.2 percent of the loan amount) in present value of debt payments. This means that the debt restructuring operation is
financially viable and meets the federal government requirement to authorize a federal guarantee of the state’s obligation
to the Bank. The State will also achieve significant savings in debt services payments in the first years because of the
lengthening of debt maturities.


 E. Poverty and Social Impacts, and Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects

Poverty and Social Impacts


                                                                                                                      Page 4 of 6
         The World Bank
         BR Enhancing Prosperity and Sustainability in the State of Sergipe Development Policy Financing (P181501)



Policies supported by this proposed series are not expected to have significant negative poverty and social impacts.
Policies aimed at improving fiscal sustainability and public expenditures are expected to have indirect positive impacts, as
they ensure that State will have the necessary fiscal space to provide adequate public services. Tax increases on products
with negative health externalities can be regressive with negative impacts on the disposable income of poor households
who consume them, however, these households are also likely to experience the highest price-elasticities of demand.
With tax increases leading to reduced consumption of these goods by vulnerable households, they can be expected to be
welfare enhancing. Policies under pillar II, especially those on water and sanitation include adequate safeguards to protect
poor households.



 Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects

Policies supported by this proposed series are expected to have positive impacts on the environment, forests, and
other natural resources. Especially policies under pillar II are expected to improve water management, reduce water
and air pollution and contribute to the protection of forests and other critical ecosystems such as mangroves.

.
    CONTACT POINT

World Bank
    Cornelius Fleischhaker
    Senior Economist


 Borrower/Client/Recipient
    State of Sergipe
    Ligia Ouvires
    Advisor
    ligia.ourives@fazenda.se.gov.br

 Implementing Agencies

    State Secretariate of Finance
    Sarah Tarsila Araujo Andreozzi
    Secretary
    sarah.andreozzi@fazenda.se.gov.br




                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 6
     The World Bank
     BR Enhancing Prosperity and Sustainability in the State of Sergipe Development Policy Financing (P181501)


FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects



APPROVAL

Task Team Leader(s):                     Cornelius Fleischhaker

Approved By
APPROVALTBL
Country Director:                       Johannes C.M. Zutt                      22-Jan-2024




                                                                                                            Page 6 of 6
