Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   BR Enhancing Prosperity and Sustainability in the State of Sergipe Development Policy Financing (P181501)




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprdpfcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                Program Information Document (PID)


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                               Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 02-May-2024 | Report No: PIDDA00062




Public Disclosure Authorized
         The World Bank
         BR Enhancing Prosperity and Sustainability in the State of Sergipe Development Policy Financing (P181501)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprdpfbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)         Operation ID                  Operation Name
                                                               BR Enhancing Prosperity and Sustainability in the State of
Brazil                           P181501
                                                               Sergipe Development Policy Financing
Region                           Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)          Financing Instrument
LATIN AMERICA AND                                              Macroeconomics, Trade         Development Policy
                                 03-Sept-2024
CARIBBEAN                                                      and Investment                Financing (DPF)
Borrower(s)                      Implementing Agency
                                 State Secretariate of
State of Sergipe
                                 Finance

Proposed Development Objective(s)
To support the State of Sergipe to: (i) strengthen fiscal sustainability and (ii) improve the management of natural
resources in the areas of water, sanitation, solar energy and solid waste.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
Financing (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                      No
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?                Yes

SUMMARY
  Total Financing                                                                                                 120.00

DETAILS
  Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                                120.00
    World Bank Lending                                                                                           120.00

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprdecision#doctemplate
Decision
The review did authorize the preparation to continue



                                                                                                                      Page 1
       The World Bank
       BR Enhancing Prosperity and Sustainability in the State of Sergipe Development Policy Financing (P181501)



 Explanation




 B. Introduction and Context

 State Context

The Government of Sergipe is seeking to strengthen fiscal sustainability by implementing a new fiscal framework,
boosting revenues, and reducing public procurement costs. The State of Sergipe, the smallest in Brazil by geographic
area, faces significant development challenges with a Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per capita of R$22,177 in 2021 that
ranks 5th lowest among all 27 Brazilian states. Its Human Development Index is 0.7, which is below the national average
of 0.75 (as of 2021), and close to half (42.4 percent) of the state's population are poor (at the $6.85 2017 PPP poverty
line), while 5.8 percent are in extreme poverty. Following a fiscal crisis during the 2015-2017 national economic downturn,
the ability to provide essential public services was threatened. This, coupled with the growing infrastructure gap, makes
it imperative to strengthen fiscal management and government capacity to enable higher public investment in the face of
increasing climate challenges.

Sergipe is also committed to improving its natural resource management in the face of the challenges of water scarcity
and being a drought-affected state. Like much of the Northeastern region, Sergipe faces the challenge of water scarcity,
which is intensified by the effects of climate change as rising temperatures threaten to exacerbate the aridity of the State’s
predominantly semiarid territory, with serious implications for water resources, subsistence farming, and population
health. Comprehensive policy reforms are necessary to establish a legal framework encouraging efficient water use,
including implementing raw water fees, and attracting private investment in infrastructure to reduce losses and pollution.
Solar energy can bolster resilience to water scarcity by lessening reliance on hydropower. Additionally, enhancing solid
waste management through increased recycling not only reduces landfill waste and associated pollution but also supports
the livelihoods of vulnerable individuals working in recycling cooperatives.

 Relationship to CPF

The proposed DPF is fully aligned with Brazil’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) FY2024–28. The overarching goal
of the CPF is to help Brazil build a more productive, more inclusive, and greener economy. The CPF is built on three High
Level Outcomes: (i) greater productivity and employment; (ii) greater inclusion of the poor and underserved populations;
and (iii) a greener economy with reduced vulnerability to climate shocks. The operation is fully aligned with CPF objectives
1.1 (strengthen fiscal management) under Pillar 1, which supports fiscal sustainability. It is also aligned with objectives 3.1
(improve management of natural resources), 3.2 (expand the clean energy matrix), and 3.3 (promote green and resilient
cities and communities) under Pillar 2, which supports efficient use of natural resources including through policies in
renewable energy, sanitation, and treatment of solid waste. Pillar 2 is also consistent with the WBG Climate Change Action
Plan 2021-2025 and 2050 targets to step up climate action to support countries in delivering and exceeding their Paris
commitments. Aligned with the new CPF and the IBRD principles for above-GDI countries, the proposed operation aims

                                                                                                                          Page 2
       The World Bank
       BR Enhancing Prosperity and Sustainability in the State of Sergipe Development Policy Financing (P181501)


to strengthen the State’s institutions, for both strengthening fiscal sustainability and fostering efficient use of natural
resources.

 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

 To support the State of Sergipe to: (i) enhance fiscal sustainability and improve public financial management; and (ii)
 promote inclusive and sustainable development through clean energy and climate resilience.

The proposed standalone DPF supports reforms of the State of Sergipe to: (i) strengthen fiscal sustainability; and (ii)
improving the management of natural resources. The proposed loan supports critical reforms in areas related to
strengthen fiscal sustainability, by implementing a framework to limit current spending growth, foster procurement cost
savings, and increase revenue from public asset management and tax policy measures under pillar 1. Pillar 2 supports
policies and regulations to improve natural resource management by and improved management of water resources to
address scarcity, bridging the investment gap in sanitation, making better use of abundant solar energy, and boosting
recycling to conserve resources and reduce pollution from solid waste.

 Key Results

The policy reforms under this DPF aim to support Sergipe to consolidate fiscal sustainability gains by advancing on the
fiscal and public financial management reform agenda and bring a more efficient natural resource management.
Legislation for fiscal sustainability, including new budget guidelines and rules, aims to control recurrent spending, maintain
fiscal space for priority investments, and strengthen fiscal buffers to absorb adverse shocks, including those triggered by
climatic events. Reforms on public procurement, and real estate asset management are expected to provide cost savings
and improved returns on existing State property. Consumption tax increases boost revenues, with rate hikes on
superfluous and health- products generating funding for the State’s anti-poverty fund. Implementing water usage fees
encourages large-scale users to conserve water and enhance efficiency without adversely affecting vulnerable
communities. Reinvesting user charge revenues into environmental conservation, river basin revitalization, and water
infrastructure is poised to improve both water quality and quantity, ultimately increasing water availability. In addition,
private sector investment in water and sanitation is expected to result in an increase in access to services, reduce rates of
hospitalization from water-borne diseases, cut GHG emissions, and provide much needed adaptation to droughts and
water scarcity through increased reuse and reduced water losses. Increased use of solar energy will reduce demand for
other sources, including fossil energy, reducing GHG emission and therefore contributing to climate change mitigation.
Finally, regulations to reduce solid waste aims to increase recycling of urban dry solid waste to 20 percent, to be achieved
within a 20-year horizon; the second is to increase the share of households with access to selective garbage collection to
72.6 percent by 2040.

 D. Project Description

This DPF supports Sergipe to safeguard fiscal sustainability, providing adequate space for priority investments, and
improve the efficiency of public financial management systems. The new fiscal rules aim to maintain an adequate level
of current savings, primarily limiting the growth of current primary expenditures at the Executive level. To incentivize
compliance, it also includes corrective mechanisms in including barring salary increases and new hiring if the current


                                                                                                                         Page 3
       The World Bank
       BR Enhancing Prosperity and Sustainability in the State of Sergipe Development Policy Financing (P181501)


savings target is not achieved. The new public procurement framework redefines roles and responsibilities of central and
sectoral agencies during the entire procurement cycle. I also empower the newly created Special Secretariat of
Contracts, Bids and Logistics to rationalize procurement across sectoral departments in a single state procurement plan,
and to review existing service contracts; and promotes the State’s Sustainable Procurement Program, which incentivizes
the adoption of environmental and social criteria into procurement documents. The new legal framework to strengthen
the management of the State’s real estate assets is another important step that creates a comprehensive inventory of
public properties, consolidates management under a single agency, and implements procedures for asset valuation to
maximize returns. Since public infrastructure assets also lack adequate data and information on climate change risks and
vulnerabilities, therefore also aims to identify critical resilient infrastructure and climate risks of real estate assets.
Finally, the policy reforms aim to pursues extra-fiscal objectives by increasing tax rates on tobacco products and
alcoholic beverages, which have proven negative health externalities.

The State of Sergipe has enormous potential to drive sustainable development through a more efficient use of water
resources, a reduction in solid waste, and promoting clean energy, while leveraging private sector engagement. Policy
reforms under pillar 2 introduce a criteria to charge water usage with a design that incentivize responsible water usage by
accounting for efficiency in water use, technology adoption, conservation practices, water type and availability. To
complement these measures, the government is pursuing private investment in water and sanitation via concession. It
has reorganized and unified the water and sanitation Microregions of Sergipe (MAES) and its governance structure as part
of an initiative to mobilize private investment to expand water and sanitation services via a competitive concession.
Beyond mobilizing private investment, the water and sanitation concession also aims to increase water reuse and reduce
losses through financial incentives, significantly aiding the State's climate adaptation and mitigation agenda. To expand
the solar energy adoption in Sergipe, the borrower has issued a regulation mandating the implementation of distributed
generation using solar power in low-voltage public buildings. These policies measures, coupled with the legislation to
establish a regulation requiring producers and retailers to operate reverse logistics system for their packaging, will
significantly contribute to the climate development agenda of the State.

The policy reforms are closely aligned with the guiding themes of the government’s Multiannual Plan (Plano Plurianual
– PPA). Policy reforms under pillar 1 is linked to linked to 3 sections of the PPA: human and social development;
infrastructure and sustainability; and management, governance, and innovation. Pillar 2 is also linked to the infrastructure
and sustainability section of the PPA, in particular to the chapters on water, renewable energy, and solid waste recycling.



 E. Implementation

 Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

The Sergipe State Secretariat of Finance (SEFAZ) is responsible for collecting and monitoring information related to
program implementation and progress toward the achievement of the results. SEFAZ is directly responsible for pillar 1
and will be responsible for coordinating all necessary actions among the agencies involved in the reform program
supported by the operation. The State Secretariat for the Environment and Climate Change will oversee policies and
coordinates different institutions under the second pillar of the program. The WB team has worked closely with the above



                                                                                                                        Page 4
       The World Bank
       BR Enhancing Prosperity and Sustainability in the State of Sergipe Development Policy Financing (P181501)


agencies as well as Brazil’s Federal Government to define results indicators that are clearly spelled out and measurable,
giving preference to those that are already collected by the State Government on a regular basis to avoid duplication.

 F. Poverty and Social Impacts, and Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects

 Poverty and Social Impacts

The prior actions supported by the operation are not expected to have significant negative poverty and social impacts.
Policy changes included in pillar 1 are expected to have both direct and indirect impacts on poverty. Most prior actions
under pillar 1 have potential for positive impacts on poverty and the vulnerable population as they aim to strengthen the
governance of the State’s procurement cycle, leading to lower costs and higher economic returns, while an improved
management of public real estate is expected to raise the State’s revenues. Together, these actions are likely to make
available more resources to invest in key areas, including the provision of public services like education and health,
benefiting social groups in the bottom of the socioeconomic scale. The changes in the tax regime expected to have both
positive and negative impacts on households’ expenditures, though the magnitude of the impacts is expected to be
negligible. Likewise, policies under pillar II are expected to have negligible or positive impacts on poverty. Small consumers
and rural communities are not expected to be affected by the increases in fees and medium- and long-term positive
impacts are possible through an enhanced and increased provision of water and sanitation services that will more than
proportionally benefit the poor. Policy measures that support recycling of solid waste may generate indirect positive
impacts due to the increase in supply of recycled materials that could be a source of income for trash collection
cooperatives, which are frequently among the poorest and most vulnerable populations.

 Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects

Policies supported by this proposed series are expected to generate positive impacts on the environment, forests, and
other natural resources. Especially policies under pillar II are expected to improve water management, reduce water
losses, and air pollution and contribute to the protection of forests and other critical ecosystems such as mangroves.
Moreover, the heightened production of solar energy is projected to foster positive environmental impacts by reducing
reliance on thermal generation. Similarly, improvements in solid waste management and the augmented collection of
recyclable materials are expected to further bolster these favorable environmental outcomes.

 G. Risks and Mitigation

The overall risk of this proposed operation is assessed as moderate. The main risk to the objectives of this operation is
the limited institutional capacity of the State to implement a multisectoral reform program, and the critical role played by
external stakeholders in some policies. Risks are mitigated by accompanying support to strengthen government capacity,
including through other World Bank and development partner engagements. The risks related to institutional capacity
and sustainability are substantial given the limited scale, capacity, and resilience in parts of the state administration, as
well as the lack of experience in implementing reforms. However, they are limited by a strong State commitment to the
reform agenda and mitigated by the support of other partners (e.g., BNDES on sanitation concession, IDB’s Profisco project
on taxation) and planned new World Bank engagement. Stakeholder risks are substantial in the sense that they may affect
the interests of incumbents who may seek to undermine its implementation. These risks are mitigated by the preparation
and consultation process undertaken by the State government, which applies good practices and lessons learned from


                                                                                                                         Page 5
       The World Bank
       BR Enhancing Prosperity and Sustainability in the State of Sergipe Development Policy Financing (P181501)


similar concessions in other parts of Brazil. Finally, the risks to the environment are moderate since improvements in water
resource management and the associated investment are not complex, as long as the risks are known. These are mitigated
by existing environmental licensing and other regulations. A similar situation occurs with solar energy investments, and
recycling policy risks are expected to be mitigated by adequate country and state systems and the support of recycling
cooperatives.




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Cornelius Fleischhaker
   Senior Economist

   Luigi Butron Calderon
   Economist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient
  State of Sergipe
  Carlos Eduardo Pereira Siqueira
  Subsecretário de Tesouro
  cadu.siqueira@fazenda.se.gov.br

 Implementing Agencies
  State Secretariate of Finance
  Sarah Tarsila Araujo Andreozzi
  Secretary
  sarah.andreozzi@fazenda.se.gov.br

 FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

 The World Bank
 1818 H Street, NW
 Washington, D.C. 20433
 Telephone: (202) 473-1000
 Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
 APPROVAL


 Task Team Leader(s):                       Cornelius Fleischhaker, Luigi Butron Calderon


                                                                                                                        Page 6
     The World Bank
     BR Enhancing Prosperity and Sustainability in the State of Sergipe Development Policy Financing (P181501)



Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:                Doerte Doemeland                       18-Apr-2024

Country Director:                        Sophie Naudeau                         22-May-2024




                                                                                                                 Page 7
