Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                        (P181064)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                     Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                    Date Prepared/Updated: 11/06/2023 | Report No: ESRSC03887




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Feb 07, 2025                                                                     Page 1 of 8
                              The World Bank
                               (P181064)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                   Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year



                     Operation Name

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries            Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Belize                    Belize                                   LATIN AMERICA AND            Environment, Natural
                                                                                        CARIBBEAN                    Resources & the Blue
                                                                                                                     Economy

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                 Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     Belize                    Belize Water Services, Ministry of       15-Oct-2024                  31-Jan-2025
                                               Finance, Economic Development and
                                               Investment




Public Disclosure
                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date

                     24-Oct-2023               32,232,810.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The objectives of the Project are to improve Belize’s management capacity for sustainable coastal and blue economy
                     development, increase safe water supply and reduce land-based pollution discharges at targeted urban areas, and in
                     case of an Eligible Crisis or Emergency, to respond promptly and effectively to it.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     This proposed project will support the government of Belize to improve its policy and technical capacity of managing
                     sustainable development of its coastal areas and blue economy, finance climate-resilient green and grey infrastructure
                     that are critical to the livelihood of its population and the sustainability of its blue economy, and provide immediate and
                     effective response to an eligible crisis or emergency. It will support the following four components: Component 1: Policy

                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                       Page 2 of 8
                              The World Bank
                               (P181064)



                     Development and Capacity Building. This component aims to improve Belize's policy framework and technical capacity
                     for the sustainable development of Belize’s coastal areas and blue economy. It will support four subcomponents: (a)
                     policy development, (b) capacity building, (c) carbon market readiness, and (d) blue economy investment program.
                     Component 2: Water, Sanitation and Waste Management in Targeted Urban Areas. This component will support (a) the
                     upgrade of Belize City Wastewater Treatment Plant; (b) the expansion of the water network in South San Pedro; and (c)
                     the development of a waste management pilot in San Pedro. Component 3: Project Management. This component will
                     support project management, including monitoring and evaluation (M&E). It will finance project implementation costs
                     associated with the project implementation units (PIU) in key agencies involved in project execution. Component 4:
                     Contingent Emergency Response Component. This component will allow for rapid reallocations of uncommitted project
                     funds in the event of an eligible emergency as defined in OP 8.00 to finance eligible expenses associated with the
                     response.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The Project will be implemented in Belize, an upper middle-income country with a population of 405,272 in 2022. The
                     scope of infrastructure investments will cover Belize City, San Pedro, and Placencia, while the policy and capacity
                     building interventions will be national. Belize is highly vulnerable to external economic shocks and adverse impacts of
                     climate change that cause tremendous damage to key sectors including tourism. Infrastructure investments in San
                     Pedro and Placencia have not kept up with the demand which has contributed to wastewater leakage into coastal areas;
                     coastal erosion; sargassum blooms; and increased pressures on public water supply, sanitation, and solid waste
                     management services. In Belize City, the Belize Water Services reports that the wastewater treatment plant does not



Public Disclosure
                     meet the required effluent discharge standards leading to pollution of the Caribbean Sea. There is also a lack of
                     adequate policy measures and investment financing to systematically address the above concerns. The Project area of
                     influence reflects the findings of the 2022 Census which indicates that Belize maintains a high poverty rate of 35.7
                     percent. Women are more likely to be self-employed and poor, indicating the structural difference in employment and
                     poverty outcomes. Rural communities live mainly on subsistence agriculture, fishing, and foreign remittances. Other
                     disadvantaged groups that could face discrimination and marginalization are the LGBTQ+ community, persons with
                     disabilities, the youth, etc. According to the Ministry of Indigenous Peoples (IP) Affairs of Belize, the country's
                     Indigenous peoples comprise approximately 18% of the country's population. Overall, the Project interventions are
                     expected to reduce land and marine pollution, promote sustainable management of coastal zones, and improve the
                     health and wellbeing of the population.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Ministry of Economic Development (MED) is the lead implementing agency for preparing and implementing the
                     proposed Project. The MED plays an active role in coordinating national stakeholders and development partners and
                     plans to use its Central Executing Unit (CEU) as the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) for this Project. The CEU has
                     experience in managing projects with different development partners including on environmental and social (E&S)
                     aspects. The Belize Water Services (BWS) - a government-owned company - will lead the execution of water and
                     sanitation activities under Component 2, including E&S risk management. The CEU will ensure overall Project
                     coordination with the BWS and with other relevant authorities such as the Belize Waste Management Authority and San
                     Pedro town government. The Government of Belize has implemented projects under the World Bank safeguards policies
                     and is gaining experience with projects under the Environmental and Social Framework (ESF). The CEU and BWS each
                     have one E&S specialist who have experience with E&S risk management but this will be their first time implementing a

                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                   Page 3 of 8
                              The World Bank
                               (P181064)



                     project under the ESF. During project preparation, the WB will assess the experience and capacity of relevant
                     institutions in implementing E&S risk management measures under the ESF and recommend capacity development
                     measures. The findings, recommendations, and actions will be documented in the appraisal ESRS and in the
                     Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP).

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                           Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                    Substantial
                     The environmental risk rating is Substantial at the Concept Stage. This rating is based on the proposed locations, type
                     of investments, potential sensitivity of project intervention, nature and magnitude of potential risks and impacts, and
                     client capacity. The Project is expected to improve the quality of wastewater effluent, promote recycling and improve
                     access to safe and reliable potable water. The key potential environmental risks and impacts are primarily associated
                     with Component 2 activities and include (i) soil, water, and air pollution resulting from the desludging of facultative
                     ponds and septage disposal; (ii) leakages and emissions of greenhouse gasses (GHGs) from the wastewater treatment
                     plant upgrades; (iii) adverse impacts to water quantity and quality of groundwater systems in water supply systems;
                     (iv) generation and disposal of hazardous waste; and (v) construction stage risks such as occupational health and
                     safety (OHS), cultural heritage risks, and waste management. These risks are likely to be temporary and can be
                     managed through proper design and implementation of appropriate risk mitigation measures. The full range of key
                     risks will be further assessed during Project preparation once activities are more defined, and the appropriate



Public Disclosure
                     measures will be identified and documented in the ESCP and E&S assessments and management plans to prevent or
                     mitigate risks.
                                                                                                                                        Moderate
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The project's social risk rating is Moderate. The main social risks of the project activities are i) the social exclusion of
                     the disadvantaged and vulnerable groups (fishers, female-headed households, low-income households, the youth, the
                     LGBTI+ community, persons with disabilities, etc. ) from the consultation and decision-making processes , ii)
                     transparency of stakeholder participation and public information disclosure, iii) inadequately addressing and
                     promoting environmental and social capacity building and institutional strengthening, iv) potential labor influx with
                     moderate risks and low SEASH risks, v) potential for moderate economic and physical displacement caused by civil
                     work, vi) low-moderate risk for child labor, along with labor safety concerns, vii) Weak capacity of contractors to
                     manage environmental and social risks and impacts. Component 2 will not impact indigenous groups (IPs) as defined
                     under ESS7. However, Component 1 could require IPs' participation during consultations to develop policies and plans
                     for the Project. At this stage, there are no identified risks of exclusion to the benefits of the Project, for example, as
                     those under Component 2 but this will further be assessed and validated during Project preparation. During Project
                     preparation, appropriate environmental and social measures will be identified and documented in the ESCP to
                     prevent or mitigate identified risks and impacts. Section C of this C-ESRS also summarizes the proposed
                     Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities the Project will implement to avoid or mitigate identified E&S
                     risks and impacts. The ESRC will be reviewed regularly throughout the project life cycle to ensure that it continues to
                     accurately reflect the level of risk that the project presents.




                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                         Page 4 of 8
                              The World Bank
                               (P181064)



                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                 Relevant

                      The project's key potential E&S risks and impacts are highlighted in Section A. The appropriate methods and tools for
                      the E&S assessments (as described under ESS1 Annex 1) and their timing will be determined during project
                      preparation. These are likely to be a combination of ESIA, ESMP, and E&S Codes of Practice. During project
                      preparation, the Borrower will develop draft terms of reference (ToR) for these assessments which will consider the
                      requirements of the ESF and the World Bank EHS Guidelines. The TOR will be reviewed and cleared by the WB prior to
                      appraisal and thereafter disclosed for stakeholder consultations and feedback. The assessments will inform project
                      design and no activities will commence prior to having the appropriate measures in place. Any technical assistance
                      activities under the Project will adhere to the requirements set out in paragraphs 14–18 of ESS1, consistent with ESSs
                      1-10. The Borrower will prepare and disclose a draft ESCP before appraisal.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                      Relevant

                      The main project stakeholders include government ministries and agencies; civil society organizations and the private
                      sector; and coastal communities, including vulnerable groups (fishers, female-headed households, low-income
                      households, the youth, the LGBTI+ community, persons with disabilities, etc.). Stakeholders will be further defined
                      during project preparation. Before appraisal, the project will prepare, consult, and disclose a draft SEP proportionate
                      to the nature and scale of the project and its associated risks and impacts consistent with ESS10. The SEP will have a



Public Disclosure
                      Grievance Mechanism to ensure that all project-level complaints are received and resolved in a timely manner and
                      will have channels to uptake and manage SEASH complaints in a confidential manner. The SEP will also address the
                      requirements of meaningful consultations in contexts of IPs, consistent with ESS7. If necessary, the SEP will be
                      updated within the timeframe of the ESCP.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                            Relevant

                      The Project will likely include direct and contracted workers and no community workers. Primary supply workers will
                      be determined during preparation. Government employees involved in project implementation will remain subject to
                      the terms and conditions of their contracts unless there is an effective legal transfer of their employment to the
                      Project - only paragraphs 17 to 20 (Protecting the Work Force) and 24 to 30 (OHS) will apply to them. To manage risks
                      and impacts, the Project will prepare Labor Management Procedures (LMP), whose timeframe will be indicated in the
                      ESCP. The LMP will have a dedicated Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) with channels to update SEA/SH-related
                      complaints. The LMP will include a code of conduct for project workers, including provisions on non-discrimination
                      and the prevention of SEA/SH. Because of the country context, risk of child labor is moderate, for which the client will
                      apply measures consistent with para 17-19 of ESS2.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                             Relevant

                      Works at the wastewater treatment plant are associated with potential sources of soil and water pollution, including
                      from desludging, disposal of dried sludge, and construction and operation of anaerobic ponds. The expansion of the
                      water supply system for North Placensia Peninsula may lead to withdrawal of significant quantities of groundwater.


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                      Page 5 of 8
                              The World Bank
                               (P181064)



                      The installation of an anaerobic pond will lead to GHGs, which, if not properly managed, will result in increased
                      emissions. During project preparation, the above issues will be further assessed, including any cumulative impacts,
                      and the resulting TOR and E&S assessments will guide the formulation of detailed mitigation measures to address the
                      impacts and in line with the WB EHS Guidelines and applicable national standards. Civil work will consider climate-
                      resilient measures as guided by technically and financially feasible solutions.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                            Relevant

                      Civil works may generate noise, dust, odors, and pollution that could potentially impact community health. Other
                      associated community health and safety risks may be related to groundwater quality, traffic disturbance, labor influx,
                      and risks associated with waste separation and recycling activities. During operation of the solid waste and
                      wastewater facilities, community risks include noise, odor, and vectors. The E&S assessments will assess risks to
                      community health and safety and detail the corresponding mitigation measures. The assessments will also ensure
                      that management systems are in place to ensure the safety of services, especially water supply, sanitation, and solid
                      waste. Designs will also address universal access to be implemented where technically and financially feasible.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                Relevant

                      Civil works including wastewater treatment, water network expansion, sanitation, and waste management could
                      imply moderate resettlement impacts (economic and physical displacement). During Project preparation, the Bank
                      will further assess the potential for such an impact. The ESCP, where relevant, will require the Borrower to formulate,
                      consult, disclose, and implement, before the start of works, Resettlement Action Plans proportionate to the nature




Public Disclosure
                      and scope of the impact. Where resettlement impacts are identified, no construction activities will be undertaken
                      before compensation is given to all displaced persons in accordance with the RAPs. The ToRs that will be developed
                      during Project preparation to guide the formulation of the ESMPs will contain in its annex a guidance note and
                      suggested table of contents for the formulation of RAPs, consistent with ESS5 and its Guidance note for borrowers.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                 Relevant
                      Resources

                      ESS6 is Relevant because Belize City, San Pedro and Placensia are located in Key Biodiversity Areas. However, Project
                      interventions are expected to positively impact biodiversity by promoting the overall health of coastal and marine
                      ecosystems and strengthening policies in key blue economic sectors. Infrastructure works will mostly be in urban and
                      peri-urban areas where significant impacts to biodiversity and habitats or living natural resources are not expected.
                      The relevance of ESS6 will be further assessed and confirmed during project preparation and appropriate mitigation
                      measures will be documented in the TORs and E&S assessments and plans.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                            Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      Activities of Component 2 will not impact indigenous communities (IPs). However, the Standard is relevant because
                      activities under Component 1 could have national scope, thus including IPs and requiring consulting them. A
                      standalone Indigenous Plan will not be necessary; instead, the SEP will address the requirements of meaningful
                      consultation in the context of IPs. The need for Free Prior and Informed Consent is not foreseen, as no Project



                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                     Page 6 of 8
                              The World Bank
                               (P181064)



                      activities will negatively impact IPs in terms of adverse impacts on IPs’ land and natural resources, causing relocation
                      from IPs’ land and natural resources, and/ or on IPs’ cultural heritage.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                        Relevant

                      At this stage of preparation, risks and impacts related to tangible and intangible cultural heritage have not been
                      identified. However, the ToR for the E&S assessments will include requirements to assess possible impacts to cultural
                      heritage. Since activities in Component 2 will involve excavations, chance find procedures will be included in relevant
                      E&S mitigation measures and procurement documents considering the national legislation and the requirements
                      under ESS8.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                  Not Currently Relevant

                      The standard is not relevant to the Project.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                           Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                    Yes

                     B.3 Other Salient Features




Public Disclosure
                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                                No
                       None


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                   No
                       None

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     Prior to appraisal, with the support of the WB Team, the Borrower will prepare:

                     1.       A draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan(SEP) with is Grievance Mechanism.
                     2.       Draft Terms of Reference for the environmental and social assessments under Component 2.
                     3.       Draft Labor Management Procedures
                     4.       A draft Environmental and Social Commitment Plan.

                     During the preparation phase of the Project, the WB team will support the client in:
                     1.      Further assessing the E&S risks of the Project, including those related to ESS5 and ESS7, and identifying
                     corresponding mitigation measures.


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                         Page 7 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               (P181064)



                     2.        Self-assessment of the borrower capacity at the project level.
                     3.        Assessing and adapting a GM adequate to the country’s context.

                     During Project implementation, as part of implementing its ESCP within its timeframe, the Borrower will:
                     1.      Formulate, consult, approve, and disclose ESIAs, site-specific ESMPs, in line with approved ToRs prepared
                     during project preparation.
                     2.      As needed, formulate, consult, approve, disclose, and implement Resettlement Actions Plan prior to the start of
                     work that is causing resettlement impacts.
                     3.      If needed, ensure that the SEP and its application apply the necessary requirements of ESS10 and ESS7 when
                     consulting with IPs. If necessary, formulate, consult, disclose, and implement IPPs.




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Nicolas Benjamin Claude Desramaut    Title:         Senior Environmental Engineer

                      Email:                  ndesramaut@worldbank.org




Public Disclosure
                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                    Nicolas Benjamin Claude Desramaut

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                           Aradhna Mathur

                     ADM Social Specialist:                                  Norman Russle Howard Taylor




                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                   Page 8 of 8
