Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Belize Blue Cities And Beyond Project (P181064)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                            Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                     (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 06/20/2024 | Report No: ESRSA03569




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Feb 07, 2025                                                                         Page 1 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Belize Blue Cities And Beyond Project (P181064)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                   Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P181064                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)        BBCBP                       2025

                     Operation Name            Belize Blue Cities and Beyond Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries            Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Belize                    Belize                                   LATIN AMERICA AND            Environment, Natural
                                                                                        CARIBBEAN                    Resources & the Blue
                                                                                                                     Economy

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                 Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     Belize                    Belize Water Services, Ministry of       15-Oct-2024                  31-Jan-2025
                                               Finance, Economic Development and
                                               Investment




Public Disclosure
                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost
                     Review Date

                     10-Jun-2024               32,232,810.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The objectives of the Project are to improve Belize’s management capacity for sustainable coastal and blue economy
                     development, increase safe water supply and reduce land-based pollution discharges at targeted urban areas, and in
                     case of an Eligible Crisis or Emergency, to respond promptly and effectively to it.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     This proposed project will support the government of Belize to improve its policy and technical capacity of managing
                     sustainable development of its coastal areas and blue economy, finance climate-resilient green and grey infrastructure
                     that are critical to the livelihood of its population and the sustainability of its blue economy, and provide immediate and
                     effective response to an eligible crisis or emergency. It will support the following four components: Component 1: Policy

                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                      Page 2 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Belize Blue Cities And Beyond Project (P181064)



                     Development and Capacity Building. This component aims to improve Belize's policy framework and technical capacity
                     for the sustainable development of Belize’s coastal areas and blue economy. It will support four subcomponents: (a)
                     policy development, (b) capacity building, (c) carbon market readiness, and (d) blue economy investment program.
                     Component 2: Water, Sanitation and Waste Management in Targeted Urban Areas. This component will support (a) the
                     upgrade of Belize City Wastewater Treatment Plant; (b) the expansion of the water network in South San Pedro; and (c)
                     the development of a waste management pilot in San Pedro. Component 3: Project Management. This component will
                     support project management, including monitoring and evaluation (M&E). It will finance project implementation costs
                     associated with the project implementation units (PIU) in key agencies involved in project execution. Component 4:
                     Contingent Emergency Response Component. This component will allow for rapid reallocations of uncommitted project
                     funds in the event of an eligible emergency as defined in OP 8.00 to finance eligible expenses associated with the
                     response.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The Project will be implemented in Belize, an upper middle-income country with a population of 405,272 as of 2022.
                     The scope of infrastructure investments will cover Belize City, and San Pedro, while the scope of policy and capacity-
                     building interventions will be national. Belize is highly vulnerable to external economic shocks and adverse impacts of
                     climate change that cause tremendous damage to key sectors including tourism. For example, infrastructure
                     investments in San Pedro and Belize City have not kept up with the demand which has contributed to wastewater
                     leakage into coastal areas, coastal erosion, and increased pressures on public water supply, sanitation, and solid waste
                     management services. In Belize City, the BWS reports that the WWTP does not meet the required effluent discharge



Public Disclosure
                     standards. There is also a lack of adequate policies, including land-use policies, sustainable tourism policies, and
                     environmental policies to systematically address these issues. Generally, Belize City and San Pedro reflect the findings of
                     the 2022 Census which indicates that Belize maintains a high poverty rate of 35.7 percent. Women are more likely to be
                     self-employed and poor, indicating the structural difference in employment and poverty outcomes. Rural communities
                     live mainly on subsistence agriculture, fishing, and foreign remittances. Other disadvantaged groups that could face
                     discrimination and marginalization are the LGBTQI+ community, persons with disabilities, the youth, etc. According to
                     the Ministry of Indigenous Peoples (IP) Affairs of Belize, the country's Indigenous peoples comprise approximately 18%
                     of the country's population. The project interventions will address these issues by promoting better-coordinated land
                     use, sustainable tourism policies, water and sanitation planning policies, and climate-resilient drinking water supply and
                     sanitation services to underserved urban and rural communities. Overall, these interventions are expected to reduce
                     land-based pollution, promote sustainable management of coastal zones, and improve the health and wellbeing of the
                     population.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The MED is the lead implementing agency for the proposed Project. The MED has experience in coordinating and
                     implementing projects financed by international financial institutions such as the World Bank, the Inter-American
                     Development Bank (IDB), and the Caribbean Development Bank. The MED has designated the Central Executing Unit
                     (CEU), which is housed in the MED, as the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) for Component 1, Subcomponent 2.3,
                     Component 3, and Component 4. Subcomponents 2.1 and 2.2 will be directly implemented by BWS – a national water
                     and sewerage utility – in coordination with the CEU.




                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                      Page 3 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Belize Blue Cities And Beyond Project (P181064)



                     The CEU is headed by a lead coordinator with the support of project managers, procurement specialists, financial
                     management specialists, and one environmental and social (E&S) specialist. It is currently implementing five IDB-
                     financed projects and expects to implement three new projects, including this project and another World Bank-financed
                     project (Belize Renewable Integration and Resilient Energy System Project, P179520). The E&S Specialist of the CEU is
                     qualified and has experience in implementing WB-financed projects under the Environmental and Social Framework
                     (ESF). The BWS has appointed one of its staff as the E&S specialist who will directly coordinate E&S risk management for
                     BWS-related activities under Subcomponents 2.1 and 2.2. The specialist is a certified environmental engineer and has
                     extensive experience working on water and sanitation projects, including on E&S risk management. As an organization,
                     BWS has experience in managing E&S risks under the Belize legal framework as well as lender standards, primarily the
                     IDB.

                     During project preparation, the WB team assessed that the E&S specialists of the CEU and the BWS are qualified and
                     their skills and knowledge align with the ESF requirements. To strengthen the PIUs knowledge on the ESF, the WB team
                     delivered introductory trainings on the ESF and requested the specialists to complete the online ESF training. The major
                     E&S capacity constraint relates to the lack of adequate number of personnel to manage, monitor, and timely report on
                     the implementation of related E&S measures. To strengthen these aspects, the CEU will hire one additional E&S staff to
                     support both the CEU and BWS on E&S risk management no later than 60 days after the Project Effective Date. A
                     capacity development program will also be put in place as part of the Environmental and Social Commitment Plan
                     (ESCP) to continue enhancing the capacity of the specialists on E&S risk management topics and to ensure proper
                     coordination between the CEU, BWS, and other stakeholders on the overall E&S risk management approach. At an
                     institutional level, an E&S capacity assessment of BWS will be conducted during project implementation which will




Public Disclosure
                     provide recommendations to improve their long-term capacity. Capacity strengthening details are elaborated under
                     ESS1 and in the ESCP.

                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                       Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                Substantial
                     The environmental risk rating is Substantial. This rating is based on the proposed locations, type of investments,
                     potential sensitivity of project locations, nature and magnitude of potential risks and impacts, and Borrower capacity.
                     The Project is expected to improve the quality of wastewater effluent, promote recycling, improve access to safe and
                     reliable potable water, and support environmental policies. The Substantial environmental risks and impacts are
                     primarily associated with the upgrade of the WWTP and include (i) soil, water and air pollution resulting from the
                     desludging of facultative ponds and septage disposal; (ii) leakages and emissions of greenhouse gases (GHGs) from
                     anerobic lagoons; (iii) generation, management and disposal of waste including sludge, chemicals, construction and
                     demolition waste, and other hazardous and non-hazardous waste; (iv) occupational health and safety (OHS) risks
                     during construction; and (v) community health and safety risks including odor, noise, dust and traffic during
                     construction and nuisances, accidents and emergencies during operation of the upgraded WWTP. The potential
                     environmental impacts related to the sewer network expansion and waste management pilot are likely to be low to
                     moderate and include minor vegetation clearance and soil disturbance along the right of way, traffic disruption, and
                     nuisances such as noise, dust, and odor. The policy development activities are expected to result in environmental


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                    Page 4 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Belize Blue Cities And Beyond Project (P181064)



                     benefits but any adverse impacts will be assessed and measures put in place. Overall, the environmental risks are
                     likely to be temporary and can be managed through proper infrastructure design, implementation of appropriate risk
                     mitigation measures, and capacity strengthening. Measures to mitigate the above potential impacts are elaborated in
                     the relevant ESSs below and documented in the ESCP.
                                                                                                                                    Moderate
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risk rating is Moderate. The main social risks of the project activities are i) the social exclusion of the
                     disadvantaged and vulnerable groups (fishers, female-headed households, low-income households, the youth, the
                     LGBTQI+ community, persons with disabilities, etc.) from the consultation and decision-making processes; ii)
                     transparency of stakeholder participation and public information disclosure; iii) inadequately addressing and
                     promoting E&S capacity development and institutional strengthening; iv) potential moderate risk associated with
                     labor influx and low SEASH risks; v) low-moderate risk for child labor, along with labor safety concerns; and vi) weak
                     capacity of contractors to manage E&S risks and impacts. Currently, no physical or economic displacement related to
                     ESS5 is envisaged as a result of project activities. Component 2 will not impact Indigenous people (IPs) as defined
                     under ESS7. However, Component 1 could require IPs' participation during consultations to develop policies and plans
                     with national scopes. At this stage, there are no identified risks of exclusion to the benefits of the Project, for
                     example, as those under Component 2. If any, these will be identified during implementation and corresponding E&S
                     measures will be put in place to prevent or mitigate such risks and impacts. The ESRC will be reviewed regularly
                     throughout the project life cycle to ensure that it continues to accurately reflect the level of risk that the project
                     presents.




Public Disclosure
                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                 Relevant

                      The project is expected to reap E&S benefits by providing communities in South San Pedro with access to safe potable
                      water, reducing pollution discharges to coastal ecosystem in Belize City, and improving the capacity of Belize to
                      sustainably manage coastal and blue economy development. However, the project activities are also associated with
                      adverse E&S impacts as highlighted in Section A above. The Government of Belize has put in place measures to
                      assess, manage, and monitor these potential impacts throughout the project life cycle. Activities under Component 1
                      are of a technical assistance (TA) nature. These TA activities will adhere to the requirements set out in paragraphs 14–
                      18 of ESS1, consistent with ESSs 1-10. The World Bank’s responsibility will not extend beyond the World Bank-
                      financed TA. To address potential impacts associated with Subcomponent 2.1 (upgrading the WWTP), the BWS has
                      prepared draft terms of reference (ToR) for an Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA). The ESA ToR covers the
                      following aspects: (i) an Environmental and Social Audit to assess key E&S areas of concern associated with the
                      existing WWTP operations; (ii) an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA); (iii) an Environmental and
                      Social Management Plan (ESMP); and (iv) a systematic assessment of BWS’s institutional capacity on E&S aspects
                      which will result into short- to long-term recommendations. The BWS submitted the ToR for the Bank’s review prior
                      to Project Appraisal and once the Bank’s feedback is integrated, the ToR will be disclosed on the Bank’s and BWS’s
                      external websites, also before Project Appraisal. The ToR will be consulted on, updated, and finalized prior to
                      finalizing the ToR for the detailed design of the WWTP. Given the ESRC is Substantial, the ESA ToR outlines various


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                     Page 5 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Belize Blue Cities And Beyond Project (P181064)



                      arrangements to ensure that ESA is conducted in a manner that ensures the independence of the specialists and
                      outputs per ESS1 paragraph 25. The ESA will be conducted during project implementation and will inform the design
                      of the WWTP. BWS will submit the draft ESA for the Bank’s review and integrate the feedback received. Thereafter,
                      BWS will disclose the ESA for stakeholder consultations, update, and redisclose it as Final. No activities will
                      commence prior to having the appropriate mitigation measures in place. The potential impacts associated with
                      Subcomponent 2.2 (water network expansion) are expected to be Low to Moderate. BWS has an existing
                      Environmental and Social Analysis and ESMP that covers the water expansion activity in South San Pedro. It was
                      developed in January 2023 as part of an IDB-supported project (Belize Water Supply and Modernization Program, BL-
                      1043). During project preparation, the World Bank conducted a gap analysis of the ESMP vis-à-vis the ESF which BWS
                      will use as a basis to update the ESMP. BWS will submit the updated ESMP for the Bank’s review and clearance within
                      sixty days of the Project Effective Date. In case of retroactive financing for this Subcomponent, the Bank will conduct
                      an E&S audit before a decision on retroactive financing is made to ensure that the activities were conducted in a
                      manner that is consistent with the ESF. Subcomponent 2.3 will pilot activities to improve waste management and
                      promote circular economy investments in San Pedro. The recycling industry is nascent in Belize and hence,
                      discussions are still underway on this subcomponent’s design. The Bank team conducted several site visits and met
                      with key stakeholders to understand the key waste management issues of San Pedro and expects that the scope of
                      proposed activities is not likely to pose serious adverse impacts. Therefore, an ESMP will be developed during project
                      implementation once the scope of the subcomponent is clear. Once developed, it will be consulted on, updated and
                      will feed into the detailed design of the activity. The mitigation measures shall be in place before the start of activities
                      that could cause E&S impacts. Component 3 of the Project will support Project Management as detailed in Section
                      D.2 “Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity”. For Component 4, the CERC Annex to the Project Operations




Public Disclosure
                      Manual will include guidelines for screening possible CERC activities, a negative list of activities not to be supported,
                      possible mitigation measures, and monitoring following the Bank’s CERC Guidance. These E&S guidelines will be
                      reviewed and cleared by the Bank prior to the finalization of the POM and thereafter incorporated into the POM.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                          Relevant

                      The main project stakeholders include government ministries and agencies; civil society organizations and the private
                      sector; and coastal communities, including vulnerable groups (fishers, female-headed households, low-income
                      households, the youth, the LGBTI+ community, persons with disabilities, etc.) To properly address the requirement of
                      ESS10, The Project has prepared a draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) with its Grievance Mechanism, which will
                      be, consulted, and disclosed prior to appraisal. The draft SEP is proportionate to the nature and scale of the project
                      and its associated risks and impacts consistent with ESS10. The SEP Grievance Mechanism will have channels to
                      uptake and manage SEASH complaints in a confidential manner and address the requirements of meaningful
                      consultations in contexts of IPs, consistent with ESS7. As mentioned under section A.2 of this A-ESRS, the
                      implementation of Component 1 will require IPs' participation during consultations and for the development of
                      policies and plans with national scopes, addressing among others, Land Use, Sustainable Tourism Development;
                      environmental related to water, water control, surface, ground and marine water quality; integrated fishery
                      monitoring, and for the participation of IPs in the related capacity building efforts. The principles to be followed when
                      consulting with IPs are further explained under ESS7. Consistently, the borrower will ensure that the Grievance
                      Mechanism is culturally appropriate and accessible to IPs. These aspects of the GM will be developed as part of the
                      updated SEP after project effectiveness and within the timeframe of the ESCP. As part of the Stakeholder
                      engagement process, during the preparation phase of the Project, the Borrower will implement broad community


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                         Page 6 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Belize Blue Cities And Beyond Project (P181064)



                      consultations, to integrate vulnerable groups' concerns in the consultations as part of the feedback mechanism, and
                      to inform project designs and activities. Since May 1st, 2024, the GoB started consulting stakeholders at the
                      institutional level and began consultations with other stakeholders and vulnerable groups on the 21st and 22nd of
                      May in San Pedro and Belize City. A summary of consultation results and how these inform the project design and the
                      feedback process will be documented in the SEP prior to appraisal and will be disclosed by the client, and by the Bank
                      The SEP will be updated within the timeframe of the ESCP.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                             Relevant

                      The Project will likely include direct and contracted workers and no community workers. Primary supply workers are
                      unlikely but this will be confirmed during project implementation, and prior to the approval of respective C-ESMPs by
                      PIUs. Government employees involved in project implementation will remain subject to the terms and conditions of
                      their contracts unless there is an effective legal transfer of their employment to the Project - only paragraphs 17 to 20
                      (Protecting the Work Force) and 24 to 30 (OHS) will apply to them. The main Labor risks for the project identified
                      under sections A.1 and A.2 are related to occupational health and safety (OHS) risks during construction; those
                      associated to SEASH risks, and low-moderate risk for child labor. The key risks on occupational health and safety
                      associated with Component 2 include exposure to hazardous material and chemicals, slips, trips and falls, cave-ins of
                      trenches, machinery hazards, electrical dangers including accidental contact with underground utilities, noise, and
                      vehicular accidents. To manage labor risks and impacts, the Project will prepare Labor Management Procedures
                      (LMP) no later than sixty days after the Effective Date of the Project. The LMP will have a dedicated Grievance
                      Mechanism (GM) with channels to update SEA/SH-related complaints. The LMP will include a code of conduct for
                      project workers, including provisions on non-discrimination and the prevention of SEA/SH. Because of the country



Public Disclosure
                      context, the risk of child labor is moderate, for which the client will apply measures consistent with para 17-19 of
                      ESS2. To manage OHS risks, the ToR for the ESA of the WWTP upgrade includes requirements to prepare an OHS
                      Management Plan as part of the ESMP. The existing ESMP for the water expansion in San Pedro already includes an
                      Occupational and Community Health and Safety Program following the IDB Standards and it will be reviewed, and if
                      necessary updated, to meet the ESF requirements. Subcomponent 2.3 activities, once available, will be assessed to
                      ensure OHS risks and measures are put in place prior to the start of any work. The LMP will have procedures to
                      address incidents and accidents during the life of the project, that will be reflected in ESMPs. The LMP will provide
                      appropriate measures of protection and assistance to address the vulnerabilities of project workers, including specific
                      groups of workers, such as women, people with disabilities, IPs, and children (of working age in accordance with ESS2,
                      and national laws (minimum working age in Belize is 14 years)). The LMP will require that a child over the minimum
                      age and under the age of 18 may be employed or engaged in connection with the project only if the work is NOT
                      likely to be hazardous or interfere with the child’s education or be harmful to the child’s health or physical, mental,
                      spiritual, moral, or social development.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                              Relevant

                      Works at the wastewater treatment plant are associated with potential sources of air, soil, and water pollution and
                      risks related to hazardous material from the potential use of chemicals in the WWTP process. The current effluent
                      does not fully meet the national discharge standards and hence contributes to the pollution of the coastal waters.
                      The key potential ESS3 impacts in the distribution network are mostly minor construction-stage impacts such as dust,
                      noise, and minor oil spills from trucks. The increase in water use from the additional water connections is likely to be
                      low compared to the average water demand. Component 2.3 will make a positive impact by promoting waste


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                      Page 7 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Belize Blue Cities And Beyond Project (P181064)



                      separation and recycling activities in San Pedro thereby contributing to a circular economy. ESS3 risks are likely to be
                      minor and will be identified once the scope of the activity is clear. To manage potential ESS3 impacts, the ToR for the
                      ESA of the WWTP includes requirements to assess and develop measures to mitigate impacts in line with EHS
                      Guidelines and applicable national standards. Based on the outcome of the ESIA, the ESMP will include, as necessary,
                      a Waste Management Plan, a Hazardous Materials Management Plan, a Water and Energy Use Plan, a Climate and
                      Disaster Risk Resilience Plan, and others. The existing ESMP of the water supply expansion already includes several
                      streamlined construction and operational stage sub-plans such as Air Quality, Noise and Vibration Plan, and Waste
                      Management Plan. These will be reviewed, and if necessary, updated to ensure consistency with ESS3 requirements.
                      Prior to Appraisal, the World Bank will estimate the baseline, gross, and net GHG emissions from the wastewater
                      subcomponent using the World Bank GHG Accounting Tool.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                              Relevant

                      Civil works may generate noise, dust, odors, and pollution that could potentially impact community health and safety.
                      Other associated community health and safety risks may be related to traffic disturbance and traffic safety including
                      possible temporary road closures, interruptions to normal operation of businesses, and during operation, odor,
                      possible vectors such as mosquitoes, and accidents or emergencies at the WWTP. Though with potential low risk,
                      labor influx and its associated risks for nearby communities (for example SEASH risks,) are considered, and mitigation
                      measures will be addressed in the ESMPs, consistent mostly of creating awareness among workers and communities,
                      training, and monitoring. The ToR for the ESMP of the WWTP and ESMP for the expansion of the water supply
                      network includes measures to safeguard community health and safety during the construction and operational
                      phases of the project. Measures will include a Community Health and Safety Management Plan and an Emergency



Public Disclosure
                      Preparedness Plan as part of the WWTP ESMP and an Occupational and Community Health and Safety Plan and Road
                      Safety and Traffic Management Plan for Subcomponent 2.2 activities. These measures will also ensure accessibility of
                      infrastructure and safety of sanitation services and ensure that designs incorporate universal access principles where
                      technically and financially feasible.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                   Not Currently Relevant

                      The civil works, such as wastewater treatment, water network expansion, sanitation, and waste management, are not
                      expected to result in any resettlement impacts. This is because the project sites have no existing buildings or other
                      permanent structures. Moreover, the work will be conducted in areas with no economic activities that could be
                      affected.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                   Relevant
                      Resources

                      Project interventions are expected to positively impact biodiversity by promoting the overall health of coastal and
                      marine ecosystems and strengthening policies in key blue economy sectors. Infrastructure works will mostly be in
                      urban and peri-urban areas where significant impacts to biodiversity are not expected. The key ESS6 impact is
                      associated with the WWTP upgrade. In the existing setup, the effluent goes through a polishing lagoon and is
                      discharged to the Caribbean Sea via a canal that crosses a mangrove area. The mangrove area effectively acts as a
                      nature-based solution for nutrient removal. According to eBird, a project of the Cornell Lab of Ornithology, birders
                      and bird watchers have recorded 190 bird species at the WWTP. However, none of them are listed as vulnerable,


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                      Page 8 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Belize Blue Cities And Beyond Project (P181064)



                      endangered, or critically endangered under the Integrated Biodiversity Assessment Tool (IBAT). To manage the
                      biodiversity-related risks, the ToR for the ESA of the WWTP includes requirements to conduct a biodiversity baseline
                      survey and assess the risks to terrestrial and marine biodiversity including mangroves, avifauna, ichthyofauna, and
                      their habitats. Based on the ESIA’s outcome, a Biodiversity Management Plan may be required as part of the ESMP to
                      manage impacts. In addition, the project design recognizes the importance of the mangroves, and consequently,
                      measures will be put in place to properly conserve and manage the mangrove area. Risks related to Subcomponent
                      2.2 are mainly related to vegetation clearance and replanting, soil erosion, and sedimentation and these will be
                      managed under ESS1

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                              Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      Activities of Component 2 will be implemented in areas where IPs meeting ESS7 criteria are not present. However,
                      the Standard is relevant because activities under Component 1: “policy development and capacity building,” will have
                      national scope, thus including IPs in the related stakeholder engagement processes. A standalone Indigenous Plan will
                      not be necessary; instead, the SEP will address the requirements of meaningful consultation in the context of IPs. The
                      Grievance Mechanism of the SEP will be culturally appropriate and accessible to IPs. The implementation of
                      Component 2 will require the engagement of the Indigenous people of Belize, including their representations,
                      specifically in the process of reviewing and revising critical land-use and environmental management policies and
                      regulations -to facilitate blue economy development in Belize; - and during the identification of critical investment
                      needs in key blue economic sectors. Regarding the above, consultations with IPs will be carried out following the
                      requirements of ESS7: a) For the development of policies and activities that could affect IPs (whether positively or



Public Disclosure
                      negatively), proactively engage with IPs to ensure their participation in the development of such policies and
                      activities; b) Provide sufficient time for IPs decision making processes: Is based on the prior disclosure and
                      dissemination of relevant, transparent, objective, meaningful and easily accessible information in a timeframe that
                      enables meaningful consultations with stakeholders in a culturally appropriate format, in relevant local language(s)
                      and is understandable to IPs; c) Consult with IPs as to the cultural appropriateness of the policies; d) Gender and
                      inter-generationally appropriate stakeholder engagement; e) Involve IP representative bodies and organizations in
                      the consultation processes and, where appropriate, other community members; f) Allow for IPs’ effective
                      participation in the design of related policies or mitigation measures that could affect them positively or negatively; g)
                      Is free of external manipulation, interference, coercion, discrimination, and intimidation; h) Is documented and
                      disclosed; i) Considers and responds to feedback. The need for Free Prior and Informed Consent is not foreseen, as no
                      Project activities will negatively impact IPs in terms of adverse impacts on IPs’ land and natural resources, causing
                      relocation from IPs’ land and natural resources, and/ or on IPs’ cultural heritage.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                        Relevant

                      The project activities and locations are unlikely to impact tangible or intangible cultural heritage and hence the
                      potential risks and impacts are low. However, since activities in Component 2 will involve excavations and inundation,
                      chance-find procedures will be included in relevant ESMPs and procurement documents considering the national
                      legislation and the requirements under ESS8. Because Belize has a rich cultural heritage from its Indigenous peoples,
                      the Maya, and its colonial settlers, on a precautionary basis, the Borrower will consult with stakeholders relevant to
                      cultural heritage that is known to exist or is likely to be encountered during the project life cycle, including for the
                      development of component 1 related to Policy Development and Capacity development. Stakeholders could be


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                       Page 9 of 11
                               The World Bank
                               Belize Blue Cities And Beyond Project (P181064)



                      national or local regulatory authorities entrusted with the protection of cultural heritage, nongovernmental
                      organizations, and cultural heritage experts.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                Not Currently Relevant

                      The standard is not relevant to the Project.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                         Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                  Yes

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                              No
                       None


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                 No
                       None




Public Disclosure
                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     During Project implementation, the Borrower will develop, consult as required, disclose, and implement: (i) an LMP
                     with its labor GM; (ii) an Environmental and Social Assessment, consisting of an E&S Audit, ESIA, and ESMP for
                     Subcomponent 2.1 in line with the approved ToR; (iii) an ESMP for Subcomponent 2.2; and (iv) an ESMP for
                     Subcomponent 2.3.


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:      Nicolas Benjamin Claude Desramaut      Title:         Senior Environmental Engineer

                      Email:                 ndesramaut@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT




                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                     Page 10 of 11
                              The World Bank
                              Belize Blue Cities And Beyond Project (P181064)



                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                                   Nicolas Benjamin Claude Desramaut

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                          Aradhna Mathur

                     ADM Social Specialist:                                 Norman Russle Howard Taylor




Public Disclosure




                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                Page 11 of 11
