Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Kyrgyz Republic: Water Supply And Sanitation Universal Access Program-1 Project (P500620)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                            Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 12/16/2023 | Report No: ESRSC04020




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Feb 07, 2025                                                                                        Page 1 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Kyrgyz Republic: Water Supply And Sanitation Universal Access Program-1 Project (P500620)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                 Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P500620                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)      WASUAP                      2025

                     Operation Name            Kyrgyz Republic: Water Supply and Sanitation Universal Access Program-1 Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries           Region                      Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Kyrgyz Republic           Kyrgyz Republic                         EUROPE AND CENTRAL          Water
                                                                                       ASIA

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Board Date

                     Kyrgyz Republic           State Institution for the Development   24-Oct-2024                 27-Mar-2025
                                               of Drinking Water Supply and
                                               Wastewater Disposal

                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost



Public Disclosure
                     Review Date

                     15-Dec-2023               200,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The project development objective (PDO) is to increase access to water supply and sanitation services and improve the
                     service delivery capacity in selected areas of the Kyrgyz Republic.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The proposed operation is aimed at providing universal access and improving the sustainability of water supply and
                     sanitation (WSS) services in the Kyrgyz Republic through a partnership involving the Government of Kyrgyzstan, the
                     World Bank, other development partners, and the private sector. This partnership will be operationalized through a
                     Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) using Investment Project Financing (IPF) lending instruments with some
                     performance-based grants (PBGs). The MPA program is structured as a 10-year engagement through three IPF
                     operations/phases to achieve the Program Development Objective. The MPA program includes: (i) a four-year Phase 1

                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                    Page 2 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Kyrgyz Republic: Water Supply And Sanitation Universal Access Program-1 Project (P500620)



                     (2024-2029) of focused investment covering unserved rural settlements while consolidating the service delivery
                     structure into district-level Water and Sanitation Service Provider (DWSSPs) on a pilot basis and enhancing the service
                     delivery capacity using PBGs, few and simpler sanitation interventions, complemented by extensive analysis and design
                     of more complex sanitation solutions, including paving the way for potential private sector engagement; (ii) a three-year
                     Phase 2 (2028-2032) to scale-up the investments, shifting to water supply infrastructure upgrade and expansion, priority
                     sewerage investments and scale-up the service delivery models, with a focus on operational and financial efficiency, and
                     climate adaptation; and (iii) a three-year Phase 3 (2031-2034) to scale-up sanitation investments, and consolidate the
                     water supply improvements, with a strong emphasis on knowledge exchange and appropriation of the policies, plans,
                     and tools developed under the previous two phases. Phase 1 project will comprise five components: Component 1 -
                     Water Supply Investments - will finance the construction of new water supply systems in unserved rural villages as well
                     as the upgrade of existing water supply systems in district centers and small towns in priority country areas; Component
                     2 - Sanitation Development - will finance the construction and/or rehabilitation/retrofitting of decentralized sanitation
                     systems, including toilet upgrades for vulnerable households and selected public institutions (schools, kindergartens,
                     health centers), including Technical Assistance (TA) to design more complex sewage improvements in subsequent
                     phases; Component 3 - Performance-based Service Improvement Program - will finance PBGs to selected water sector
                     institutions to implement their institutional and WSS services development plans and improve the sustainability of WSS
                     services, Component 4 - MPA Program Structuring and Management - will support the establishment of a program
                     management framework and WSS infrastructure development capacity; and Component 5- Contingency Emergency
                     Response. The risk classification and assessment provided in this ESRS covers only Phase 1 of the MPA.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview



Public Disclosure
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     Kyrgyzstan is highly vulnerable to climate change and highly dependent on climate-sensitive sectors. The water
                     resources in the country are formed by perennial and ephemeral rivers, brooks and springs, and freshwater and
                     brackish lakes. Most rivers are fed by glaciers and/or snowmelt. The country's water sector is vulnerable to climate
                     change, as it is experiencing various natural and climate-related hazards, such as droughts, mudslides, and flash floods.
                     Climate vulnerability disproportionally affects the poor and vulnerable, with women, the elderly, and children being at
                     the highest risk, especially in rural areas, partly due to the infrastructure gap and limited access to services, including
                     water and sanitation. Despite sustained progress in recent years, urban and rural, as well as interregional disparities
                     persist regarding water supply and sanitation. In 2022, compared to the national average of 77 percent of households
                     with safely managed Water Supply Services (WSS), the figure is lower in rural areas at 67 percent. Similar trends have
                     also been observed in access to sanitation, currently at 98 percent basic sanitation (99 percent rural and 97 percent
                     urban). Further, lack of reliability and low quality of services remains a major challenge. The Project will be implemented
                     in Osh, Chui, Issyk-Kul, and Batken oblasts where there have been access challenges. With the impending impacts of
                     climate change, particularly floods and droughts, sanitation-related risks to public health are expected to be more
                     intense and frequent, with possible spread and transmission of water-related diseases. Experience suggests that access
                     improvements in WSS positively correlate with public health and quality of life. Global evidence indicates a steady
                     decline in the infant and child mortality rate under five with improved WSS services (Multiple Indicator Survey Cluster
                     Snapshot 2018).

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The mandate for water supply and sanitation services is anchored within the Department of Drinking Water Supply and
                     Wastewater Disposal (DDWSWD) under the State Agency for Architecture, Construction, Housing, and Communal

                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                      Page 3 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Kyrgyz Republic: Water Supply And Sanitation Universal Access Program-1 Project (P500620)



                     Services (GOSSTROY). The Department for Disease Prevention and Sanitary and Epidemiological Expertise of the
                     Ministry of Health monitors potable water quality. The Ministry of Natural Resources, Environment, and Technical
                     Supervision is responsible for protecting natural resources, including enforcing effluent standards for wastewater
                     discharge.

                     The DDWSWD will be the Project implementing agency (IA) and is also expected to mobilize and coordinate support
                     from the Community Development and Investment Agency (ARIS), which is currently implementing the Sustainable
                     Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Development Project (SRWSSDP, P154778). The DDWSWD has gained some
                     experience with the Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) by managing the Bank-funded Climate Resilient Water
                     Services Project (CRWSP, P173734). The environmental and social performance of this operation was rated satisfactory
                     as per the last Implementation Status and Results (ISR) report. The existing DDWSWD Project Implementation Unit (PIU)
                     has a full-time environmental specialist and a social specialist responsible for managing the ESF requirements and
                     compliance with the national environmental, labor, and health legislation. A dedicated team of specialists will be
                     assigned to this new Project, including an Environmental Specialist and a Social Development Specialist. As needed, the
                     PIU E&S capacity will be augmented by hiring additional environmental and social specialists, including possibly at the
                     rayon/oblast centers. This will be confirmed during Project preparation. In addition, capacity-building on the ESF
                     requirements and project implementation needs will be provided for all relevant project staff with the support of the
                     WB team, as needed, throughout Project implementation.


                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS




Public Disclosure
                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                          Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                   Substantial
                     The Project’s environmental risks and impacts are mainly linked to the activities to be undertaken under Components
                     2 (water supply) and 3 (sanitation development). Component 2 will finance the construction of water supply schemes
                     (boreholes, well fields, intakes, and disinfection units) and the water transmission and distribution infrastructure
                     (networks, storage, meters). Component 3 will finance the construction and/or the rehabilitation/retrofitting of a
                     decentralized sanitation system, including toilet upgrades for households and public institutions (schools,
                     kindergartens, health centers), conveyance, and localized wastewater treatment where technically, financially, and
                     environmentally feasible. Risks and potential impacts during the construction phase may include: (i) increased
                     pollution due to the generation of hazardous and non-hazardous waste (oil, paints, asbestos), dust, noise, vibration,
                     and accidental spills of fuel and lubricants; (ii) traffic congestion, (iii) ecosystems disturbance, and (iv) occupational
                     and community health and safety issues. During the operation phase, risks are expected to be mainly associated with
                     the generated wastewater and fecal sludge from the sanitation facilities (pathogens, odors, soil, water pollution) if
                     not adequately managed. The above risks and impacts are readily identifiable and can be prevented, minimized, or
                     mitigated by proper assessment and readily available mitigation measures in line with national regulations, the
                     Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines (EHSGs) of the World Bank, and the Good International Industry
                     Practice (GIIP). However, considering the type and geographic scope of activities (over 80 villages in four oblasts), the
                     associated EHS risks coupled with the IA’s limited experiences with the ESF and the low capacity of local authorities to




                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                        Page 4 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Kyrgyz Republic: Water Supply And Sanitation Universal Access Program-1 Project (P500620)



                     manage operational risks of the established infrastructure effectively, the environmental risk rating is assessed as
                     Substantial at the concept stage.
                                                                                                                                     Moderate
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The Social Risk is rated as Moderate based on information available at the Concept stage, which will be revisited
                     during Project preparation. The rating is assigned based on a preliminary understanding of the proposed investments
                     under Phase 1 of the MPA. Water supply infrastructure at the household level (Component 2) is not expected to
                     require major land acquisition based on previous project experiences in the same sector. A participatory approach will
                     be adopted as part of the Project’s design to foster social acceptance to the Operation. The sanitation development
                     interventions will entail small-scale construction and/or rehabilitation works, including toilet upgrades for vulnerable
                     groups and public institutions. The Project is expected to have positive social impacts such as improved water
                     accessibility, hygiene, and sanitation standards in the Project communities, which in turn would have positive impacts
                     on the quality of life, especially for women, children, and vulnerable groups. The Project will likely adversely impact
                     vulnerable groups in several ways: (i) increase of tariffs, (ii) improved billing and collection systems (iii) connection
                     costs, which are expected as part of design measures. A social analysis, as part of the project design, will inform
                     potential exclusion risks of beneficiaries from Project activities, gender gaps and inform mitigation measures to
                     enable inclusive access to benefits and meaningful community engagement. The Project will cover Batken region
                     where the conflicts on the Kyrgyz-Tajik border in 2021-2022 have resulted in local tensions. To address related labor
                     and community safety risks, the Project will assess and mitigate such risks for the subprojects in Batken using the
                     same approach utilized in other World Bank funded projects implemented in Batken.




Public Disclosure
                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                 Relevant

                      The standards relevant to the Project are ESS1, ESS2, ESS3, ESS4, ESS5, ESS6, ESS8 and ESS10. The environmental and
                      social risks and impacts are mainly associated with the WSS small to medium-scale civil works and include OHS,
                      pollution, traffic, ecosystem disruption, and Community Health and Safety (CHS) during construction and O&M
                      phases. Social risks include land impact, beneficiaries’ exclusion, and labor issues. The impacts of civil works will be
                      addressed by the Contractors’ C-ESMPs. CHS risks during O&M will be addressed as part of design measures and
                      capacity building for WSS operators and community representatives. Since the locations and design options will be
                      determined during Project implementation, an ESMF to guide site-specific assessments, the development of related
                      ESMPs, and other E&S plans will be prepared and disclosed before appraisal. Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will be
                      prepared when detailed designs are available. OP 7.50 is also triggered for the Program.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                      Relevant

                      ESS10 is relevant. Key stakeholders are those benefiting from the Project, including municipalities and households in
                      Project areas. Others include state agencies and municipal entities who may possibly influence and make decisions on
                      the implementation of the project and/or may have an interest in the Project. Vulnerable and disadvantaged groups
                      may include, but are not limited to, poor families, people with disability, and women-headed households. The Project
                      investments will be based on a participatory approach and will benefit from social analysis, which will identify

                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                       Page 5 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Kyrgyz Republic: Water Supply And Sanitation Universal Access Program-1 Project (P500620)



                      mitigation measures to enable inclusive access to benefits and meaningful community engagement. The IA will
                      prepare and implement a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), which includes the following: (i) stakeholder
                      identification and analysis; (ii) planning for stakeholder engagement aligned with project activities; (iii) consultations
                      and information disclosure; (iv) grievance mechanism; and monitoring and reporting.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                               Relevant

                      ESS2 is relevant. The Project would include direct and contracted workers. At concept stage, no community and
                      primary supply workers are expected to be involved in the Project activities. OHS risks are expected and relate to
                      work hazards associated with excavations, confined space entry, working at heights, and exposure to pathogens. The
                      ESMF will include sections on Environmental Health and Safety (EHS) based on the EHSG of the World Bank (e.g., EHS
                      checklists for expected types of works, codes of conduct, safety training, procedures for dealing with hazardous
                      materials like asbestos and lead-based paint). No significant risks related to labor influx, such as SEA/SH, are
                      expected. Risks related to child and forced labor are low. The IA will develop and disclose Labor Management
                      Procedures (LMP) to manage minor labor-related risks. Site-specific ESMPs will incorporate LMP requirements,
                      including a Code of Conduct, SEA/SH prevention, and workers’ Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM).

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                                Relevant

                      The standard is relevant as pollution is expected from the construction, operation, and maintenance of the
                      established WSS infrastructure. Potential impacts include dust and noise emissions, hazardous (including asbestos)
                      and non-hazardous waste generation, wastewater, and sludge. However, the Project will improve water use




Public Disclosure
                      efficiency, reduce water losses through improved network and management, and reduce possible contamination of
                      aquifers by collecting and managing generated wastewater, minimize GHG emissions through installing energy-
                      efficient pumping equipment, and explore the use of solar energy to operate them. The ESMF will provide guidance
                      and guidelines for pollution prevention and resource efficiency for air, water, and soil pollution, handling and disposal
                      of waste (including asbestos), wastewater, sludge management, and material sourcing and transportation. Related
                      measures will also be included within the scope of the site-specific environmental and social assessments.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                                Relevant

                      The standard is Relevant. Activities will be undertaken in settlements and may expose adjacent communities to risks,
                      including traffic and road safety, accidents, noise, dust, and vibration during construction. Issues could also arise
                      during operation phase from exposure to pathogens, odors, and nuisance from improper septic tank maintenance
                      and sludge management. Labor and community safety risks due to the conflicts on the Kyrgyz-Tajik border in 2021-
                      2022 will be assessed for each subproject in Batken. The ESMF and LMP will include an assessment of work-related
                      health risks, road safety, excessive noise and dust, site safety and access restrictions, labor influx, and SEA/SH risks.
                      All these risks will be screened and addressed in site-specific ESMPs. The Project will develop and agree with local
                      government on a Grievance Mechanism for the population living in the Project areas. No upstream dams will be
                      associated with the project as the primary water supply source will be groundwater.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                    Relevant

                      ESS5 is relevant due to the potential investments under Components 2 and 3, which may require additional land and
                      lead to potential impacts on livelihoods. The scale of impacts under ESS5 is not expected to be substantial and


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                         Page 6 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Kyrgyz Republic: Water Supply And Sanitation Universal Access Program-1 Project (P500620)



                      physical displacement will be avoided to the extent technically and financially feasible through design measures. The
                      scope of interventions and impacts will become clearer when investment subprojects are identified in sufficient
                      detail, and site-specific design studies are completed. Therefore, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be
                      prepared, consulted, disclosed by appraisal as part of the ESMF, and implemented throughout the Project
                      implementation. The RPF will establish how site-specific RAPs will be prepared, disclosed, and implemented during
                      Project implementation. It is noted that all subprojects requiring land acquisition and involuntary resettlement will
                      ensure that the RAP(s) are prepared and fully implemented prior to the commencement of works.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                   Relevant
                      Resources

                      The standard is relevant. The Project includes construction of water intake and storage infrastructure (bore wells,
                      reservoirs, elevated water towers, etc.) and laying of new water pipes in rural areas of the Osh, Issyk-Kul, Chui and
                      Batken oblasts, some of which might be located in the important biodiversity areas. Hence, temporary disturbance,
                      fragmentation, degradation, or destruction of habitats may occur. Furthermore, accidental leakages or spillage from
                      the operation/ use of constructed sanitation and wastewater treatment facilities in rural areas may harm nearby
                      natural habitats. The ESMF will include guidance for screening such risks and addressing them according to the
                      mitigation hierarchy in line with ESS6, so that the Project does not result in significant impacts on protected areas or
                      natural habitats and no net loss to biodiversity occurs. Site-specific biodiversity risks will be assessed for each
                      subproject, and relevant mitigation measures will be included in the ESMPs.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                Not Currently Relevant



Public Disclosure
                      Local Communities

                      This standard is not relevant given that there are no Indigenous Peoples in the Kyrgyz Republic as defined by ESS7.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                        Relevant

                      The standard is relevant. Although the works will be carried out on the territories of the existing settlements and not
                      near any known cultural or archaeological heritage sites, planned activities will entail excavations with potential
                      chance finds. Accordingly, the Project’s ESMF and subsequent site-specific ESMPs for all activities that may involve
                      any excavation of earth will include appropriate “chance find” procedures. A “chance find” clause will also be added
                      to the contracts, defining procedures for contractors in the event that cultural heritage is encountered.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                   Not Currently Relevant

                      The ESS 9 is not relevant since no financial intermediaries will be involved in the project implementation.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                         Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                      No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                       Page 7 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Kyrgyz Republic: Water Supply And Sanitation Universal Access Program-1 Project (P500620)



                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                           No
                       Borrower's E&S Framework will not be used for the Project as a whole or for any of its parts.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                             TBD
                       Several development partners, including the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, the Islamic Development Bank, the
                       European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, and the Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs, have
                       demonstrated interest in joining the Bank in this transformative program. This will be further explored during project
                       preparation.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     The Borrower shall develop and disclose the following instruments before appraisal:
                     1. Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), including Project GM
                     2. Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework
                     3. Draft Labor Management Procedures (LMP), including GM for Project workers;
                     4. Draft Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF);
                     5. Draft Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP).




Public Disclosure
                     During Project implementation, the Borrower will undertake environmental and social screening of subprojects and
                     prepare fit-for purpose ESMPs and/or adopt Environmental and Social Codes of Practices (for lower level risks and
                     impacts) as applicable. The Project’s environmental and social performance will be periodically reported during Project
                     implementation following effectiveness (bi-annually), with relevant capacity building being organized for implementing
                     entities on environmental and social management.


                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Odete Duarte Muximpua                   Title:         Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                     Specialist

                      Email:                  omuximpua@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Verena Schaidreiter                     Job Title:     Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                     Specialist

                      Email:                  vschaidreiter@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT


                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                                    Page 8 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Kyrgyz Republic: Water Supply And Sanitation Universal Access Program-1 Project (P500620)



                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                            Odete Duarte Muximpua, Verena Schaidreiter

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                   Amos Abu

                     ADM Social Specialist:                          Syrga Asanalieva




Public Disclosure




                    Feb 07, 2025                                                                                          Page 9 of 9
