Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Kyrgyz Republic: Water Supply and Sanitation Universal Access Program (P500620)



                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                 Project Information Document (PID)



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 24-Oct-2024 | Report No: PIDIA00346




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     Kyrgyz Republic: Water Supply and Sanitation Universal Access Program (P500620)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                      Operation ID                  Operation Name
                                                                                         Kyrgyz Republic: Water
Kyrgyz Republic, Kyrgyz        EUROPE AND CENTRAL                                        Supply and Sanitation
                                                           P500620
Republic                       ASIA                                                      Universal Access Program-
                                                                                         1 Project
Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
Investment Project
                               14-Oct-2024                 19-Dec-2024                   Water
Financing (IPF)
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                               State Institution for the
                               Development of Drinking
Kyrgyz Republic
                               Water Supply and
                               Wastewater Disposal

Proposed Development Objective(s)
The project development objective (PDO) is to increase access to water supply and sanitation services and improve the
service delivery capacity in selected areas of the Kyrgyz Republic.

Components
Water Supply Investments
Sanitation Development
Performance-Based Service Improvement Program
MPA Program Structuring and Management and Institutional Development Support
Contingent Emergency Response

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                  Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?            Yes

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                          165.00



                                                                                                                   Page 1
        The World Bank
        Kyrgyz Republic: Water Supply and Sanitation Universal Access Program (P500620)



    Total Financing                                                                                              165.00
                of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                 86.00
    Financing Gap                                                                                                   0.00

 DETAILS
   World Bank Group Financing
      International Development Association (IDA)                                                                 86.00
        IDA Credit                                                                                                78.50
        IDA Shorter Maturity Loan (SML)                                                                             7.50
   Non-World Bank Group Financing
      Other Sources                                                                                               70.00
        Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank                                                                      50.00
        OPEC FUND                                                                                                 20.00
      Trust Funds                                                                                                   9.00
        Trust Funds                                                                                                 9.00




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
Environmental And Social Risk Classification
Substantial


 Decision
 The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate


 B. Introduction and Context
 Country Context

1. The Kyrgyz Republic is a lower-middle-income country with strong but volatile economic growth. Over the last
20 years, the country's economic growth pattern has been uneven, with an average Gross Domestic Product growth rate
of 3.13 percent. A third of the 7.1 million inhabitants live below the poverty line.1 Although the economic growth reached
6.3 percent in 2022 (much stronger than expected), driven by gold production, agriculture, and the services sector, the
country growth forecast is less optimistic, with a moderate 4 percent in 2024 and persistent vulnerability to market
fluctuations and external shocks due to the economy's heavy dependence on resource-based commodities and


1 https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SI.POV.NAHC?locations=KG



                                                                                                                      Page 2
        The World Bank
        Kyrgyz Republic: Water Supply and Sanitation Universal Access Program (P500620)


remittances. The country's development objectives outlined in the National Development Strategy 2018-20402 aspire to
a strong, self-sufficient, and developed state by 2040.
2. The country's economy is highly vulnerable to climate change and heavily dependent on climate-sensitive sectors.
The water, energy, and agricultural sectors are the most vulnerable to climate change and face a wide variety of natural
and climate-related hazards, such as droughts, floods, and mudslides. The country ranked 52nd in German Watch's annual
Climate Risk Index, and the most at-risk country in the Central Asia region,3 and urgently needs a strategic approach toward
climate adaptation and resilience. Climate vulnerability disproportionally affects the poor and vulnerable, with women
and children being at the highest risk, especially in rural areas, due to limited access to essential services. Climate change
will also increase sanitation-related risks to public health and, with floods and droughts expected to become more intense
and frequent, will exacerbate the spread and transmission of water-related diseases through increased exposure to flood
waters contaminated with poorly managed sewage.
3. The infrastructure and services deficit is hindering the Kyrgyz Republic's development. The country's infrastructure
quality is relatively poor compared to its regional peers.4 While there has been an increase in investments, leading to
universal access to electricity5 and significant improvements in water and transport coverage, quality of services remains
a major challenge, particularly in rural areas. Water and sanitation investments have historically lagged behind, at one
percent of the total country investments compared to 54 percent in energy and 39 percent in transport projects (between
2000 and 2018). Although the country's development strategy strongly focuses on infrastructure financing, more
investments are needed in climate-vulnerable sectors.
4. The country's economic transformation and growth requires a higher investment efficiency and a greater focus on
institutions. The country’s vision and development objectives are generally inclusive and largely reformist. However, the
country's development strategy remains vulnerable to political instability and social unrest. Future development would
require a shift from the current drivers of growth into new, more inclusive, and sustainable sources, such as energy, water,
and agricultural resources. However, these sectors suffer from policy uncertainty and institutional capacity gaps that
further encroach into the limited fiscal space with subsidized utilities and services. Thus, stronger institutions, a stable
regulatory environment, and robust tariff policies are among the key reforms needed to increase investment financing
efficiency and harness the transformative potential of infrastructure and services.
 Sectoral and Institutional Context
5. Water supply and sanitation (WSS) are essential enablers of socio-economic growth and human capital in the Kyrgyz
Republic. Access to WSS is an important contributor to health and education outcomes in the country. Poor access to
water supply has been associated with intestinal helminth and protozoa infections,6 and global studies indicate that at
least 60 percent of diarrheal deaths are associated with poor access to water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH). 7 Further,
access to WSS is among the key factors affecting children's retention in schools, particularly during winter in rural
settlements, where extremely low temperatures prevent children from accessing outside toilets and handwashing
facilities.
6. The country has made substantial progress in increasing access to WSS in the past two decades. With an estimated
90.8 percent access to basic water services, the absolute number of unserved people decreased by more than two-thirds
between 2000 and 2022, due to the persistent water supply infrastructure investments, including in the enabling policies,


2 Kyrgyz Republic. 2018. National Kyrgyz Republic Development Strategy
3 https://www.germanwatch.org/sites/germanwatch.org/files/Global%20Climate%20Risk%20Index%202019_2.pdf
4 Sustainable Infrastructure for Low-Carbon Development in Central Asia and the Caucasus: Hotspot Analysis and Needs Assessment. 2022. OECD.
5 Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey. 2019. National Statistical Committee of Kyrgyz Republic
6 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0001706X10001816
7 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1438463918310484



                                                                                                                                         Page 3
        The World Bank
        Kyrgyz Republic: Water Supply and Sanitation Universal Access Program (P500620)


institutions, and regulations (PIR). Between 2001 and 2013, the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic (GoKR) implemented
the Taza-Suu Rural Water Supply Program with support from the World Bank,8 Asian Development Bank (ADB), and the
Department for International Development of the United Kingdom. As a result, a cumulative 80 percent of the 1,819
villages in the country are now served with functioning water systems, though some expansion is needed. Similar trends
have been observed in access to basic sanitation, currently at 92.6 percent.9 These access improvements have led to
notable progress in public health: according to the Multiple Indicator Survey Cluster Snapshot of 2018, there has been a
steady decline in the infant and child mortality rate under five years old (from 28 to 20 deaths per 1,000 children) since
2000, which is highly correlated to WSS access. Thus, further investments and universal access to WSS have the potential
to significantly reduce the burden of public health disease on human capital and the country's economy.
7. In parallel, the GoKR carried out a series of capacity-building activities and pilots to enhance the PIR, with extensive
technical support from the World Bank. At the policy level, the Water Code was enacted in 2005, the Program for
Development of Drinking WSS Systems for Populated Localities (PDDWSSSPL) until 2026 was developed, and the design
norms and standards (‘SNiPs) were updated in 2023 to better align the sector's institutional framework with the local
government structures, promote quality infrastructure development, and enhance WSS service delivery efficiency and
cost recovery. Further, a rural WSS information system (SIASAR) was introduced, and extensive training programs were
implemented through multiple investment projects, targeting key sector institutions at the central and local levels, with
more than 1,000 sector professionals trained over the last ten years.
8. However, the lack of reliability and the low quality of services remains challenging, particularly in rural areas. Poor
infrastructure performance, low tariffs, and operational inefficiency significantly affect WSS service quality and
sustainability. Though addressing the access gap, most of the sector investments are not transformed into sustainable
services but enter into a recurrent cycle of reinvestment, requiring significant repairs and replacements, particularly in
small towns and rural areas. Data from SIASAR indicate that less than one-third of WSS service providers (municipal or
community-led) are fully operational, and only nine percent are financially sustainable.10 Recently established municipal
water enterprises (MWEs) perform better than the community drinking water user unions (CDWUUs) but struggle with
poor service management due to the lack of qualified staff and high turnover. Further, due to the low tariffs and low
willingness to pay for services, the operators' balance sheet in most villages is characterized by high volumes of debt and
uncollected arrears from unpaid water bills. This situation is exacerbated by the lack of metering, which leads to poor
water consumption practices. As a result, infrastructure performance is relatively low, with high non-revenue water (NRW)
(above 50 percent) and related poor water and service quality.
9. The situation with sanitation is dire, and the official figures mask prevailing service access limitations. In rural areas,
pit latrines and septic tanks are the most common containment solutions and fall primarily under the responsibility of
households, many of whom lack the financial resources11 and technical knowledge to construct and safely operate their
sanitation facility. Fecal sludge emptying and transport is managed by private or municipal tankers that dispose of the
sludge in either an inoperative wastewater treatment facility or a dumping site, with most of the excreta ending up in the
environment without treatment. The lack of sanitation systems is among the main contributing factors to poor public
health. Schools and health centers are required to have functioning sanitation facilities. However, many of these facilities,
usually outdoors, require significant upgrades and lack a sustainable operation and maintenance (O&M) structure. Aiyl




8 US$69.5 million were provided under the Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project (RWSSP-1 and 2, P110267)
9 https://www.sdg6data.org/en/country-or-area/kyrgyzstan
10 Based on SIASAR data for 2019-2020.
11 The implementation of the results-based incentive grant scheme for sanitation improvement in households under the Sustainable Rural Water

Supply and Sanitation Development Project showed low commitment of the households due to high costs (at least US$1,000).

                                                                                                                                          Page 4
           The World Bank
           Kyrgyz Republic: Water Supply and Sanitation Universal Access Program (P500620)


Okmotus (AOs)12 are responsible for financing the continued operation of these facilities, but they lack the resources to
do so.
10.     The poor performance of WSS services is particularly critical for women, who bear the burden of water provision
at the household level, yet they are not an integral part of policy development and decision-making. In the Kyrgyz
Republic, as is generally the case in developing countries, women are most likely to be responsible for fetching water for
households, and girls are nearly twice as likely as boys to bear the responsibility and spend more time doing it each day (a
disparity which could be exacerbated with climate change induced droughts).13,14 However, women are underrepresented
in the WSS sector in the Kyrgyz Republic. There are no women in managerial or technical positions, as confirmed by the
evidence from the ongoing World Bank-financed projects. This gender gap is mainly explained by sociocultural norms in
what is a male-dominated sector, few female role models in managerial positions, low salaries,15 lower enrollment of
women in the science, technology, engineering, and mathematics fields, low access to information and capacity
development16, and the likelihood of pursuing technical careers.17
11. The country is undergoing a series of PIR reforms to enhance service delivery and accelerate access to WSS. In early
2024, the sector structure was consolidated at the central level to combine policy, strategy development, and investment
planning under the new Ministry of Water Resources, Agriculture, and Processing Industry (MWRAPI). A State Institution
for the Development of Drinking Water Supply and Wastewater Disposal (SIDDWSWD)18 under the existing Water
Resources Service replaced the Department of Drinking Water Supply and Wastewater Disposal (DDWSWD) on the overall
sector mandate, including policy development and service regulation. Consultations are ongoing for the proposed
delegated service delivery model that aggregates the management, operation, and maintenance of WSS services into
district water and sanitation service providers (DWSSPs), with two pilots currently being established in Naryn and Suzak
districts through government financing. The sector restructuring is expected to streamline human resources and technical
capacity, leverage economies of scale, and promote financial efficiency. The aggregation at the district level will help
optimize revenues and finance necessary investments to improve operational efficiency and extend services to unserved
areas. These water sector changes are aligned with the ongoing administrative-territorial reform19 on the consolidation of
AOs, which started in 2022 with pilots in the Issyk-Kul and Naryn regions and halved the number of AOs in 2024.
12. Further PIR improvements are required to reduce the sector's fragmentation, develop the service delivery functions
and enhance the climate resilience and financial sustainability of WSS services. Although WSS is now consolidated under
a single ministry, the Community Development and Investment Agency (ARIS) still manages a large part of the
infrastructure investments, though SIDDWSWD is gradually increasing its role in investment management. Water tariffs
are agreed with the Anti-Monopoly Regulation Service (the entity responsible for economic regulation) under the Ministry
of Economy and Commerce and approved by local Keneshes.20 MWRAPI is in the process of mainstreaming infrastructure
investment planning (with the establishment of an investment coordination unit) and playing a role in defining cost
recovery tariffs at the DWSSP level. Drinking water quality regulation is under the Ministry of Health. Service provision is
decentralized to urban WSS utilities in the cities and district capitals through municipal vodokanals and in rural areas
through MWEs and CDWUUs, many of which lack the capacity to manage WSS services. Thus, it is critical that the
regulatory instruments operationalizing the new WSS law, including a clear set of guiding principles for service delegation,
cost-reflective tariff setting, and service regulation, are adopted.

12 Local self-governance bodies
13 https://www.who.int/publications/m/item/progress-on-household-drinking-water--sanitation-and-hygiene-2000-2022---special-focus-on-gender
14
     National Statistical Committee and UNICEF. 2019. Kyrgyzstan Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey 2018, Survey Findings Report. Bishkek
15 Anecdotal evidence suggests that the average salary of the rural service provider staff is 2-3 times less than the average salary of a teacher.
16 Practical Outlook on Gender Issues in the Water Resources Sector (2020). http://cakn.online/wp-content/uploads/collection_eng.pdf
17 World Bank Gender Data Portal. 201 - in the Kyrgyz Republic, only 18 percent of engineering graduates are women, the lowest in Central Asia.
18 The DDWSWD was transferred to the MWRAPI by resolution #98 of the Cabinet of Ministers dated March 7, 2024.
19 Decree #370 of the President of the Kyrgyz Republic, dated December 29, 2023.



                                                                                                                                                     Page 5
         The World Bank
         Kyrgyz Republic: Water Supply and Sanitation Universal Access Program (P500620)


13. The GoKR intends to secure potable water supply to all by 2030 and improve sanitation in priority areas in line with
its National Development Strategy, the 2018-2026 PDDWSSSPL of the Kyrgyz Republic and its successor. At the current
investment pace, in the most optimistic scenario, the country would likely cover only 88 percent of rural settlements with
basic access to water by 2030. Such a scenario does not consider the risk of falling back, which is high for rural water
supply systems with no sound management structures and sustainable operational financing mechanisms. Thus, fully
realizing the country's universal WSS access goals requires (i) an accelerated implementation strategy to deliver at least
twice the current annual sector investment and (ii) sector reforms focused on service delivery capacity to enhance the
sustainability of WSS. Lessons from the implementation of multiple investment programs, including World Bank-financed
WSS projects in the country,21 point to the need for (i) a better alignment between investment models and financing
mechanisms to incentivize improvements in operational, financial, and climate sustainability; (ii) a results-oriented
institutional capacity development approach to enable skills development on investment planning and implementation,
and improve service delivery; and (iii) improvements to the regulatory framework to enable cost-reflective tariffs.
14. Achieving universal access and enhancing climate resilience will require a significant scale-up and consistency in the
WSS investments through a program focused on closing the access gap and strengthening the sustainability of prior and
new investments within the next ten years. Several development partners, including the Asian Infrastructure Investment
Bank (AIIB), the Islamic Development Bank (IsDB), the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) Fund, the
ADB, and the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC), are willing to step up their engagement and join the
World Bank in this transformative program through blended parallel or co-financing arrangements within the fiscal limits
for the country. The World Bank financing will include capacity building and program management interventions to de-
risk the project at all stages, improve readiness, and crowd in more financing as needed. These include preparation and
implementation of designs, safeguards, and fiduciary arrangements for the program.

 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
 Development Objective(s) (From PAD)
 15. PrDO statement. The proposed PrDO of the WASUAP is to provide universal access and improve the sustainability
 of water supply and sanitation services in the Kyrgyz Republic.
 16. PDO Statement. The project development objective (PDO) is to increase access to WSS services and improve the
 service delivery capacity in selected areas of the Kyrgyz Republic.

 Key Results
 17. PrDO Level indicators. At the end of the 10-year Program, the outcomes will be measured by the following
 indicators:
      • People provided with at least basic water (of which % is safely managed (Baseline: 90.8%, target: >99%); 22
      • People provided with at least basic sanitation (of which % is safely managed) (Baseline 92.6%, target: 95%);
      • Percentage of the water supply and sanitation service providers achieving and maintaining an operating cost
        coverage ratio of at least 100 percent (Baseline: 9%, target: 50%); and
      • People with enhanced resilience to climate risks in the Kyrgyz Republic as a result of program interventions
         (Baseline: 0, target: 300,000).



21 Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Development Project (P154778); Climate Resilient Water Services Project (P173734)
22 The JMP classifies countries estimated to have achieved >99% service coverage as ‘nearly universal’, recognizing the physical, and economic and

financial limitations for last-mile coverage.

                                                                                                                                             Page 6
        The World Bank
        Kyrgyz Republic: Water Supply and Sanitation Universal Access Program (P500620)



 18. PDO Level Indicators. The following PDO indicators will measure the achievement of the first phase objectives and
 progress toward the PrDO at the end of the Project.
      (i) Outcome 1: To increase access to improved WSS services:
           • People provided with at least basic water (Number), of which % is (safely managed, female)
           • People provided with at least basic sanitation (Number), of which % is (safely managed, female)23
           • People with enhanced resilience to climate risk (Number)
      (ii) Outcome 2: To improve the service delivery capacity:
      • Water supply service providers with an operating cost coverage ratio of at least 100% (Percentage)

  D. Project Description
19. The MPA is structured as a 10-year engagement through three IPF operations/phases to achieve the PrDO. The
Project Development Objective (PDO) for each phase and PrDO target the same topics, and the phases are progressive;
each phase maintains a similar structure and builds towards the achievement of the overall PrDO. The structure of the
MPA is uninterrupted to ensure that the Program's activities continue without a gap in the rollout of the key activities.
The total Program's estimated cost is US$400 million, with a proposed IDA financing envelope of US$200 million. This
includes (i) a five-year Phase 1 (2024-2029) of focused investment covering unserved and underserved rural settlements,
piloting the aggregated district-level service delivery structure and enhancing the capacity using performance-based
grants (PBGs), few and simpler sanitation interventions, complemented by extensive analysis and design of more complex
sanitation solutions, including paving the way for potential private sector engagement; (ii) a four-year Phase 2 (2028-
2032) to scale-up the investments, shifting to water supply infrastructure upgrade and expansion, priority sewerage
investments and scale-up the service delivery models, with a focus on operational and financial efficiency, and climate
adaptation; and (iii) a three-year Phase 3 (2031-2034) to scale-up sanitation investments and consolidate the water supply
improvements, with an emphasis on knowledge exchange and appropriation of the policies, plans, and tools developed
under the previous two phases.
20. Phase 1 (US$165 million) will cover the first batch of the Program's WSS infrastructure investments in unserved and
underserved settlements in the least served regions and districts within those regions without ongoing or planned
investments. Phase 1 will finance the construction and upgrade of water supply systems, and priority household and social
institutions' sanitation infrastructure (containment). Phase 1 will include a PBG-structured capacity-building program for
four DWSSPs to enable them to independently expand and enhance the quality of services within their district. The project
will also finance improvements to existing fecal sludge management (FSM) services led by both private and municipal
operators and the design of sanitation interventions to be implemented in the subsequent phases. Phase 1 envisages the
establishment of a learning program to document lessons and inform the program implementation. Further, the project
will finance program structuring support, including outreach and mobilization, to help attract financing for the subsequent
phases.

Project Components
21. Component 1 – Water Supply Investments (US$117.0 million, of which US$36.5 million IDA credit, US$7.5 million
IDA shorter maturity loan, US$50.0 million co-financing credit from the AIIB, US$3.0 million parallel financing grant
from AIIB and US$20.0 million co-financing credit from the OPEC Fund) will finance the construction and upgrade of
water supply systems in 109 rural villages and small towns in Chui, Issyk-Kul, and Osh regions, benefitting around
373,000 people. Specifically, Subcomponent 1.1 – Water Supply Access to the Unserved will finance the design and

23 All the sanitation beneficiaries are expected to benefit from water supply improvements. To prevent double counting, these will be counted in

the overall number of water beneficiaries. To track progress on sanitation, this indicator is maintained at the PDO level.

                                                                                                                                              Page 7
       The World Bank
       Kyrgyz Republic: Water Supply and Sanitation Universal Access Program (P500620)


construction of climate-resilient water supply systems in 33 currently unserved settlements (around 66,000 beneficiaries);
and Subcomponent 1.2 – Water Supply Upgrades will finance the design, rehabilitation, and upgrade of water supply
systems in 76 villages and district centers in Aksu, Alai, Kara-Kulja, Kara Suu, Panfilov, Sokuluk, and Uzgen districts (around
307,000 beneficiaries). Engineering designs for this component will be funded through the US$ 3.0 million AIIB grant.
22. Component 2 – Sanitation Development (US$28 million IDA credit) will finance priority onsite sanitation
investments, including household and public sanitation infrastructure, FSM services improvements, and technical
assistance (TA) to design more complex sewerage improvements. Specifically, the project will finance: (a) the construction,
rehabilitation/retrofitting of decentralized sanitation systems, including toilet upgrades for vulnerable households and
selected public institutions (schools, kindergartens, hospitals, and health centers), in all 109 target settlements; (b) TA,
equipment, and works for FSM services improvement; (c) the implementation of a sanitation marketing and behavioral
change strategy to incentivize the adoption and use of improved WASH and behaviors; and (d) TA for the design of
sewerage systems in priority settlements, aiming to reduce environmental pollution and enhance the resilience of
sewerage infrastructure to the impacts of climate change, such as increased flooding, and extreme weather events.
23. Component 3 – Performance-based Service Improvement Program (US$15 million, of which US$6 million IDA credit
and U$S9 million SDC grant) will (i) provide PBGs for DWSSPs to finance WSS service improvements (including NRW
reductions) and enhance the sustainability and drought resilience of WSS services, and (ii) finance the professional and
vocational development program (PVDP). Sub-component 3.1 – Service Delivery Improvements will finance PBGs for four
DWSSPs (out of the ten planned for Phase 1) and will cover the start-up activities and operational and structural
investments that are critical to enabling the operational and financial efficiency of the DWSSPs, and the resilience of water
supply systems against climate variability. Funding for the PBGs will cover activities from the DWSSPs’ institutional and
service development plans and will focus on increasing service management capacity, innovative solutions for service
expansion and climate resilience, asset management and operations, digital solutions for customer services and feedback,
tariff-setting procedures, financial management, and service monitoring and reporting. Sub-Component 3.2 – Professional
and Vocational Development Program will finance the establishment of a national water training center hosted at the
SIDDWSWD, with a dedicated certificate-oriented, long-term capacity development program in response to the need to
create a pipeline of water sector professionals with the skills to plan and manage efficient and sustainable water services.
The PVDP will also carry out extensive outreach and provide training scholarships to attract women to the water
sector and enhance their technical and leadership skills.
24. Component 4 – MPA Program Structuring and Management and institutional development support (US$9 million,
of which US$8 million IDA credit, and US$1 million grant parallel financing from AIIB, and in-kind counterpart financing)
will finance TA and institutional capacity building for the establishment of a program management framework and WSS
infrastructure development capacity, including: (a) TA and training for the development of the program management tools
to enhance coordination and program implementation efficiency, and the M&E systems for program results tracking,
sector coordination, and annual reviews; (b) TA for the preparation of investment packages, engineering design, and E&S
instruments for future interventions planned for the subsequent phases of the MPA; (c) Incremental operating costs, TA,
and equipment for program management; (d) TA, equipment, and services to support a knowledge development program
and communications strategy for the MPA; (e) TA for the preparation of service contract agreements between the
operator and asset owner and the PBG independent verification; and (f) TA for targeted policy regulations, particularly
focused on the implementation of the new service aggregation model and tariff framework.
25. Component 5 – Contingent Emergency Response (CERC - US$0). This component will provide preparedness and rapid
response measures to address disaster, emergency, and/or catastrophic events in accordance with the applicable CERC
Manual.

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate

                                                                                                                          Page 8
       The World Bank
       Kyrgyz Republic: Water Supply and Sanitation Universal Access Program (P500620)


 Legal Operational Policies                                                           Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                          Yes
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                    No


Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts


26. The Project’s environmental and social risk was assessed as Substantial at the Concept stage and remains the same
at the Appraisal stage, with Substantial for the Environment and Moderate for Social. Environmental and Social
Standards (ESSs) 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, and 10 are considered relevant for the Project. The overall environmental and social
impacts of the Project investments are expected to be generally positive. Improved WSS services, including their
sustainability and climate change resilience, will benefit the public at large as well as vulnerable groups. They will also
have direct benefits to public health through a reduction in the transmission of water-borne diseases. The Project's
environmental risks and impacts are mainly associated with the construction of new and rehabilitation of water supply
schemes and infrastructure under Component 1 and the construction and/or rehabilitation and/or retrofitting of a
contaminant sanitation system (i.e., toilet and septic tank upgrades for vulnerable groups and selected public institutions
such as schools, kindergartens, health centers, etc.) under Component 2. Such construction is expected to be small and
medium scale with site-specific impacts. The project will utilize groundwater as the main supply, and its use will need to
be managed to ensure sustainable withdrawal rates.

 E. Implementation

 Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

27. The institutional and implementation arrangements are built on the experience in the previous projects and aligned
with ongoing institutional reforms to strengthen the sustainability of service delivery. Key institutions involved in the
implementation include the MoF, the MWRAPI and its SIDDWSWD, DWSSPs, and local self-government bodies (AOs) at
the local level. The SIDDWSWD will coordinate the project and establish the required capacity at the regional and local
level for service delivery, including implementing reforms and the PBGs to establish autonomous service providers and,
where feasible, public-private partnerships. The existing PIU of the SIDDWSWD responsible for the implementation of the
ongoing CRWSP will be expanded and further strengthened to manage the proposed program. At the district level,
technical teams will be established within the DWSSPs to support project implementation, and M&E.
 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Odete Duarte Muximpua
   Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

   Verena Schaidreiter
   Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist



                                                                                                                       Page 9
     The World Bank
     Kyrgyz Republic: Water Supply and Sanitation Universal Access Program (P500620)


Borrower/Client/Recipient
 Kyrgyz Republic

Implementing Agencies
 State Institution for the Development of Drinking Water Supply and Wastewater Disposal
 Azamat Shadmanov
 Director
 enesay24.info@yandex.ru

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                    Odete Duarte Muximpua, Verena Schaidreiter

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:               Winston Yu                            06-May-2024

Country Director:                       Hugh Riddell                          24-Oct-2024




                                                                                            Page 10
