Public Disclosure Authorized
                                         The World Bank
                                         Kyrgyz Republic: Water and Sanitation Universal Access Program(P500620)




                                  @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                       Project Information Document (PID)

                                                        Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 19-Dec-2023 | Report No: PID149




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Dec 20, 2023                                                                                      Page 1 of 10
          The World Bank
          Kyrgyz Republic: Water and Sanitation Universal Access Program(P500620)


   @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
   BASIC INFORMATION


   A. Basic Project Data
   Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                 Operation Name
   Kyrgyz Republic, Kyrgyz        P500620                      Kyrgyz Republic: Water Supply and Sanitation Universal
   Republic                                                    Access Program
   Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
   EUROPE AND CENTRAL             01-Apr-2024                  31-Jul-2024                   Water
   ASIA
   Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                  Implementing Agency
   Investment Project             Kyrgyz Republic              Department of Drinking
   Financing (IPF)                                             Water Supply and
                                                               Wastewater Disposal
                                                               (DDWSWD)

  Proposed Development Objective(s)
   The project development objective (PDO) is to increase access to improved WSS services in selected areas of the
   Kyrgyz Republic

   @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
   PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

   Maximizing Finance for Development

   Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   Yes
   Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             No

   SUMMARY
     Total Operation Cost                                                                                           400.00

     Total Financing                                                                                                100.00
                 of which IBRD/IDA                                                                              100.00
     Financing Gap                                                                                                  300.00

   DETAILS
     World Bank Group Financing
        International Development Association (IDA)                                                             100.00


Dec 20, 2023                                                                                                        Page 2 of 10
          The World Bank
          Kyrgyz Republic: Water and Sanitation Universal Access Program(P500620)


          IDA Credit                                                                                                                            100.00

   @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
 Environmental and Social Risk Classification                                     Concept Review Decision
 Substantial                                                                      The review did authorize the preparation to continue



  Other Decision (as needed)

  B. Introduction and Context
  Country Context
 1. The Kyrgyz Republic is a lower-middle-income country with strong but volatile economic growth. Over the last 20
 years, the country's economic growth pattern has been uneven, with an average Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth
 rate of 3.13 percent. The economic gains have resulted in a dramatic, though fitful, reduction in poverty, reflected in a
 decrease in monetary poverty headcount from 36.6 percent in 2013 to 20.1 percent in 2019.1 However, this trend was
 reversed by the Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak, related economic fall-out, and political upheavals,
 compounded by high global food and fuel prices, which increased domestic inflation, largely affecting the poor
 households, mostly residing in rural areas. Although the economic growth reached 6.3 percent in 2022 (much stronger
 than expected), driven by gold production, agriculture, and the services sector, the country growth forecast is less
 optimistic, with a moderate 3.5 percent in 2023 and persistent vulnerability to market fluctuations and external shocks
 due to the economy's heavy dependence on resource-based commodities and remittances. Further, the country's
 development strategy,2 though inclusive and largely reformist, is vulnerable to political instability and related social unrest.
 2. The country's economy is highly vulnerable to climate change and heavily dependent on climate-sensitive sectors.
 The country's water, energy, and agricultural sectors are the most vulnerable to climate change, as they face a wide variety
 of natural and climate-related hazards, such as earthquakes, droughts, mudslides, and floods. The country ranked 52nd in
 German Watch's annual Climate Risk Index, and positions it as the most at-risk country in the Central Asia region.3 Between
 1991 and 2011, the country suffered at least US$14 million in average annual agricultural losses, almost entirely
 attributable to drought and water shortages.4 The annual average population affected by floods is about 27,000, with an
 annual average loss of US$73 million.5 Projections indicate that the country could experience up to 5.6°C of warming—
 considerably above the global average rise of 3.7°C—by 2090s, and the annual probability of severe drought is expected
 to double from 14 percent in 2020–2039 to 31 percent in 2040–2059. 6 Climate change will also increase sanitation-related
 risks to public health and, with floods and droughts expected to become more intense and frequent, will exacerbate the
 spread and transmission of water-related diseases. Climate vulnerability disproportionally affects the poor and vulnerable,
 with women, elderly, and children being at the highest risk, especially in rural areas, due to limited access to basic services.
 3. The deficit in infrastructure and services is hindering the Kyrgyz Republic's development. The country's
 infrastructure quality is relatively poor compared to its regional peers.7 While there has been an increase in infrastructure

 1 Poverty and Vulnerability in the Kyrgyz Republic. 2022. World Bank
 2 In October 2021, the GoKR launched a medium-term development program (2021-2026) with the goal of “leaving no one behind.”
 3 https://www.germanwatch.org/sites/germanwatch.org/files/Global%20Climate%20Risk%20Index%202019_2.pdf
 4 Kyrgyz Republic. 2016. Third National Communication of the Kyrgyz Republic under the UNFCCC. Bishkek.
 5 Country Risk Profile: Kyrgyz Republic. 2022. Central Asia Regional Economic Cooperation Program.
 6 Climate Risk Profile: Kyrgyz Republic. 2021. World Bank Group and Asian Development Bank.
 7 Sustainable Infrastructure for Low-Carbon Development in Central Asia and the Caucasus: Hotspot Analysis and Needs Assessment. 2022. OECD.




Dec 20, 2023                                                                                                                                    Page 3 of 10
          The World Bank
          Kyrgyz Republic: Water and Sanitation Universal Access Program(P500620)


 investments, leading to universal access to electricity8 and significant improvements in water and transport coverage,
 quality of services remains a major challenge, particularly in rural areas. Further, the infrastructure and service gap
 between urban and rural areas is often a source of social conflicts, particularly in mining communities,9 which lack access
 to basic services. Water and sanitation investments have historically lagged behind, at one percent of the total country
 investments compared to 54 percent in energy and 39 percent in transport projects (between 2000 and 2018). Although
 the country's development strategy strongly focuses on infrastructure financing, a more balanced and greener approach
 is needed to enhance climate resilience, with more investments in climate-vulnerable sectors.
  Sectoral and Institutional Context
 4. Water supply and sanitation (WSS) are essential enablers of socio-economic growth, and the country has made
 substantial progress in increasing access to WSS services in the past two decades. With an estimated 94 percent access
 to improved water sources, the absolute number of unserved people decreased by more than two-thirds between 2000
 and 2022. Despite this progress, large urban‐rural and intraregional disparities in access rates remain: in 2022, 77 percent
 of households across the country had access to safely managed water supply services, and only 67 percent in rural areas.
 Similar trends have been observed in access to basic sanitation currently at 98 percent (99 percent rural, 97 percent
 urban).10 While these figures may mask continued service delivery challenges, the access improvements have led to
 notable progress in public health. According to the Multiple Indicator Survey Cluster Snapshot of 2018, there has been a
 steady decline since 2000 in the infant mortality and child mortality rate under five years old, from 28 to 20 deaths per
 1,000 children, which is correlated to WSS access. However, the lack of reliability and the low quality of services remains
 challenging, particularly in rural areas; the impact of poor WSS is estimated to cost the country US$120 million per year.11
 5. The sector's institutional framework is fragmented, with the service delivery functions still underdeveloped. At the
 central level, the mandate for WSS services including policies is anchored within the Department of Drinking Water Supply
 and Wastewater Disposal (DDWSWD) under the State Agency for Architecture, Construction, Housing, and Communal
 Services (Gosstroy). However, a large part of the sector infrastructure investments are managed by the Community
 Development and Investment Agency (ARIS). The sector's economic regulation is the responsibility of the Anti-Monopoly
 Regulation Service under the Ministry of Economy and Commerce, and while tariffs are agreed with the Anti-monopoly
 Regulation Service, they are approved by local Keneshes.12 The Department for Disease Prevention and Sanitary and
 Epidemiological Expertise under the Ministry of Health monitors the quality of potable water. The Ministry of Natural
 Resources, Environment, and Technical Supervision is responsible, among others, for protecting natural resources,
 including the effluent standards for wastewater discharge and enforcement. Service provision is decentralized to urban
 WSS utilities in the major cities and district capitals through municipal vodokanals and in rural areas through small
 municipal water enterprises (MWEs) and community drinking water user unions (CDWUU), many of which lack the
 capacity to manage, finance and sustain the WSS services under their responsibility.
 6. Poor infrastructure performance, low tariffs, and operational inefficiency significantly affect the quality and
 sustainability of WSS services. Although there is a gradual increase in sector investments, most WSS infrastructure
 remains dilapidated, requiring significant repairs and replacements. Most service providers hardly generate enough
 revenue to cover operations and do not cover asset maintenance and replacement. Due to low tariffs and unwillingness
 to pay for services, the operators' balance sheet is characterized by high volumes of debt and uncollected arrears from
 unpaid water bills, including from large customers. This situation is exacerbated by the lack of metering, which leads to
 poor water consumption practices. As a result, infrastructure performance is relatively low, with high non-revenue water

 8 Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey. 2019. National Statistical Committee of Kyrgyz Republic
 9 https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2214790X20302847
 10 https://www.sdg6data.org/en/country-or-area/kyrgyzstan
 11 Economic losses due to lack of improved water supply consider health care costs, productivity costs and premature death. Source: World Bank. 2019.

 Central Asia: Regional Water Security (internal report). Washington, DC.


Dec 20, 2023                                                                                                                                Page 4 of 10
          The World Bank
          Kyrgyz Republic: Water and Sanitation Universal Access Program(P500620)


 (above 50 percent) and related poor water and service quality. Further, the lack of qualified staff, low incentives to work
 in the sector, and high staff turnover lead to poor service management.
 7. The country is undergoing a series of institutional reforms in the water sector aimed at enhancing service delivery
 and accelerating access to WSS. At the institutional level, a State-owned enterprise (SOE) ‘Kyrgyz Suu’ is currently being
 established under the DDWSWD for management, operation and maintenance (O&M) of water supply systems in rural
 areas through its branches in 40 rayon centers, which will gradually replace existing rural service providers in the coming
 years. The underlying objective of the sector restructuring is to improve service delivery by consolidating human resources
 and technical capacity, leveraging economies of scale, and promoting financial sustainability. Such reforms are expected
 to create companies that generate enough revenues to finance necessary capital investments to improve operational
 efficiency and extend services to unserved areas. This reform is aligned with the ongoing administrative-territorial reform
 on consolidating local self-governance bodies (Aiyl Okmotus [AOs]), which started in 2022 with pilots in Issyk-Kul and
 Naryn regions. At the policy level, the WSS Law, and the design norms and standards (‘SNiPs’) are being updated to better
 align the institutional framework with the sector development needs.
 8. Meeting the 2030 global and national goals will require a significant expansion and acceleration of WSS investments
 through a programmatic approach. The National Development Strategies and the country's global-level commitments
 envisage universal access to WSS by 2030. At the current investment pace, in the most optimistic scenario, the country
 would likely cover only 88 percent of the settlements with basic access to water by 2030. Such a scenario does not consider
 the risk of falling back, which is relatively high for rural water supply schemes with no sound management structures and
 operational financing mechanisms in place. Thus, fully realizing the country's universal WSS access goals requires (i) an
 accelerated implementation strategy to deliver at least two times the current annual sector investment; and (ii) a series
 of reforms to enhance investment planning and implementation capacity, strengthen the management, delivery, and
 financial sustainability of services. Lessons from the implementation of multiple investment programs, including the World
 Bank-financed WSS projects in the country,13 point to the need for (i) a better alignment between investment models and
 financing mechanisms to incentivize improvements in operational, financial, and climate sustainability; (ii) a structured
 institutional capacity development approach to enable skills development on investment planning, and service delivery at
 both central and local levels, particularly in rural areas; and (iii) improvements to the regulatory framework to enable cost-
 reflective tariffs that promote service delivery efficiency and takes into account affordability.
 9. Given the urgency to increase access to improved WSS, the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic (GoKR) requested
 the World Bank to consider financing a WSS program to secure potable water supply and improved sanitation in priority
 areas. Several development partners, including the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, the Islamic Development Bank,
 the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, and the Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs, have
 demonstrated interest in joining the Bank in this transformative program. However, the country's fiscal constraints and
 borrowing capacity may limit the extent to which additional financiers would be willing to commit resources to the
 program. To meet these concerns, the Bank financing will finance the capacity building and program management
 interventions required to de-risk the project, including the preparation and implementation of safeguards and fiduciary
 arrangements requirements for the program.
  Relationship to CPF
 10. The proposed investments are aligned with the new World Bank's Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the
 Kyrgyz Republic for Fiscal Year 2024–202814. The project contributes to Objective 2.1 (increase access and efficiency in
 the water and agriculture sectors). It supports greener and more inclusive growth through investments and reforms
 targeting WSS services, focusing on improving operational efficiency and reliability and reducing regional disparities in

 13 Sustainable Rural WSS Development Project (SRWSSDP, P154778); Climate Resilient Water Services Project (CRWSP, 173734)
 14 Report No. 182689-KG, discussed by the Board on October 31, 2023.




Dec 20, 2023                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 10
          The World Bank
          Kyrgyz Republic: Water and Sanitation Universal Access Program(P500620)


 service delivery. The project has a clear poverty focus, including specific design elements to target and extend benefits to
 the poorest and most vulnerable households, and contributes to reducing gender disparities in rural communities by
 improving access to water, thus enabling women to engage in other economic activities.
 11. The investments are well aligned with the World Bank Twin Goals and the Country Development Strategy and are
 consistent with the country's Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC). The GoKR aims for universal access to at least
 basic WSS services by 2030, in line with its National Strategy for Sustainable Development of the Kyrgyz Republic for 2018–
 204015 and the new WSS Law. Achieving universal access to WSS will have transformational effects on the country, given
 that reliable and affordable access to clean water is an essential precondition for a healthy population and productive
 economy. These WSS investments will particularly benefit the country's rural population, which relies on unimproved
 water sources and is exposed to a high risk of contamination and recurrent water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH)-related
 diseases. Beyond the direct benefits of public health, the investments are expected to reduce the gap in living conditions
 between rural and urban areas by targeting the poorest and most vulnerable. WSS improvements in the country, including
 enhanced operational efficiency, are consistent with the co-benefits resulting from the mitigation and adaptation actions
 identified in the country's NDC. It pledges to reduce greenhouse gas emissions (GHG) emissions by 11.49-13.75 percent
 below business-as-usual levels by 2030, rising to between 29 and 30.89 percent with international support. Water is
 among the priority sectors for resilience building, including improving the climatic resilience of WSS infrastructure.

  C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
 12. The proposed Program Development Objective (PrDO) of the Water and Sanitation Universal Access Program
 (WASUAP) is to enable universal access to improved WSS services in the Kyrgyz Republic
 13. The project development objective (PDO) of Phase 1 is to increase access to improved water supply and sanitation
 services in selected areas of the Kyrgyz Republic.
  Key Results (From PCN)
 14. The Program will focus on three key results areas: (i) increased access to improved water supply services;
 (ii) increased access to improved sanitation services; and (iii) improved WSS financial and operational performance and
 climate change adaptation. Additional intermediary indicators will be identified during project preparation to regularly
 monitor progress and identify additional steps and adjustments to achieve the PrDO.
 15. At the end of the 10-year Program, the following outcomes are expected: (i) 544,000 new people gaining access to
 improved water services; (ii) 406,100 new people gaining access to improved sanitation services; (iii) 50 percent of the
 water supply schemes achieving and maintaining an operating cost coverage ratio of at least 100 percent; and (iv) U$$200
 million in additional capital mobilized for WSS in the Kyrgyz Republic, including from other donors and private sector.

  D. Concept Description
 16. The MPA program is structured as a 10-year engagement through three IPF operations/phases to achieve the PrDO.
 The Program includes: (i) a four-year Phase 1 (2024-2028) of focused investment covering unserved rural settlements
 while consolidating the service delivery structure into regional SOEs on a pilot basis, establishing the regulatory framework
 and enhancing the institutional capacity of service providers using a performance-based approach; (ii) a three-year Phase
 2 (2028-2031) to scale-up the investments, with a shift to WSS infrastructure upgrade and expansion and scale-up the
 service delivery models, with a focus on operational and financial efficiency, and climate adaptation; and (iii) a three-year
 Phase 3 (2030-2033) to consolidate the scaled-up activities and place a strong emphasis on knowledge exchange and
 widespread appropriation of the policies, plans, and tools developed under the previous two phases.

 15 Decree No. 221 of the President of the Kyrgyz Republic dated October 31, 2018.




Dec 20, 2023                                                                                                         Page 6 of 10
          The World Bank
          Kyrgyz Republic: Water and Sanitation Universal Access Program(P500620)


 17. This Phase 1 will focus on three strategic areas: (i) establish a framework for WSS infrastructure investments and
 capacity development in the country; (ii) progressively develop climate-resilient WSS infrastructure and WSS access in
 unserved rural areas of the Kyrgyz Republic, and (ii) test and quick start the implementation of a PBG financing mechanism
 to incentivize service delivery efficiency and enable climate adaptation.
 18. The Proposed project will comprise four components. The expected total number of beneficiaries under Components
 2 and 3 is estimated at 263,000 people living in 81 villages including in 3 small towns in Chui, Issyk-Kul, Osh and Batken
 regions. In addition, the Project will indirectly benefit the existing customers from the utility management-related
 activities under Component 4.
 19. Component 1 – MPA Program Structuring and Management (US$10 million, of which US$7.5 million IDA and US$2.5
 million to mobilized by the GoKR) will support the establishment of a program management framework and WSS
 infrastructure development capacity. Specifically, the component will finance (i) Technical Assistance (TA) and training for
 the development of the program management tools, including standard environmental and social instruments,
 implementation manuals and protocols, to enhance coordination and Program implantation efficiency, and a monitoring
 and evaluation (M&E) program; (ii) TA for the preparation of investment packages, engineering design, and safeguards
 instruments for future interventions planned for the subsequent phases of the MPA; (iii) TA and equipment for program
 management, including incremental costs; and (iv) TA, equipment and services to support a knowledge development
 program and communications strategy for the MPA.
 20. Component 2 – Water Supply Investments (US$100 million, of which US$50 million IDA and US$50 million mobilized
 by the GoKR) will finance the construction of new water supply systems in unserved rural villages in priority country areas.
 This component will focus on priority investments in Chui, and Issyk-Kul, Osh and Batken regions and finance water source
 development, treatment, transmission and distribution networks, and household connections in the selected priority
 areas. Wherever feasible, the project will maximize the use of gravity systems, install energy-efficient pumping equipment
 and explore the use of renewable energy solutions such as solar energy to operate them in order to minimize GHG
 emissions. The scheme design will follow a participatory approach, with consultations involving disabled people, building
 on local knowledge and historical data. Complementary institutional support activities are defined under Component 4.
 These activities, together with the infrastructure investments, will support water system operations to enable sustainable
 service delivery. Component 2 also includes an allocation for contingencies to address potential unanticipated technical
 challenges that would hinder the achievement of water supply objectives in the project areas.
 21. Component 3 – Sanitation Development (US$70, of which US$27.5 million IDA and US$42.5 million mobilized by
 the GoKR) will finance the construction and/or rehabilitation/retrofitting of a decentralized sanitation system, including
 toilet upgrades for vulnerable households and selected public institutions (schools, kindergartens, health centers),
 conveyance, and wastewater treatment and reuse where technically, financially, and environmentally feasible. It will also
 finance TA, training, and equipment for developing fecal sludge management services, including collection, transport, and
 treatment. Further, the Project will finance the development and implementation of a sanitation marketing and behavioral
 change strategy to incentivize the adoption and use of improved WASH at the household level and public institutions.
 22. Component 4 – Performance-based Capacity Building Program (US$20 million, of which US$15 million IDA and US$
 5 million mobilized by the GoKR) aims at enhancing institutional and service delivery capacity at the central, regional,
 district, and scheme levels. Specifically, the component will finance PBGs to selected water sector institutions to
 implement their institutional and WSS services development plans to improve the sustainability of WSS services. The PBG
 managed centrally by the DDWSWD will at the central level: (i) support the establishment of the national SOE "Kyrgyz-
 Suu" and (ii) the implementation of the "Professional and Vocational Development Program"16 – a certificate-oriented,

 16 Introduced through the SRWSSDP-AF1. This activity will be coordinated with the proposed “Water Research Center of Excellence” to be established under

 the Higher Education Quality and Innovation Project (HEQIP, P178592).

Dec 20, 2023                                                                                                                                   Page 7 of 10
          The World Bank
          Kyrgyz Republic: Water and Sanitation Universal Access Program(P500620)


 long-term capacity development program – in response to the need for developing and creating a pipeline of professional
 staff and skilled workers in the water sector. At the regional and district level, it will support (i) the start-up activities and
 service improvement investments in selected regional and district-level SOEs to enable operational and financial efficiency
 and service expansion. The investments will focus on increasing SOE's planning and management capacity and operations,
 including innovative solutions for enhancing climate resilience, asset management and operations, customer services,
 tariff-setting procedures, financial management, and sector monitoring and reporting. At the local level, the component
 will build the capacity of local authorities (AOs) and rural water service providers responsible for water service delivery in
 the project areas. This will include training on topics and support for tariff setting, billing and collection systems, O&M,
 water quality testing, customer relations, human resources, and commercial management. It will also support the
 preparation of service contract agreements between the operator and asset owner.


   @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
   Legal Operational Policies                                                                Triggered?
   Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                               Yes
   Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                         No


   Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts



 23. The Project’s environmental and social risk is assessed as Substantial at the Concept stage, with substantial for the
 Environment and Moderate for Social. The risk ratings will be reassessed at the Appraisal stage once the subproject
 designs have been determined and preliminary environmental and social assessment is conducted. Environmental and
 Social Standards (ESSs) 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, and 10 are considered relevant for the Project. The overall environmental and
 social impacts of the Project investments will be largely positive through improved Water Supply and Sanitation (WSS)
 services, including their sustainability and climate change resilience, which will benefit the public at large as well as
 vulnerable groups. Improved WSS will also have direct benefits to public health through a reduction in the transmission
 of water-borne diseases. The Project's main environmental risks and impacts are linked to the civil works to be undertaken
 under Components 2 (water supply) and 3 (sanitation development). Expected risks and potential impacts during the
 construction phase include, amongst others: (i) increased pollution due to the generation of hazardous and non-hazardous
 waste (oil, paints, asbestos); dust, noise, and vibration; accidental spills of fuel and lubricants; (ii) traffic congestion, (iii)
 ecosystems disturbance, and (iv) occupational and community health and safety issues. During the Operation and
 Maintenance (O&M) phase, community health and safety risks will be associated with the generated wastewater and fecal
 sludge from the sanitation facilities (pathogens, odors, soil, and water pollution) if not adequately/appropriately managed.
 The social risks are expected to be due to poor implementation, such as social exclusion risks due to the adoption of tariffs
 and required costs to participate (i.e., contributions). Due to the conflicts on the Kyrgyz-Tajik border in Batken in 2021-
 2022, labor and community safety risks shall be assessed and mitigated for the subprojects implemented in Batken using
 the approach utilized in other World Bank-funded projects implemented in Batken. No large-scale land acquisition with
 potentially significant impacts on livelihoods is envisaged under the Project. No significant risks related to labor influx and
 Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) are expected under the Project, as most Project workers are
 expected to be recruited locally. This will need to be monitored and confirmed throughout Project implementation. The
 above risks and impacts are readily identifiable and reversible and can be prevented, minimized, or mitigated by proper
 assessment and readily available mitigation measures in line with national regulations, the Environmental, Health, and


Dec 20, 2023                                                                                                               Page 8 of 10
          The World Bank
          Kyrgyz Republic: Water and Sanitation Universal Access Program(P500620)


 Safety Guidelines of the World Bank, and the Good International Industry Practice. However, considering the type and
 scope of activities to be implemented in over 80 villages in four oblasts, the environmental, health, and safety risks
 described above, coupled with the implementing agency's limited experiences with the ESF and the low capacity of local
 authorities to manage operational risks of the established infrastructure effectively, the overall risk is assessed as
 Substantial.
 24. Since the exact locations and design options will only be determined during the Project implementation following
 a site-level feasibility assessment, a framework approach to risk management will be applied. This includes development
 of an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), which will provide a preliminary assessment of the
 relevant risks and generic mitigation measures, implementation, and monitoring arrangements that will inform design
 measures and management of potential impacts. In addition to the ESMF, a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP),
 Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), and Labor Management Procedures (LMP) will be prepared and consulted with
 stakeholders prior to Appraisal. The Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) will be prepared and disclosed
 prior to Appraisal, outlining time-bound actions by the project implementing agency during Project implementation.

   @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
   CONTACT POINT

   World Bank
     Odete Duarte Muximpua
     Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

     Verena Schaidreiter
     Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

   Borrower/Client/Recipient
    Kyrgyz Republic

   Implementing Agencies
    Department of Drinking Water Supply and Wastewater Disposal (DDWSWD)
    Nurgazy Mamataliev, Director, nurgazym@mail.ru

   FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

   The World Bank
   1818 H Street, NW
   Washington, D.C. 20433
   Telephone: (202) 473-1000
   Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

   @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
   APPROVAL



Dec 20, 2023                                                                                                    Page 9 of 10
          The World Bank
          Kyrgyz Republic: Water and Sanitation Universal Access Program(P500620)



   Task Team Leader(s):                     Odete Duarte Muximpua, Verena Schaidreiter

   Approved By

   Practice Manager/Manager:

   Country Director:                        Indu John-Abraham                       20-Dec-2023




Dec 20, 2023                                                                                      Page 10 of 10
