Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Kyrgyz Republic: Water Supply And Sanitation Universal Access Program-1 Project (P500620)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                            Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                         Date Prepared/Updated: 09/30/2024 | Report No: ESRSA03722




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Oct 17, 2024                                                                                         Page 1 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Kyrgyz Republic: Water Supply And Sanitation Universal Access Program-1 Project (P500620)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                  Operation Acronym          Approval Fiscal Year

                     P500620                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)       WASUAP                     2025

                     Operation Name            Kyrgyz Republic: Water Supply and Sanitation Universal Access Program-1 Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries            Region                     Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Kyrgyz Republic           Kyrgyz Republic                          EUROPE AND CENTRAL         Water
                                                                                        ASIA

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                 Estimated Appraisal Date   Estimated Board Date

                     Kyrgyz Republic           State Institute for the Development of   14-Oct-2024                19-Dec-2024
                                               Drinking Water Supply and
                                               Wastewater Disposal

                     Estimated Decision        Total Project Cost



Public Disclosure
                     Review Date

                     08-Oct-2024               200,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The project development objective (PDO) is to increase access to WSS services and improve the service delivery capacity
                     in selected areas of the Kyrgyz Republic.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The proposed operation is aimed at providing universal access and improving the sustainability of water supply and
                     sanitation (WSS) services in the Kyrgyz Republic through a partnership involving the Government of Kyrgyzstan, the
                     World Bank, other development partners, and the private sector. This partnership will be operationalized through a
                     Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) using Investment Project Financing (IPF) lending instruments with some
                     performance-based grants (PBGs). The MPA program is structured as a 10-year engagement through three IPF
                     operations/phases to achieve the Program Development Objective. The MPA program includes: (i) a four-year Phase 1

                    Oct 17, 2024                                                                                                   Page 2 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Kyrgyz Republic: Water Supply And Sanitation Universal Access Program-1 Project (P500620)



                     (2024-2029) of focused investment covering unserved rural settlements while consolidating the service delivery
                     structure into district-level Water and Sanitation Service Provider (DWSSPs) on a pilot basis and enhancing the service
                     delivery capacity using PBGs, few and simpler sanitation interventions, complemented by extensive analysis and design
                     of more complex sanitation solutions, including paving the way for potential private sector engagement; (ii) a three-year
                     Phase 2 (2028-2031) to scale-up the investments, shifting to water supply infrastructure upgrade and expansion, priority
                     sewerage investments and scale-up the service delivery models, with a focus on operational and financial efficiency, and
                     climate adaptation; and (iii) a three-year Phase 3 (2030-2033) to scale-up sanitation investments, and consolidate the
                     water supply improvements, with a strong emphasis on knowledge exchange and appropriation of the policies, plans,
                     and tools developed under the previous two phases. Phase 1 project will comprise five components: Component 1 -
                     Water Supply Investments - will finance the construction of new water supply systems in unserved rural villages as well
                     as the upgrade of existing water supply systems in district centers and small towns in priority country areas; Component
                     2 - Sanitation Development - will finance the construction and/or rehabilitation/retrofitting of decentralized sanitation
                     systems, including toilet upgrades for vulnerable households and selected public institutions (schools, kindergartens,
                     health centers), including Technical Assistance (TA) to design more complex sewage improvements in subsequent
                     phases; Component 3 - Performance-based Service Improvement Program - will finance PBGs to selected water sector
                     institutions to implement their institutional and WSS services development plans and improve the sustainability of WSS
                     services, Component 4 - MPA Program Structuring and Management - will support the establishment of a program
                     management framework and WSS infrastructure development capacity; and Component 5- Contingency Emergency
                     Response. The risk classification and assessment provided in this ESRS covers only Phase 1 of the MPA.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview



Public Disclosure
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The project is planned to be implemented in eight rayons of the Kyrgyz Republic, in Sokuluk and Panfilov rayon of Chui
                     oblast; Alai, Aravan, Kara-Suu, Kara-Kulja, Uzgen rayons of Osh oblast and Ak-Suu rayon of Issyk-Kul oblast.
                     Osh oblast. The Osh oblast occupies the territory of the Alai, the northern slopes of the Trans-Alai, the south-eastern
                     part of the Fergana ridges, which are the eastern frame of the Fergana depression. The Alai Mountain system has an
                     almost latitudinal strike and is characterized by a relatively gentle northern slope, complicated by a series of sharply
                     defined foothill ridges; the southern slope - facing the highly elevated Alai depression, is relatively short and steep.
                     The climate of the Fergana Valley is characterized by mild winters with little snow and dry hot summers in the lower
                     zone, moderately cold and cold winters in the upper zone. The climate of the Alai Valley is continental. The eastern part
                     has more severe conditions than the western and central ones. On the territory of the region there are such large high-
                     water rivers as the Kara-Darya, formed by the confluence of the Tar and Kara-Kulja rivers. Below the city of Uzgen in the
                     river. The Kara-Darya river flows into Iasi. These rivers originate from the Fergana and Alai ranges. The rivers Gulcha, Ak-
                     Buura and Kyrgyz-Ata begin from the northern slopes of the Alay Range. The Kyzyl-Suu River, originating on the
                     southern slopes of the Alai and northern slopes of the Trans-Alai ridge, is the main waterway of the Alai depression.
                     The territory of the Osh region is characterized by the intensive development of dangerous natural processes associated
                     with geological and structural features, relief, climatic and hydrogeological conditions, seismic activity, man-made
                     factors, etc. Many settlements are located along the banks of large and small rivers, in mountainous areas. Depending
                     on the structure of adjacent slopes and the water content of rivers, residents of many villages are threatened by
                     landslides, rockfalls, avalanches, mudflows, flood waters, flooding with surface water, and flooding with groundwater.
                     Issyk-Kul oblast. The territory of the Issyk-Kul oblast is located at an altitude of 1600 to 7439 m above sea level. The
                     relief of the territory is divided into 2 main parts: the Issyk-Kul depression and the Issyk-Kul syrts. The basin has a length
                     from east to west of 240 km, a width of about 100 km. According to climatic zoning, most of the Issyk-Kul region is

                    Oct 17, 2024                                                                                                        Page 3 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Kyrgyz Republic: Water Supply And Sanitation Universal Access Program-1 Project (P500620)



                     located in North-Eastern Kyrgyzstan. The climate of North-Eastern Kyrgyzstan is formed under the influence of the large
                     (6200 sq. km) ice-free Lake Issyk-Kul, located at an altitude of 1608 m above sea level, and has marine features: mild
                     winters, relatively warm summers, smoothed annual air temperature. About 118 rivers and streams flow into the lake;
                     the largest are the Jyrgalang and Tyup. The lake is a Ramsar Convention site, and it supports large numbers of wintering
                     waterfowl as well as waders and passerines on passage migration. Both the western and eastern ends of the lake have
                     been recognized as Important Bird Areas (IBAs) by BirdLife International.
                     Bedrock rocks consist of igneous, metamorphic and sedimentary complexes, grouped into rocky and semi-rocky groups.
                     Outcrops of rocky and semi-rocky soils are observed in high- and mid-mountain zones (less often in low-mountain
                     areas), while in rocky soils the development of dangerous exogenous processes is predicted - landslides, rockfalls,
                     screes, karst (on limestone and carbonate rocks), and in semi-rocky soils landslide phenomena are expected. Surface
                     deposits in high-medium, low-mountain and low-mountain areas are combined into formations of mountain slopes,
                     intermountain depressions and mountain glaciation, consisting of loose and cohesive soils and in them the development
                     of landslides, gully erosion, mudflows, solifluction, planar washout, and other exogenous processes occurs and
                     phenomena.
                     Chui oblast. The territory occupied by the Chui oblast includes the low-mountain Chui, as well as the Suusamyr and
                     Chon-Kemin intermountain depressions. The relief is dissected, the absolute height ranges from 550 to 4856 m above
                     sea level. According to climatic zoning, the Chui Valley belongs to Northern and Northwestern Kyrgyzstan. The
                     distribution of precipitation in the Chui Valley is decisively influenced by the altitude of the area above sea level. The
                     amount of precipitation increases from 370 mm in the north of the valley to 425 up the valley in the eastern direction
                     and to 450-500 mm in the southern direction towards the foothills. The hydrographic network of the Chui region
                     belongs to the basins of the Chu and Naryn rivers.




Public Disclosure
                     According to the engineering and geological features of the structure, the territory of the region in the section consists
                     of two parts, underlying ancient bedrock rocks with rigid structural connections and younger, less durable Quaternary
                     surface deposits. Bedrock rocks consist of igneous, metamorphic and ancient sedimentary complexes, combined into
                     rocky and semi-rocky soils. Outcrops of rocky and semi-rocky soils are observed in high- and mid-mountain zones (less
                     often in low-mountain areas), while in rocky soils the development of dangerous exogenous processes is predicted -
                     landslides, rockfalls, screes, karst (in limestone and carbonate rocks), and in semi-rocky soils manifestations are often
                     possible landslide phenomena. Surface deposits in high-, mid-, low-mountain and low-mountain areas are represented
                     by loose and cohesive soils. In surface sediments, the development of landslides, gully erosion, mudflows, solifluction,
                     planar washout, and other exogenous processes and phenomena is predicted.
                     Kyrgyzstan is highly vulnerable to climate change and relies heavily on climate-sensitive sectors. The country’s water
                     resources include perennial and ephemeral rivers, brooks, springs, and both freshwater and brackish lakes. Most rivers
                     are fed by glaciers and/or snowmelt. The country's water sector is vulnerable to climate change, as it is experiencing
                     various natural and climate-related hazards, such as droughts, mudslides, and flash floods. Groundwater accounts for
                     more than 85 percent of the water supply in the country, with more than a third of the existing reserves currently being
                     used. Water availability is often compromised, particularly during summer. Water operators face increasing challenges
                     to maintain continuity of services (more than eight hours of supply). Under such circumstances, climate vulnerability
                     disproportionally affects the poor and vulnerable, with women, the elderly, and children being at the highest risk. This is
                     especially obvious in rural areas, partly due to the infrastructure gap and poor service performance, including water and
                     sanitation. Despite sustained progress in recent years and relatively high access figures ( 90. 8 percent for water supply
                     and 92.6 percent for sanitation), disparities in water supply and sanitation persist between urban and rural, as well as
                     among regions, and sustainability remains a major challenge. At least 30 percent of the schemes invested in the last 20
                     years suffer from poor infrastructure performance and require reinvestment, thus resulting in poor quality of services.


                    Oct 17, 2024                                                                                                     Page 4 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Kyrgyz Republic: Water Supply And Sanitation Universal Access Program-1 Project (P500620)



                     Furthermore, unreliability and poor quality of sanitation services remain a major challenge. In rural areas, pit latrines
                     and septic tanks are the most common containment solutions and are primarily managed by individual households,
                     often without financial resources and technical know-how to construct and safely manage their facility. Fecal sludge
                     emptying and transport is primarily managed by private or municipal tankers that dispose of the excreta in either an
                     inoperative wastewater treatment or a dumping facility without being properly treated prior to final disposal. Lack of
                     sanitation systems is reported to be one of the main contributing factors of poor public health. For instance, residents
                     of Osh have reported a high incidence of kidney stones due to the interaction between boreholes and on-site sanitation
                     systems. With the impending impacts of climate change, particularly floods and droughts, sanitation-related risks to
                     public health are expected to be more intense and frequent, with the possible spread and transmission of water-related
                     diseases. To address some of these challenges, Phase 1 of the Project will be implemented in unserved settlements as
                     well as villages and district centers in need of water supply upgrades, focusing on Osh, Chui, and Issyk-Kul oblasts. The
                     project will finance the construction of new and upgrades of water supply schemes and vulnerable households and
                     social institutions’ sanitation infrastructure (containment). In addition to technical assistance for improvements to the
                     existing fecal sludge management (FSM) services provided by both private and municipal operators. Interventions in
                     the Water Supply and Sanitation (WSS) sector are expected to improve public health and quality of life in the long term.
                     Global evidence indicates a steady decline in the infant and child mortality rate under five with improved WSS services
                     (Multiple Indicator Survey Cluster Snapshot 2018). Furthermore, in the Kyrgyz Republic, as observed in other developing
                     countries, women are most likely to be responsible for fetching water for households, while girls are nearly twice as
                     likely as boys to bear the responsibility and spend more time doing it each day. Hence, improving access to WSS will
                     likely result in improving the lives of women and girls in general.




Public Disclosure
                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The mandate for water supply and sanitation services is anchored within the State Institution for the Development of
                     Drinking Water Supply and Wastewater Disposal (SIDDWSWD) of the Water Resources Service under the Ministry of
                     Water Resources, Agriculture and Processing Industry (MoWRAPI). The Department for Disease Prevention and Sanitary
                     and Epidemiological Expertise of the Ministry of Health monitors potable water quality. The Ministry of Natural
                     Resources, Environment, and Technical Supervision is responsible for protecting natural resources, including enforcing
                     effluent standards for wastewater discharge. The management, operation, and maintenance of water supply systems
                     and sanitation services will be delivered through the DWSSPs in the 40 district (gradually replacing the existing service
                     providers with commercially oriented utilities).
                     The SIDDWSWD will be the Project implementing agency (IA). The SIDDWSWD has gained some experience with the
                     Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) by managing the ongoing Bank-funded Climate Resilient Water Services
                     Project (CRWSP, P173734). The environmental and social performance of this operation was rated satisfactory as per
                     the last Implementation Status and Results (ISR) report. The existing PIU of the SIDDWSWD responsible for the
                     implementation of the ongoing CRWSP will be expanded and further strengthened to manage the proposed program.
                     The PIU will be restructured into a Project Coordination Unit (PCU) at the central level based in Bishkek, with a
                     dedicated team of specialists, comprising a project coordinator for the PCU, and dedicated project staff, including a
                     manager, a financial manager, a procurement specialist, a disbursement specialist, an environmental specialist, a social
                     development specialist, water supply and sanitation engineers, an institutional development specialist, a M&E
                     specialist, a communications specialist, and administrative staff. At the district level, technical teams will be established
                     within the DWSSPs to support project implementation and M&E. The technical teams will include at least a district
                     project coordinator and water engineer, a sanitation officer, an environmental and social officer, and an institutional
                     development officer. These technical teams will work closely with the PCU at the SIDDWSWD and be responsible for


                    Oct 17, 2024                                                                                                        Page 5 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Kyrgyz Republic: Water Supply And Sanitation Universal Access Program-1 Project (P500620)



                     day-to-day project oversight, including environmental and social aspects of relevant activities. In addition, capacity-
                     building on the ESF requirements and project implementation needs will be provided for all relevant project staff with
                     the support of the WB team, as needed, throughout Project implementation.
                     Sectoral coordination is expected to be one of the challenges the project needs to address due to the involvement of
                     state and non-state actors, including municipalities and operators (both state-owned and private). Subnational
                     capacities and ownership, particularly on aspects related to Operations and Maintenance (O&M) and stakeholder
                     engagement, are expected to require sustained improvements to ensure that the project's sustainability objectives are
                     being met.

                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                              Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                       Substantial
                     The environmental risks and impacts of Phase 1 of the MPA are primarily associated with activities under Components
                     1 (water supply) and 2 (sanitation development). Component 1 will support the construction of water supply schemes
                     (boreholes, well fields, intakes, and disinfection units) and the associated water transmission and distribution
                     infrastructure (networks, storage, meters, solar panels) in 109 villages, 36 of which are new. Component 2 will fund
                     the construction and/or rehabilitation/retrofitting of onsite/decentralized sanitation facilities, such as toilet upgrades
                     and septic tanks for vulnerable households and public institutions in all 109 villages. Further, the project will finance
                     the design of centralized sewerage systems planned for financing under the Phase II of the MPA. Approximately



Public Disclosure
                     vulnerable households are expected to benefit from toilet upgrades, and 115 schools, 115 kindergartens, and 108
                     health centers are anticipated to receive WASH improvements (construction and/or rehabilitation of indoor and
                     outdoor sanitation facilities, indoor handwashing facilities, including the construction and/or rehabilitation of outdoor
                     septic tanks). During the construction phase, potential risks and impacts may include: (i) increased pollution from the
                     generation of hazardous and non-hazardous waste (oil, paints, asbestos-containing materials (ACM) in existing water
                     supply schemes), dust, noise, vibration, and accidental spills of fuel and lubricants; (ii) traffic congestion; (iii) increased
                     suspended sediment and reduced water quality near intakes; (iv) loss of soil material, soil erosion and sedimentation
                     to surface and/or groundwater systems from earthwork activities; (v) improper restoration of construction sites,
                     including the cleaning and sealing of old outdoor unhygienic pits after completion of works; (vi) occupational and
                     community health and safety issues; (vii) disturbance and pollution of natural ecosystems and biodiversity; and (viii)
                     landslides in mountainous terrains. During the operation phase, risks are expected to be mainly related to the
                     wastewater and fecal sludge from sanitation facilities (pathogens, odors, soil, water pollution) and potentially e-waste
                     from discarded solar panels and electric/electronic water meters if not properly managed. Additionally, stress on the
                     aquifer from water intake and supply for the schemes could pose an environmental issue. The aforementioned risks
                     and impacts are typically associated with small- to medium-scale civil works common in water and sanitation
                     interventions. These risks and impacts are largely site-specific and reversible. They can be prevented, minimized, or
                     mitigated through proper assessment and readily available mitigation measures in accordance with national
                     regulations, the World Bank's Environmental, Health, and Safety Guidelines (EHSGs), and Good International Industry
                     Practice (GIIP). However, given the type and geographic scope of activities across over 100 villages in three oblasts,
                     the associated Environmental, Health, and Safety (EHS) risks, combined with the capacity constraints within the
                     implementing agency in ensuring enforcement and supervision across different contractors, the environmental risk is


                    Oct 17, 2024                                                                                                           Page 6 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Kyrgyz Republic: Water Supply And Sanitation Universal Access Program-1 Project (P500620)



                     assessed as Substantial. This Substantial risk rating also takes into account potential capacity constraints and the
                     complexity of supervision due to the broad geographic coverage.
                                                                                                                                        Moderate
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The moderate social risks, as contemplated at the concept stage, remain relevant based on the scope of the project at
                     the appraisal stage. The rating is assigned based on an assessment of the proposed investments under Phase 1, which
                     focuses on rural water supply and sanitation (WSS) infrastructure, focusing on unserved settlements. Potential risks of
                     the subsequent phases of the MPA will be assessed as part of their future preparation, and hence, the rating will only
                     reflect Phase 1 activities. Component 1 (Water Supply Investments) and Component 2 (Sanitation Development) are
                     not envisaged to invest in major infrastructure and, hence, are not expected to require major land acquisition based
                     on previous project experiences in the same sector. Sanitation infrastructure will focus on on-site containment. Water
                     supply investments will focus on the design and construction of climate-resilient water supply schemes in 36
                     unserved settlements in the target regions, as well as water supply upgrades in 73 villages and district centers. The
                     sanitation development interventions will entail small-scale construction and/or rehabilitation works, including toilet
                     upgrades for vulnerable groups and public institutions. As the investment needed to achieve universal access for WSS
                     in the country is significantly higher than the available resources, the subprojects in target regions/districts will be
                     selected from the list approved by IA through a set of selection criteria consulted with the public. A participatory
                     approach will be adopted as part of the Project’s design to foster the appropriateness of the investments as well as
                     social acceptance of the investments. While the Project is expected to have positive social impacts such as improved
                     water accessibility, hygiene, and sanitation standards and, hence, positive impacts on the quality of life in general,
                     social risks considered under the project could stem from potential water conflicts, particularly with communities in




Public Disclosure
                     the intake areas which require meaningful engagement and consensus building. Learning from grievances from
                     ongoing projects, potential issues may also result from poor design and construction quality, resulting in
                     malfunctions, temporary disruption of WSS services during construction, and lack of stakeholder engagement about
                     project information. Tariff reforms, which may entail tariff increases, improved billing and collection systems, and
                     levies for connection costs, may leave the poor and vulnerable groups with no access if no differentiated measures to
                     improve inclusion are in place. Further, various expectations could emerge due to the project, especially amongst
                     communities that are not the primary beneficiaries. Hence, the project will require a clear, transparent, and publicly
                     consulted selection of subprojects, activities, and social risk mitigation measures. In further understanding such social
                     implications, including adverse risks, a social analysis, as part of the selected subprojects’ design, will inform potential
                     exclusion risks of beneficiaries from Project activities and gender gaps and inform mitigation measures to enable
                     inclusive access to benefits and meaningful community engagement. A gender action plan will be developed and will
                     guide the implementation of gender empowerment initiatives under the program, including the promotion and
                     integration of female professionals in the water sector.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                    Relevant

                      The standards relevant to the Project include ESS1, ESS2, ESS3, ESS4, ESS5, ESS6, ESS8 and ESS10. The environmental
                      and social risks and impacts are mainly associated with the typical risks and impacts associated with small to medium-


                    Oct 17, 2024                                                                                                        Page 7 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Kyrgyz Republic: Water Supply And Sanitation Universal Access Program-1 Project (P500620)



                      scale civil works in the WSS sector. These include OHS, soil and water pollution, traffic, ecosystem disruption, and
                      Community Health and Safety (CHS) during the construction and O&M phases. Social risks include land impact,
                      beneficiaries’ exclusion, and labor issues. All E&S risks and impacts of civil works will be addressed in the
                      Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) for each water supply scheme prior to the start of the
                      construction works. CHS risks during O&M will be addressed as part of design measures and capacity building for WSS
                      operators and community representatives. Since the target settlements and site-specific investments are based on
                      pre-determined criteria established by the project, and hence, design solutions and project’s footprints will only be
                      determined during Project implementation, a framework approach will be adopted. Under this approach, an
                      Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared, publicly disclosed, and consulted prior
                      to appraisal. The ESMF includes, amongst others, preliminary risk assessments, institutional assessment, and
                      responsibility, resource allocation for environmental and social management at the project level, as well as
                      supplementary frameworks, guidelines, and procedures. These include a Labor Management Procedures (LMP),
                      Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), guidelines for site-specific (ESMPs), and/or checklists, Environmental and
                      Social Codes of Practices (for lower-level risks and impacts) as applicable. Finalization of the ESMF is expected prior
                      completion of the project appraisal, as established in the project’s Environmental and Social Commitment Plan
                      (ESCP). As for the E&S instruments, a detailed screening of the subprojects shall be carried out by the PIU's
                      environmental and social specialists using the environmental and social screening checklist templates. The
                      environmental and social screening will determine which subproject-specific tools (ESIA, ESMP, ESMP Checklist) will
                      need to be prepared.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                      Relevant




Public Disclosure
                      ESS10 is relevant. Key stakeholders include those benefiting from the Project, including municipalities, WSS
                      operators, and particularly households in Project areas. Communities around the intake areas could be directly
                      impacted due to reduced water resources and hence, need to be adequately consulted to minimize tensions and
                      conflicts. Others include state agencies and municipal entities who may possibly influence and make decisions on the
                      implementation of the project and/or may have an interest in the Project. Vulnerable and disadvantaged groups may
                      include, but are not limited to, poor families, people with disability, and women-headed households. The Project
                      investments will be based on a participatory approach and will benefit from social analysis, which will identify
                      mitigation measures to enable inclusive access to benefits and meaningful community engagement. The IA has
                      prepared and publicly disclosed a project-level SEP, which includes the following: (i) stakeholder identification and
                      analysis; (ii) planning for stakeholder engagement aligned with project activities; (iii) consultations and information
                      disclosure; (iv) grievance mechanism; and monitoring and reporting. The SEP will be finalized and disclosed prior to
                      the project appraisal as established in the ESCP.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                            Relevant

                      ESS2 is relevant. The Project may include direct and contracted workers. No community workers are expected to be
                      involved in the Project activities. OHS risks are expected and relate to work hazards associated with excavations,
                      confined space entry, working at heights, and exposure to pathogens. The ESMF includes sections on Environmental
                      Health and Safety (EHS) based on the EHSG of the World Bank (e.g., EHS checklists for expected types of works, codes
                      of conduct, safety training, procedures for dealing with hazardous materials like asbestos and lead-based paint).
                      While no significant risks related to labor influx are expected, SEA/SH risks are assessed as moderate due to project’s
                      sensitive receptors (i.e., children, communities in remote settings, etc.). Risks related to child and forced labor are


                    Oct 17, 2024                                                                                                     Page 8 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Kyrgyz Republic: Water Supply And Sanitation Universal Access Program-1 Project (P500620)



                      low, and the project will establish a minimum age in line with ESS2 as part of the project’s contracts. To identify risks
                      related to labor and working conditions at the appraisal stage based on past project experiences, the IA has prepared,
                      publicly disclosed, and consulted on Labor Management Procedures (LMP). Site-specific ESMPs will incorporate LMP
                      requirements, including a Code of Conduct, SEA/SH prevention, and workers’ GRM.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                              Relevant

                      The standard is relevant as pollution is anticipated from the construction, operation, and maintenance of the
                      established water supply and sanitation infrastructure and facilities. Potential impacts include dust and noise
                      emissions and the generation of hazardous waste (such as asbestos, chemicals for coagulation, disinfection, and
                      water conditioning) as well as non-hazardous waste (including construction debris and disassembled materials),
                      wastewater, and fecal sludge. Pollution prevention measures will encompass the cleaning and sealing old outdoor
                      unhygienic pits, along with strategies for managing the increased volume of greywater resulting from an improved
                      water supply once connections are made. The project aims to enhance water use efficiency, diminish water losses
                      through network improvements and better management, and promote sustainable water use via metered
                      connections. A positiive impact of the project is reduction of a potential aquifer contamination by collecting and
                      treating wastewater from vulnerable households and social facilities that are supported by water supply and
                      sanitation facilities. The project will further aim to minimize greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by installing energy-
                      efficient pumping equipment and utilizing solar energy for operation. For instance, ten of the larger schemes serving
                      small towns (approximately 145,000 people) will benefit from solar power installations and pumping station upgrades
                      to enhance energy efficiency. Groundwater will be the primary source for the project, and its use will be managed to
                      ensure sustainable withdrawal rates. The abstraction for the schemes is not expected to impact the basin's overall



Public Disclosure
                      water balance significantly. The design will also consider risks related to water quantity taking into account changes in
                      the availability of water at the sources due to climate change which could lead to accelerated depletion of the water
                      source. To avoid or mitigate impact, operation of the systems should be performed with due consideration of the
                      following management measures: (i) installation of efficient use of water supply systems should be practiced avoiding
                      water loss; (ii) Training of the community and O&M personnel in water management of the water supply schemes.
                      (iii) Ongoing economic evaluation of water consumption requirements and utilization to ensure continued efficiency
                      of the water supply schemes to meet (changing) needs. Nonetheless, groundwater assessments will be conducted as
                      part of the feasibility studies for new or rehabilitated water source, and site-specific resource efficiency aimed on
                      water and energy efficiency and mitigation measures will be incorporated, as needed, into the site-specific ESMP and
                      design for each water scheme. The ESMF provides guidance for pollution prevention and resource efficiency
                      concerning air, water, and soil pollution, as well as the handling and disposal of waste (including asbestos and e-
                      waste), wastewater management, sludge management, and the sourcing and transportation of materials. These
                      related measures will also be included within the scope of the site-specific environmental and social assessments.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                              Relevant

                      The standard is relevant. Activities will be undertaken in settlements and may expose adjacent communities to risks,
                      including traffic and road safety, accidents, noise, dust, and vibration during construction. Issues could also arise
                      during the operation phase, from exposure to pathogens and odors to nuisance from improper septic tank
                      maintenance and sludge management to improper collection and disposal of discarded meters and solar panels (e-
                      waste). For all sources (including wells and springs), test the water for bacteriologic quality with several samples
                      taken over a period of time to establish a history of water quality at the source. With a few exceptions, surface water


                    Oct 17, 2024                                                                                                      Page 9 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Kyrgyz Republic: Water Supply And Sanitation Universal Access Program-1 Project (P500620)



                      and groundwater sources should always be presumed to be bacteriologically unsafe and, as a minimum, must be
                      disinfected. The ESMF and LMP have incorporated an assessment of community health risks, such as road safety,
                      exposure to pollutants (i.e., excessive noise, sludge materials, and dust), site safety and access restrictions, labor
                      influx, and SEA/SH risks. All these risks will be screened and re-assessed following decisions of site-level investments
                      as part of feasibility and designs and subsequently addressed as part of design measures and/or site-specific ESMPs.
                      The Project will develop and agree with sub-national stakeholders, including municipalities on stakeholder
                      engagement and grievance mechanism focusing on communities living in the Project areas. The primary water supply
                      source will be groundwater and hence, no downstream dams will be associated with the project.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                  Relevant

                      ESS5 is relevant due to the potential investments under Components 1 and 2, which may require additional land and
                      lead to potential impacts on livelihoods. The scale of impacts under ESS5 is not expected to be substantial, and
                      physical displacement will be avoided to the extent technically and financially feasible through design measures. The
                      scope of interventions and impacts will become clearer when investment subprojects are identified in sufficient
                      detail, and site-specific design studies are completed. Therefore, an RPF has been prepared, publicly disclosed, and
                      consulted prior to appraisal. The RPF will establish how site-specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs), which include
                      land acquisition process(es), entitlement matrix, institutional arrangement, resource allocation, and grievance
                      management, will be prepared and implemented during the project implementation. It is noted that all subprojects
                      requiring land acquisition and involuntary resettlement will ensure that the RAP(s) are prepared and fully
                      implemented prior to the commencement of works.




Public Disclosure
                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                   Relevant
                      Resources

                      The standard is relevant as the project involves constructing water intake and storage infrastructure (such as bore
                      wells, reservoirs, elevated water towers, disinfectant units, etc.) and laying new water pipes in the rural areas of
                      targeted oblasts (Osh, Issyk-Kul, and Chui). Some activities may occur in ecologically sensitive areas, for instance,
                      within the transition zone of the "Issyk-Kul" biosphere area in Issyk-Kul oblast, where such activities are permitted. As
                      a result, there could be temporary disturbances, fragmentation, degradation, or destruction of habitats. Moreover,
                      accidental leakages or spillages from improperly managed onsite sanitation facilities in vulnerable households and
                      social institutions in 109 target settlements in rural areas could negatively impact nearby natural habitats. The
                      specific locations of these interventions are not yet known and will be determined during the project's
                      implementation. Consequently, the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) provides guidance for
                      screening subprojects using the exclusion list of activities included in the ESMF and addressing other risks according
                      to the mitigation hierarchy in line with Environmental and Social Standard 6 (ESS6). This ensures that the project does
                      not significantly impact protected areas or natural habitats and that there is no net loss of biodiversity. Site-specific
                      biodiversity risks will be assessed for each subproject, and relevant mitigation measures will be included in the
                      ESMPs. If significant risks and adverse impacts on biodiversity are identified in accordance with ESS6 and the ESMF,
                      Biodiversity Management Plans (BMPs) will be developed and incorporated into the site-specific ESMPs.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional               Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities



                    Oct 17, 2024                                                                                                     Page 10 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Kyrgyz Republic: Water Supply And Sanitation Universal Access Program-1 Project (P500620)



                      This standard is not relevant given that there are no Indigenous Peoples in the Kyrgyz Republic as defined by ESS7.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                       Relevant

                      The standard is relevant. Although the works will be carried out on the territories of the existing settlements and not
                      near any known cultural or archaeological heritage sites, planned activities will entail excavations with potential
                      chance finds. Accordingly, the Project’s ESMF and subsequent site-specific ESMPs for all activities that may involve
                      any excavation of earth will include appropriate “chance find” procedures. A “chance find” clause will also be added
                      to the contracts, defining procedures for contractors in the event that cultural heritage is encountered.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                  Not Currently Relevant

                      The ESS 9 is not relevant since no financial intermediaries will be involved in the project implementation.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                        Yes
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                  No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                             No



Public Disclosure
                       Borrower's E&S Framework will not be used for the Project as a whole or for any of its parts.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                No
                       The project will be co-financed by the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB), the Organization of Petroleum
                       Exporting Countries (OPEC) Fund for International Development, which will focus on financing activities within
                       Component 1; and the Swiss Development Cooperation (SDC), which will support Component 3. A common approach
                       is not being adopted for this project as AIIB has agreed to follow the Bank’s ESF in accordance with the Co-financing
                       Framework Agreement signed on May 15, 2021. It is expected that the Bank’s ESF will also apply to the Project
                       activities to be financed by the OPEC Fund and the SDC. Accordingly, the environmental and social risk management
                       under the project, including for activities under AIIB, OPEC Fund and SDC financing, will follow the World Bank's
                       Environmental and Social Framework (ESF). Meanwhile, the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and the Islamic
                       Development Bank (IsDB) are expected to provide parallel financing, and the activities planned under their financing
                       will follow their own E&S procedures.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     The Borrower developed, publicly disclosed and consulted the following instruments before appraisal:
                     1. DraftStakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), including Project GM;


                    Oct 17, 2024                                                                                                    Page 11 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Kyrgyz Republic: Water Supply And Sanitation Universal Access Program-1 Project (P500620)



                     2. Draft Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF);
                     3. Draft Labor Management Procedures (LMP), including GM for Project workers;
                     4. Draft Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF);
                     5. Draft Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP).

                     The SEP and the draft ESCP will be disclosed prior to the project appraisal. According to the ESCP, the ESMF will be
                     finalized and disclosed prior to completion of the project appraisal. Finalization of the LMP and RPF will be prior to the
                     project effective date.

                     During Project implementation, the Borrower will undertake environmental and social screening of subprojects and
                     prepare fit-for-purpose ESMPs and/or adopt Environmental and Social Codes of Practices (for lower-level risks and
                     impacts) as applicable. The Project’s environmental and social performance will be periodically reported during Project
                     implementation following effectiveness (bi-annually), with relevant capacity building being organized for implementing
                     entities on environmental and social management.




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Odete Duarte Muximpua                   Title:          Senior Water Supply and Sanitation



Public Disclosure
                                                                                                      Specialist

                      Email:                  omuximpua@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Verena Schaidreiter                     Job Title:      Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                      Specialist

                      Email:                  vschaidreiter@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                              Odete Duarte Muximpua, Verena Schaidreiter

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                     Almaz Asipjanov


                    Oct 17, 2024                                                                                                     Page 12 of 13
                               The World Bank
                               Kyrgyz Republic: Water Supply And Sanitation Universal Access Program-1 Project (P500620)



                     V. APPROVAL

                     ADM Social Specialist:                           Syrga Asanalieva




Public Disclosure




                    Oct 17, 2024                                                                                           Page 13 of 13
