Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Second Inclusive and Resilient Market Economy Development Policy Operation(P501037)



                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidcondpfcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized



                                               Program Information Document (PID)



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 06-Aug-2024 | Report No: PIDIC00164




Public Disclosure Authorized
      The World Bank
      Second Inclusive and Resilient Market Economy Development Policy Operation(P501037)


 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@piddpfbasicinformation#doctemplate
 BASIC INFORMATION


 A. Basic Project Data

 Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                  Operation Name
                                                              Second Inclusive and Resilient Market Economy
 Uzbekistan                     P501037
                                                              Development Policy Operation
 Region                         Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)          Financing Instrument
 EUROPE AND CENTRAL                                           Macroeconomics, Trade         Development Policy
                                12-Dec-2024
 ASIA                                                         and Investment                Financing (DPF)
 Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
 Republic of Uzbekistan         Ministry of Economy and
                                Finance

Proposed Development Objective(s)
 To support Uzbekistan’s transition to an inclusive and resilient market economy through: (i) creating markets, (ii)
 improving fiscal risk management and public procurement, and (iii) supporting social inclusion and green resilience.

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
 Financing (US$, Millions)


 Maximizing Finance for Development

 Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                    Yes
 Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?              Yes

 SUMMARY
   Total Financing                                                                                              800.00

 DETAILS
   Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                             800.00
     World Bank Lending                                                                                         800.00

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@piddpfdecision#doctemplate
Decision
The review did authorize the preparation to continue



                                                                                                                        Page 1
     The World Bank
     Second Inclusive and Resilient Market Economy Development Policy Operation(P501037)




B. Introduction and Context

Country Context


1.      Uzbekistan is midway through an ambitious, historic reform program in a bid to rapidly converge to higher
income levels. Uzbekistan’s 36 million people have limited economic means, with an Atlas gross national income per
capita of US$2,360 in 2023. A continuous program of reform since 2017 has seen Uzbekistan become one of the world’s
top reformers, with average GDP growth since 2017 of 5.3 percent outperforming many peers. However, further, and
even bolder reform steps are needed to meet Uzbekistan’s goal of reaching upper middle-income status by 2030.
2.      To maintain its ambitious trajectory, Uzbekistan needs to continue to improve the business environment,
proactively act on climate change, and ensure inclusive and efficient public services. Uzbekistan’s rapid growth will
depend on an increasingly vibrant private sector, which will require continued reforms to reduce the role of the state
in the economy and ensure open access and fair competition in markets. It will also be essential that public sector
resources are utilized efficiently to crowd in greater private investment, improve public services and support
vulnerable groups. Finally, navigating the twin-pronged threat and opportunity that climate change presents will be
essential, to adapt to the expected impacts of climate change and to take advantage of green growth opportunities.




Relationship to CPF

This proposed operation is fully consistent with the focus areas of the CPF. All three pillars of the PDO are consistent
with the first HLO of the CPF on increasing inclusive private sector employment—specifically Objective 1.1 on
expanding competitive access to the markets, Objective 1.2 on enabling private sector growth and investment,
Objective 1.3. on increasing the returns from agriculture and agri-business development and Objective 1.4 on
improving infrastructure for competitiveness and connectivity. The third pillar of the operation also support the second
HLO of the CPF on improving human capital (Objective 2.3: expanding social protection coverage and improving
inclusive labor market policies). The actions relating to energy sector reform, climate change and air pollution are
consistent with the third HLO of the CPF, specifically Objective 3.1 on decarbonization and green development of the
economy and Objective 3.2 on more efficient use of natural resources.




C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

To support Uzbekistan’s transition to an inclusive and resilient market economy through: (i) creating markets, (ii)
improving fiscal risk management and public procurement, and (iii) supporting social inclusion and green resilience.



                                                                                                                     Page 2
     The World Bank
     Second Inclusive and Resilient Market Economy Development Policy Operation(P501037)




Key Results


This proposed development policy operation is the second and final operation in a programmatic series of two
operations. The proposed operation supports key government priorities. The first PDO pillar supports measures to
improve the business and investment environment, and to enhance efficiency and reduce state dominance in the key
sectors of agriculture, rail, and energy. The second pillar supports measures to improve fiscal risk transparency and
management, especially relating to PPPs and a good practice, new Public Procurement Law. The third pillar supports
measures to expand in-work social protection, further measures to protect victims of domestic violence, and measures
to strengthen environmental sustainability and climate change action. Government priorities supported include
reducing GHG emissions in power generation and industrial processes, enhancing climate resilience in the water
resources and agriculture sectors, and mobilizing climate finance. These measures reinforce the business environment
and fiscal risk mitigation of the other pillars to enable growth, sustainability, and inclusion.



D. Concept Description

This operation consists of fourteen prior actions organized into three pillars. Pillar 1 Creating Markets (prior actions
1-5) will focus on strengthening regulatory quality, competition and market orientation in the energy, rail, and
agriculture sectors and improve the legislative framework for investment. Pillar 2 Improving Fiscal Risk Management
and Public Procurement (prior actions 6 and 7) will support the commencement of publication of a new Fiscal Risk
Statement and further details about fiscal commitments arising from public-private partnerships, and a new Public
Procurement Law. Pillar 3: Supporting Social Inclusion and Climate Change Action (prior actions 8-14) will support a
new Law on Social Insurance, further measures to protection women against violence, a new Energy Efficiency law, a
new Water Code, strengthened national Environmental Impact Assessment regulations, new air quality standards and
a new framework to support the climate-responsive corporate bonds and state support programs.



E. Poverty and Social Impacts, and Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects

Poverty and Social Impacts




                                                                                                                     Page 3
     The World Bank
     Second Inclusive and Resilient Market Economy Development Policy Operation(P501037)



The Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF) is responsible for implementing the program supported by the proposed
operation. As the main implementing agency, the MEF will coordinate with other government agencies to implement
the operation. These include the Presidential Administration, the Office of the Cabinet of Ministers, the Agency for
Strategic Reforms, the Ministry of Agriculture, the State Assets Management Agency, the Ministry of Employment and
Poverty Reduction, the Ministry of Ecology, Environmental Protection and Climate Change, the Development Strategy
Centre, the Center for Economic Research under the Presidential Administration, the National Social Protection
Agency, the Supreme Court, and the Statistics Agency. The MEF will work with these institutions to collect the data
necessary to assess implementation progress and evaluate the results. These institutions' technical capacity is
adequate to regularly monitor the indicators and outcome measures.



Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects

Ten out of the 14 prior actions have favorable poverty and distributional implications. Three of these are expected
to have strongly positive distributional impacts, namely measures to Liberalizing the agriculture market and strengthen
land tenure security (Prior action #4), expand the provision of in-work benefits (#8), and strengthen the protection of
gender-based violence (#9). Enhancing market competitiveness and job creation through reforms in the investment
environment (#5) are most likely to have positive impacts. Additionally, water resource management (#11) and air
quality management by reducing GHG emission (#10) and PM2.5 (#13) and upgrading the environmental impact
assessment (EIA) regulations (#12) are likely to have positive distributional impacts since poorer households are more
exposed to water supply disruption and air pollution while having lower adaptive capacity. While increasing energy
tariffs (#1, #2) could have short-term risks of increased poverty, the accompanying social protection measures are
expected to mitigate negative impacts. The other actions envisioned in this DPO will likely have neutral impacts across
socio-economic groups.

The negative environment, natural resources and forests impacts of the prior actions supported under the three
pillars of this operation are minimal to nil. Reforms in the energy, agriculture and railway sectors under Pillar 1 will
continue the ongoing energy tariff adjustments, reforms land tenure and railway tariff. These will help promote
efficient energy use, climate resilience and increase investments in renewable energy which will contribute to
reduction of GHG emissions. However, it is important to note that renewable energy initiatives may have potential
negative impacts on wildlife (including migratory birds) other ecosystem services. Mitigation measures to address
negative impacts of renewable energy should be properly assessed upstream and appropriate mitigation measures
developed. Pillar 2 will encourage green procurement that will have a positive environmental outcome. Pillar 3 will
have direct and significant contribution to the environment by reducing GHG emissions by promoting efficient energy
and water use, improving air quality, and integrating climate change adaptation and mitigation measures into
development projects. As part of DPO 6, the government updated its EIA to address impacts of development projects
on climate change. The Ministry of Ecology, Environmental Protection and Climate Change should play a key role in
mitigating the potential negative impacts of this operation by effectively applying its EIA.




                                                                                                                     Page 4
     The World Bank
     Second Inclusive and Resilient Market Economy Development Policy Operation(P501037)



G. Risks and Mitigation
The overall risk to the operation is moderate. Uzbekistan has established a strong track record for delivering reforms,
as evidenced by six successive DPOs and the results assessed in four ICRs so far. The reform program enjoys strong
political and public backing. The government has established a track record of managing and mitigating negative social
impacts, maintaining strong economic management, and strengthening citizen and media engagement. Institutional
risks remain substantial due to the fast pace of reforms and the nascency of many critical government institutions.
While stakeholder and institutional volatility has led to some delays in implementation in the past, reformed
institutional frameworks are now working well for coordination and policy implementation, but new institutional
structures and reform processes will need complementary capacity-building. The government is aware of these risks
and is working closely with the World Bank and other institutions to receive expert assistance and policy advice.



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
CONTACT POINT

World Bank
 Pinar Yasar
 Senior Economist

 Wei-Jen Leow
 Senior Environmental Finance Specialist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 Republic of Uzbekistan
 Ilkhom Norkulov
 First Deputy Minister
 ilhom.norqulov@imv.uz

Implementing Agencies
 Ministry of Economy and Finance
 Ilkhom Norkulov
 First Deputy Minister
 ilhom.norqulov@imv.uz

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                                                                                                                    Page 5
     The World Bank
     Second Inclusive and Resilient Market Economy Development Policy Operation(P501037)




@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                   Pinar Yasar, Wei-Jen Leow

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:

Country Director:                      Tatiana A. Proskuryakova             06-Aug-2024




                                                                                           Page 6
