Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Second Inclusive and Resilient Market Economy Development Policy Operation (P501037)



                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprdpfcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                               Program Information Document (PID)



Public Disclosure Authorized
                                               Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 19-Aug-2024 | Report No: PIDDA00115




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     Second Inclusive and Resilient Market Economy Development Policy Operation (P501037)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprdpfbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data

Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                  Operation Name
                                                             Second Inclusive and Resilient Market Economy
Uzbekistan                     P501037
                                                             Development Policy Operation
Region                         Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)          Financing Instrument
EUROPE AND CENTRAL                                           Macroeconomics, Trade         Development Policy
                               03-Oct-2024
ASIA                                                         and Investment                Financing (DPF)
Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                               Ministry of Economy and
Republic of Uzbekistan
                               Finance

Proposed Development Objective(s)
To support Uzbekistan’s transition to an inclusive and resilient market economy through: (i) creating markets, (ii)
improving fiscal risk management and public procurement, and (iii) supporting social inclusion and green resilience.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidpfrprojectfinancing#doctemplate
Financing (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                    Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?              Yes

SUMMARY
  Total Financing                                                                                              800.00

DETAILS
  Total World Bank Group Financing                                                                             800.00
    World Bank Lending                                                                                         800.00

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprdecision#doctemplate
Decision
The review did authorize the preparation to continue


Explanation
A Concept review for second and subsequent operations in a programmatic DPF series is not longer required as of
June 13, 2024. The CD has not requested a concept review meeting for this operation.



                                                                                                               Page 1
       The World Bank
       Second Inclusive and Resilient Market Economy Development Policy Operation (P501037)




 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context
1. Uzbekistan is midway through an ambitious, historic reform program in a bid to rapidly converge to higher
   income levels. Uzbekistan’s 37 million people have limited economic means, with an Atlas gross national income
   per capita of US$2,360 in 2023. A continuous program of reform since 2017 has seen Uzbekistan become one of
   the world’s top reformers, with average Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth since 2017 of 5.3 percent
   outperforming many peers. However, further, and even bolder reform steps are needed to meet Uzbekistan’s goal
   of reaching upper middle-income status by 2030.
2. To maintain its ambitious trajectory, Uzbekistan needs to continue to improve the business environment,
   proactively act on climate change, and ensure inclusive and efficient public services. Uzbekistan’s rapid growth
   will depend on an increasingly vibrant private sector, which will require continued reforms to reduce the role of
   the state in the economy and ensure open access and fair competition in markets. It will also be essential that
   public sector resources are utilized efficiently to crowd in greater private investment, improve public services and
   support vulnerable groups. Finally, navigating the twin-pronged threat and opportunity that climate change
   presents will be essential, to adapt to the expected impacts of climate change and to take advantage of green
   growth opportunities.

 Relationship to CPF

3. This proposed operation is fully consistent with the focus areas of the CPF. All three pillars of the PDO are
   consistent with the first higher-level objective (HLO) of the CPF on increasing inclusive private sector
   employment—specifically Objective 1.1 on expanding competitive access to the markets, Objective 1.2 on
   enabling private sector growth and investment, Objective 1.3. on increasing the returns from agriculture and agri-
   business development and Objective 1.4 on improving infrastructure for competitiveness and connectivity. The
   third pillar of the operation also support the second HLO of the CPF on improving human capital (Objective 2.3:
   expanding social protection coverage and improving inclusive labor market policies). The actions relating to energy
   sector reform, climate change and air pollution are consistent with the third HLO of the CPF, specifically Objective
   3.1 on decarbonization and green development of the economy and Objective 3.2 on more efficient use of natural
   resources. The program is also aligned with the WB Gender Strategy, Climate Change Action Plan and IDA20 Special
   Themes and Cross-Cutting Issues. A wide range of WB operational, analytical, and policy engagements have
   contributed to this operation.

 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

4. To support Uzbekistan’s transition to an inclusive and resilient market economy through: (i) creating markets,
   (ii) improving fiscal risk management and public procurement, and (iii) supporting social inclusion and green
   resilience.

 Key Results


5. The Program Development Objective (PDO) is to support Uzbekistan’s transition to an inclusive and resilient
   market economy through: (i) creating markets; (ii) improving fiscal risk management and public procurement;
   and (iii) supporting social inclusion and climate change action. This proposed development policy operation is
   the second and final operation in a programmatic series of two operations. The proposed operation supports key


                                                                                                                  Page 2
       The World Bank
       Second Inclusive and Resilient Market Economy Development Policy Operation (P501037)


    government priorities. The first PDO pillar supports measures to improve the business and investment
    environment, and to enhance efficiency and reduce state dominance in the key sectors of agriculture, rail, and
    energy. The second pillar supports measures to improve fiscal risk transparency and management, especially
    relating to PPPs and a good practice, new Public Procurement Law. The third pillar supports measures to expand
    in-work social protection, further measures to protect victims of domestic violence, and measures to strengthen
    environmental sustainability and climate change action. Government priorities supported include reducing GHG
    emissions in power generation and industrial processes, enhancing climate resilience in the water resources and
    agriculture sectors, and mobilizing climate finance. These measures reinforce the business environment and fiscal
    risk mitigation of the other pillars to enable growth, sustainability, and inclusion.

 D. Project Description

6. This operation consists of twelve prior actions organized into three pillars. Pillar 1 Creating Markets (prior actions
   1-5) will focus on strengthening regulatory quality, competition and market orientation in the energy, rail, and
   agriculture sectors and improve the legislative framework for investment. Pillar 2 Improving Fiscal Risk
   Management and Public Procurement (prior action 6) will support the commencement of publication of a new
   climate-sensitive Fiscal Risk Statement, further details about public-private partnerships, and a new Public
   Procurement Law. Pillar 3: Supporting Social Inclusion and Climate Change Action (prior actions 7-12) will support
   a new Law on Social Insurance, further measures to protection women against violence, a new Energy Efficiency
   law, a new Water Code, strengthened national Environmental Impact Assessment regulations, new air quality
   standards and a new framework to support the climate-responsive corporate bonds and state support programs.

 E. Implementation

 Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

7. The MEF is responsible for implementing the program supported by the proposed operation. As the main
   implementing agency, the MEF will coordinate with other government agencies to implement the operation.
   These include the Presidential Administration, the Office of the Cabinet of Ministers, the Agency for Strategic
   Reforms, the Ministry of Agriculture, the State Asset Management Agency (SAMA), Ministry of Employment and
   Poverty Reduction, the MEEPCC, the Development Strategy Centre, the Center for Economic Research under the
   Presidential Administration, NASP, the Supreme Court, and the Statistics Agency. The MEF will work with these
   institutions to collect the data necessary to assess implementation progress and evaluate the results. The technical
   capacity of these institutions is adequate to perform regular monitoring of the indicators and outcome measures.

 F. Poverty and Social Impacts, and Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects

 Poverty and Social Impacts

8. Eight out of the 12 prior actions supported by this DPO have favorable poverty and distributional implications.
   Two of these are expected to have strongly positive distributional impacts, namely measures to liberalize the
   agriculture market and strengthen land tenure security (Prior Action 4), expand the provision of in-work benefits
   and strengthen the protection of gender-based violence (Prior Action 7). Enhancing market competitiveness and
   job creation through reforms in the investment environment (Prior Action 5) is likely to have positive, indirect
   impacts. Additionally, water resource management (Prior Action 9) and air quality management by reducing GHG
   emission (Prior Action 8) and PM2.5 (Prior Action 11) and upgrading the EIA regulations (Prior Action 10) are likely
   to have positive distributional impacts since poorer households are more exposed to water supply disruption and
   air pollution while having lower adaptive capacity. While increasing energy tariffs (Prior Action 1) could have short-


                                                                                                                    Page 3
       The World Bank
       Second Inclusive and Resilient Market Economy Development Policy Operation (P501037)


    term risks of increased poverty, the accompanying social protection measures and introduction of lifeline tariffs
    (Prior Action 2) are expected to mitigate negative impacts. The other actions envisioned in this DPO will likely have
    neutral impacts across socio-economic groups.

 Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects

9. The negative environment, natural resources and forests impacts of the prior actions supported under the three
   pillars of this operation are minimal to nil. Reforms in the energy, agriculture and railway sectors under Pillar 1
   will continue the ongoing energy tariff adjustments, reforms land tenure and railway tariff. These will help
   promote efficient energy use, climate resilience and increase investments in renewable energy which will
   contribute to reduction of GHG emissions. The project has incorporated measures, such as the lifeline tariff, to
   protect vulnerable households to encourage electric and gas use instead of shifting to coal and biomass due to the
   tariff adjustment. Renewable energy initiatives may have potential negative impacts on wildlife (including
   migratory birds) other ecosystem services. Mitigation measures to address negative impacts of renewable energy
   should be properly assessed upstream and appropriate mitigation measures developed. Pillar 2 will encourage
   green procurement that will have a positive environmental outcome. Pillar 3 will have direct and significant
   contribution to the environment by reducing GHG emissions by promoting efficient energy and water use,
   improving air quality, and integrating climate change adaptation and mitigation measures into development
   projects. As part of this DPO, the government updated its EIA to address impacts of development projects on
   climate change. The MEEPCC should play a key role in mitigating the potential negative impacts of this operation
   by effectively applying its EIA.

 G. Risks and Mitigation

10. The overall risk to the operation is moderate. Uzbekistan has established a strong track record for delivering
    reforms, as evidenced by six successive DPOs and the results assessed in four ICRs so far. The reform program
    enjoys strong political and public backing. The government has established a track record of managing and
    mitigating negative social impacts, maintaining strong economic management, and strengthening citizen and
    media engagement. Institutional risks remain substantial due to the fast pace of reforms and the nascency of many
    critical government institutions. While stakeholder and institutional volatility has led to some delays in
    implementation in the past, reformed institutional frameworks are now working well for coordination and policy
    implementation, but new institutional structures and reform processes will need complementary capacity-
    building. The government is aware of these risks and is working closely with the World Bank and other institutions
    to receive expert assistance and policy advice.

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Pinar Yasar
   Senior Economist

   Wei-Jen Leow
   Senior Environmental Finance Specialist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient




                                                                                                                    Page 4
     The World Bank
     Second Inclusive and Resilient Market Economy Development Policy Operation (P501037)


 Republic of Uzbekistan
 Jasur Qarshibaev
 Deputy Minister
 jasur.qarshibaev@imv.uz

Implementing Agencies
 Ministry of Economy and Finance
 Jasur Qarshibaev
 Deputy Minister
 jasur.qarshibaev@imv.uz

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                   Pinar Yasar, Wei-Jen Leow

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:

Country Director:                      Tatiana A. Proskuryakova              19-Aug-2024




                                                                                            Page 5
