Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                             Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                       (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                         Date Prepared/Updated: 02/26/2024 | Report No: ESRSC04122




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Jan 17, 2025                                                                          Page 1 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                 Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P504170                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)      SGBWSP                      2025

                     Operation Name            Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries          Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Lebanon                   Lebanon                                 MIDDLE EAST AND             Water
                                                                                       NORTH AFRICA

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Board Date

                     Lebanese Republic         Council for Development &               07-Nov-2024                 14-Jan-2025
                                               Reconstruction, Beirut and Mount
                                               Lebanon Water Establishment

                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost



Public Disclosure
                     Review Date

                     13-Feb-2024               257,800,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     The project development objective is to improve the water supply services in the Greater Beirut and Mount Lebanon
                     area.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The proposed Project builds on the ongoing water reform agenda and the progress already achieved under the GBWSP,
                     while addressing emerging challenges. The proposed Project (hereinafter “the Project” or “SGBWSP”) will finance the
                     completion of the water supply infrastructure, ensuring the achievement of the objective of bringing additional water
                     supply to extended areas of GBML. In addition, the Project will support the necessary add-ons to the Wardanieh WTP to
                     manage increased levels of pollution expected at different times of the year. The SGBWSP will also support institutional
                     strengthening to improve the operational and commercial performance of the BMLWE in line with the MoEW vision for

                    Jan 17, 2025                                                                                                    Page 2 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)



                     the recovery of the sector outlined in the NWSS 2024-2035 and the conclusions of analytics funded by the World Bank
                     and other donors. The project will consist of six components: Component 1: Completing remaining bulk water
                     infrastructure. This component will finance investments to complete the remaining bulk water infrastructure started
                     and significantly advanced under the GBWSP to ensure water is conveyed to the existing water supply distribution
                     network serving the GBML area. It will also finance the required construction supervision services for all the works. The
                     component will have the following subcomponents: (i) completion of the remaining tunnel and ancillary works; (ii)
                     remaining Pipeline Works, which include the completion of the twin transmission pipelines; and (iii) construction of
                     three regional reservoirs to increase the overall resilience and efficiency of the distribution system by allowing the
                     BMLWE to regulate the flow of the stream depending on the fluctuations in water demand. Component 2:
                     Strengthening treatment processes for improved water quality This component will finance adjustments (add-ons) to
                     the Wardanieh WTP treatment processes to enhance the resilience of the Wardanieh WTP to variable raw water quality
                     while maintaining operational costs within the financial capacity of the BMLWE. In addition, this component will finance
                     activities to improve water quality management at the BMWLE, including the rehabilitation and upgrade of BMLWE’s
                     laboratory at the Dbayeh through the expansion of existing facilities and the purchase of sufficient equipment,
                     laboratory tools and chemicals, and the reinforcement of chlorination practices to ensure residual chlorine in BMWLE’s
                     distribution network. Component 3: Reforms for improved utility operations This component will finance activities
                     aimed at improving the operational, financial and customer orientation performance of the BMLWE, in alignment with
                     the vision for the recovery of the sector in Lebanon. These activities are divided in three sub-components: (i) NRW
                     reduction in four zones in the GBML area, namely Babdaa Suburbs, Coastal Metn, Tallet EL Khayat, and Bourj Abu Hadar
                     (ii) modernization of BMLWE’s operational and commercial management systems, such as BMLWE’s Information and
                     Communication Technology (ICT) infrastructure, the Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA), Enterprise




Public Disclosure
                     Resource Planning (ERP) software, customer management processes, and entity audits; and (iii) improved
                     communications, which will finance the development and implementation of the BMLWE’s Communications Strategy
                     and the implementation of semi-annual public awareness campaigns. Component 4: Land Acquisition and Resettlement
                     Compensation : This component will include land acquisition and resettlement compensation to displaced people for: (i)
                     the reservoirs Hadath 90 and Hazmieh 90 to be constructed under subcomponent 1.3; (ii) a section of the twin
                     transmission pipelines under subcomponent 1.2; (iii) the Joun Regulation Structure (JRS) to control the raw water flow
                     to the WTP under subcomponent 1.1, and (iv) the land for the outflow of the Wardanieh WTP. The implementation of
                     this component will follow the provisions of the resettlement action plan (RAP). Component 5: Project management and
                     capacity building. This component will finance the operation of the Project Management Units (PMU). In addition, this
                     component aims to address gaps in female representation in technical positions through focused training and capacity-
                     building activities for women, enhancing their skills for technical and managerial positions. As such, this component will
                     support an apprenticeship program that will target female participants to facilitate exposure to professional
                     opportunities within BMLWE. The program will not be exclusive to women but will aim to have more than 50 percent of
                     female participation. The BMLWE will benefit from the work of young and well-trained apprentices, while the new
                     graduates will be certified on utility-related technical skills (like NRW reduction, SCADA management, asset
                     management, etc.) and gain on-the-job experience that will enhance their competitiveness on the job market.
                     Component 6: Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC). This component will have zero funding allocation at
                     the onset and will only be triggered in emergency circumstances.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings


                    Jan 17, 2025                                                                                                      Page 3 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)



                     The project will finance the 1) the remaining tunnel works and pipeline in Khalde, Hadath and Damour areas which are
                     situated south of Beirut and 2) the remaining works for the WTP in Wardaniyeh, south of Beirut. Since the declaration of
                     effectiveness in December 2012 of the first Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (GBWSP), the country context has
                     evolved significantly due to multiple crises including the Syrian refugee influx of 2012, the economic crisis in October
                     2019, the COVID19 pandemic in March 2020, the Port of Beirut explosion of August 2020, Ukraine-Russia conflict, and
                     the more current Middle East conflict since October 2023.Poverty rates have increased particularly in the hardest hit
                     areas in the North and South and the Bekaa valley, which are suffering comparatively more due to higher poverty rates
                     as a result of the economic crisis, the effects of the war and the Syrian refugee influx respectively. Thus, social tensions
                     are also high in the project areas which are characterized as generally low-income dense urban areas (Hadath and
                     Khalde) to semi-urban agricultural areas (Wardaniyeh and Damour) with small to medium scale protests erupting
                     frequently nationwide. Moreover, while water in Lebanon is paradoxically abundant, it is scarce due to climate change,
                     unstainable levels of groundwater exploitation and seawater intrusion in coastal aquifers. The widespread financial
                     strain has caused some citizens to stop paying their water bills altogether, impeding the Water Establishments’
                     functioning and eroding public trust in the Government’s ability to carry out its duties.

                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The project will be implemented as per the arrangement made under the first GBWSP. The Ministry of Energy and
                     Water (MoEW) will be the administrative entity responsible for executing the project and will delegate the
                     implementation of Component 1 to CDR, and the implementation of Components 2 & 3 to the PMU at BMLWE. Both
                     PMUs are currently implementing the first GBWSP and have developed the capacity in implementing Bank-financed
                     projects. Both PMUs have each an assigned Environmental and Social (E&S) focal point who are following up on the




Public Disclosure
                     monitoring and implementation of the E&S requirements of the first GBWSP project which is under the safeguards
                     policies. Under the parent project, OP 4.01 and 4.12 were triggered and the PMUs accordingly prepared an
                     Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) which were cleared and
                     disclosed on the client websites (dated 2010). Recently, the PMU coordinator and E&S focal points have attended the
                     World Bank ESF PIU training in Beirut. Under the new proposed loan, both PMUs will maintain the same E&S focal
                     points and will strengthen the PMUs capacities by hiring external E&S consultants to help in preparation of the ESF joint
                     documents needed at the different stages of the project lifecycle. Each PMU will also hire an Environmental, Social,
                     Health & Safety (ESHS) specialist for monitoring implementation of the ESHS instruments and this provision will be
                     included in the ESCP. Moreover, the E&S focal points and ESHS specialists who will be hired will receive additional
                     capacity building to ensure satisfactory follow up on the implementation of the ESF instruments.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                          Substantial


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                   Substantial
                     Proposed environmental risk rating of this new project is substantial as per Annex 1 of the October 2023 E&S
                     Directive. While the first GBWSP was classified as a Category A under the Bank Operation Policies on safeguards with
                     OP4.01 & OP4.12 triggered, the substantial risk for the new project is justified by the fact that a significant percentage
                     of the construction works have been completed under the ongoing GBWSP. The remaining works are associated with
                     typical construction E&S risks for the remaining tunnel works, pipeline works and the Wardaniyeh WTP. These risks


                    Jan 17, 2025                                                                                                        Page 4 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)



                     will potentially include air, dust and noise emissions, generation of solid and liquid non-hazardous wastes, pollution of
                     soils, use of chemicals, unsustainable use of construction materials from borrow-pits/quarries and the potential
                     disruption to natural habitats and eco-systems linked to such quarries. In addition, health and safety risks to workers
                     include working at height and in confined spaces, falls, trips, electrocution, slippage, noise, vibration, moving objects,
                     airborne dust and materials, manual handling…etc. For the construction works which will take place nearby existing
                     communities, there is potential high exposure levels to health and safety risks from dust and noise emissions, blocked
                     or reduced mobility, road accidents from construction vehicles, lack of access to services and businesses, etc. These
                     risks though significant in nature yet typical, limited to construction sites, temporary, predictable, reversible and can
                     be avoided or mitigated with technical feasible solutions and proper implementation of E&S mitigation measures
                     following the risk management hierarchy, and with strong E&S site monitoring and supervision, as per the
                     implementation of the first project, taking also into consideration application of ESF requirements proper to this
                     operation. Operational E&S risks are associated with the WTP. It includes aspects e.g. abstraction of large quantities
                     of fresh water from
                                                                                                                                      Moderate
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risks and impacts of the project are considered moderate, with minimal significance due to the completion
                     of most works under the first GBWSP. Health and safety impacts at the Wardaniyeh WTP site are expected to be low
                     to moderate, with the site being isolated, surrounded by uninhabited and seasonal housings, fenced, and guarded.
                     Labor influx risks and associated SEA/SH (low) are low as workers are likely to be local, similar to the first GBWSP. Low
                     to moderate risk of ineffective communication and consultation with affected communities may exist. This will be
                     addressed through stakeholder engagement as per ESS10. Temporary traffic disruptions and nuisances are




Public Disclosure
                     anticipated during remaining tunnel and pipeline works. The project aims to serve vulnerable groups in Greater Beirut
                     areas, which include vulnerable groups in poverty pockets and particularly those in the low-income neighborhoods of
                     Southern Beirut, therefore the risk of exclusion is deemed negligible. Water fees post-project are expected to be
                     affordable, even to vulnerable groups, improving upon the current expensive private water supply (due to lack of
                     public water supply) , with installment payment options remaining available. No new land acquisitions are required
                     for the new loan, as these were completed under the first GBWSP, with compensation nearly finalized. Monitoring
                     and regular reporting of RAP implementation and PAP compensation collections will continue. Any additional
                     mitigation measures will be identified through a gap assessment of the ESIA from the parent project.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                  Relevant

                      The initial Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (GBWSP) was classified as Category A, indicating significant
                      environmental and social (E&S) impacts. It triggered the World Bank's E&S safeguard operational policies OP4.01 and
                      OP4.12. To address these impacts, an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and a Resettlement Action
                      Plan (RAP) were developed, consulted upon with stakeholders, cleared, and disclosed on both the client's and the
                      World Bank's websites. For the upcoming project, a gap assessment of the existing ESIA will be conducted prior to the
                      project's appraisal to identify any new or additional E&S risks that need to be addressed in line with the
                      Environmental and Social Framework (ESF). This assessment will check for changes in salient characteristics that may


                    Jan 17, 2025                                                                                                        Page 5 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)



                      require further mitigation measures and determine any additional ESF requirements, such as water balance
                      considerations. The findings will be incorporated into an addendum to the ESIA, which will be subject.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                     Relevant

                      The project's stakeholders include local communities, women, men, impoverished Lebanese, non-Lebanese, and
                      displaced persons. Institutions like the Ministries of Energy and Water, Environment, Finance, CDR, Water
                      Establishments, academic entities, and NGOs/CSOs are also key. Vulnerable groups, such as the illiterate, disabled,
                      internet-inaccessible, and elderly will receive special focus. The CDR and BMLWE will craft a joint Stakeholder
                      Engagement Plan(SEP), to be consulted, cleared, and disclosed pre-appraisal, detailing stakeholder identification and
                      engagement methods, including a grievance mechanism. Although the current GM is functioning adequately, the new
                      loan will introduce measures to better communicate uptake channels.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                           Relevant

                      The project will engage: (i) direct workers (consultants from CDR and BMLWE PMUs), (ii) contracted workers for
                      pipeline, tunnel, and Wardaniyeh WTP remaing works, and (iii) primary supply workers providing construction
                      materials regularly. Currently, Wardaniyeh WTP has up to 150 workers, and pipeline works have 60, with OHS/ESHS
                      measures implemented following the respective CESMPs. A joint LMP by CDR and BMLWE PMUs will be prepared,
                      cleared, and disclosed pre-appraisal, identifying worker types/numbers, OHS/labor risks, and detailing labor
                      laws/policies per Lebanese laws and World Bank ESS2, work conditions, non-discrimination, SEA/SH prevention,
                      child/forced labor prohibition, and minimum labor age. A grievance mechanism for project workers will be outlined in




Public Disclosure
                      the LMP, which also mandates a Code of Conduct prohibiting child and forced labor, to be signed by all workers.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                            Relevant

                      The WTP sources water from Joun reservoir, supplied by Awali and Litani Rivers through different existing reservoirs.
                      Despite poor water quality, conventional treatment at Wardanieh WTP ensures compliance with Lebanese and WBG
                      standards. High water demand may pose risks to agricultural users reliant on Joun for irrigation. A water balance, part
                      of the ESF gap assessment and included in the ESIA addendum, will be prepared, maintained, and monitored to
                      mitigate impacts, adhering to the risk management hierarchy. Water conservation awareness campaigns will be part
                      of citizen engagement. The project's construction and operation air emissions, effluent, sludge, and waste
                      management are addressed in the existing ESIA mitigation measures and further assessment will be conducted.
                      Additional measures, if needed to meet ESS3 standards, will be added within the ESIA addendum.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                            Relevant

                      Joun reservoir's water quality is currently poor. The Water Treatment Plant (WTP) will employ treatment technologies
                      to ensure that the treated water complies with both Lebanese and international standards for potable water,
                      safeguarding public health. To ensure that water only meeting such standards is distributed, contingency plans will be
                      established during the plant's operation. Remaining construction activities may negatively impact traffic and road
                      safety due to the movement of construction vehicles and equipment. The ESF gap assessment will propose necessary
                      measures to restrict community access to construction sites during active work periods, alongside other safety
                      measures to protect local communities. Contractors will be obligated to prevent community exposure to any



                    Jan 17, 2025                                                                                                     Page 6 of 9
                              The World Bank
                              Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)



                      hazardous activities, materials, or substances. Also, an SEA/SH Action Plan will be developed as part of the Labor
                      Management Procedures (LMP) standalone document. Dam safety will be further assessed.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                  Relevant

                      ESS5 applies. The original RAP from the first GBWSP, disclosed in August 2010, remains valid as no new expropriations
                      are needed under the new loan. All expropriations were completed and most compensations collected.
                      Compensation tracking and PAP notifications are documented, monitored and updated regularly in quarter progress
                      reports prepared by CDR and BMLWE PMUs. Upcoming stakeholder engagement will reiterate ESS5's relevance and
                      the RAP's availability on official websites. Unclaimed compensations by project end will be held in ESCROW account,
                      with OESRC guidance for managing closure and completion of projects which have outstanding E&S issues will be
                      referred to and documented, as needed.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                   Relevant
                      Resources

                      The project activities may have adverse impacts on existing aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems and natural habitats.
                      According to the Bank-cleared ESIA (2010) conducted for the parent project, the ecosystems which fall within the
                      project influence are either highly degraded or with no important aquatic or floral biodiversity. The aquatic species in
                      Joun reservoir were determined to be 'very common'. Therefore, based on the existing ESIA, biodiversity
                      management plans are not required however the ESF Gap Assessment will confirm if any additional mitigation and
                      management measures should be developed and incorporated in the addendum to the 2010 ESIA o avoid adverse




Public Disclosure
                      impact on biodiversity and living Natural Resources, including ecosystem services.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional               Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      No indigenous people exist in Lebanon. Therefore ESS7 is not relevant.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                         Not Currently Relevant

                      According to the parent project ESIA, no significant physical cultural resources exist within the scope of influence of
                      the project. All deep excavations are already completed. The remaining works are for water pipelines which will be
                      laid down in existing streets in populated urban areas. Based on the parent project ISRs, Bank Team site visits, there
                      are no tangible or intangible cultural heritage sites heritage, which may be recognized and valued at a local, regional,
                      national or global level exists in the locations where the remaining works will take place. However, chance-find
                      procedures, including stop of work and reporting to the PMU and relevant authorities will be added as part of the
                      Contractors’ contract and C-ESMP. It will also be required in the ESCP, as a precautionary measure if any antiquities
                      are accidently discovered.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                  Not Currently Relevant

                      No FIs are involved in this project. ESS9 is not currently relevant.




                    Jan 17, 2025                                                                                                       Page 7 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                    No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                             No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                        No
                       This project does not use the Borrower's Framework


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                           No
                       This project does not use the common approach.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     E&S instruments preparation: CDR and BMLWE PMUs will conduct ESF Gap Assessment of the existing ESIA under the
                     ongoing first GBWSP and subsequently determine if additional E&S management plans need to be prepared for the
                     new loan, in accordance with the applicable ESSs. Both PMUs will prepare, consult and disclose the determined E&S
                     management plans, Stakeholders Engagement Plan (SEP), Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) and Labor



Public Disclosure
                     Management Procedures (LMP) and seek Bank clearance prior to project appraisal.
                     Recruitment of E&S specialist: . Currently both CDR and BMLWE have in place E&S focal points. Supervision of ESMP
                     implementation is conducted as part of the supervision contracts. Recently, the PMU coordinator and E&S focal points
                     attended the World Bank ESF PIU training in Beirut (May, 2023). Under the new proposed loan, both PMUs will
                     maintain the same E&S focal points and will strengthen the PMUs capacities by hiring external E&S consultants to help
                     in preparation of the ESF documents during project preparation. During implementation, supervision of E&S mitigation
                     and monitoring measures will be part of the supervision contracts. In the meantime, the capacity of both PMUs will
                     need to be strengthened by hiring ESHS specialists for each PMU to monitor satisfactory implementation of the E&S
                     instruments. Moreover, the E&S focal points will receive additional capacity building to ensure satisfactory
                     implementation of the ESF instrument. These provisions will be included in the ESCP.




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:      Elvira Cusiqoyllor Broeks Motta          Title:       Senior Water Specialist

                      Email:                 ebroeksmotta@worldbank.org




                    Jan 17, 2025                                                                                                 Page 8 of 9
                               The World Bank
                               Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)



                      TTL Contact:            Sally Zgheib                            Job Title:    Senior Water Supply and Sanitation
                                                                                                    Specialist

                      Email:                  szgheib@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                              Elvira Cusiqoyllor Broeks Motta, Sally Zgheib

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                     Ehab Mohamed Mohamed Shaalan

                     ADM Social Specialist:                            Noushig Chahe Kaloustian




Public Disclosure




                    Jan 17, 2025                                                                                                 Page 9 of 9
