Public Disclosure Authorized                                               FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
                                                                                                                            Report No: PADHI01180

                                                               INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

                                                                      PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                                 ON A
                                                                            PROPOSED CREDIT

                                                                   IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 18.5 MILLION
                                                                       (US$25MILLION EQUIVALENT)

                                                                                       TO

                                                                                  SAINT LUCIA




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                              FOR THE
                                                       SAINT LUCIA URBAN RESILIENT FLOOD INVESTMENT PROJECT

                                                                             SEPTEMBER 2, 2025




                                Urban, Resilience and Land Global Practice
                                Latin America and Caribbean Region




Public Disclosure Authorized


                               This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official
                               duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.



                                                                                                               Official Use Only
                   GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR
                      APRIL 1 - MARCH 31

                    CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

              (Exchange Rate Effective 31-July-2025]

                       Currency Unit = XCD
                        XCD 2.71 = US$1
                        XCD 1 = US$0.37




Regional Vice President: Carlos Felipe Jaramillo
     Regional Director: Maria Marcela Silva
      Country Director: Lilia Burunciuc
     Practice Manager: Federica Ranghieri
  Task Team Leader(s): Jared Phillip Mercadante, Artessa Saldivar-Sali




                                                             Official Use Only
                                 ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AM          Accountability Mechanism                   IDA      International Development Association
AWP         Annual Work Plan                           IPF      Investment Project Financing
Cat-DDO     Catastrophe Draw Down Option               M&E      Monitoring and Evaluation
            Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance       MoA      Ministry of Agriculture
CCRIF SPC
            Facility Segregated Portfolio Company
                                                       MoF      Ministry of Finance, Economic
CDB         Caribbean Development Bank
                                                                Development and Youth Economy
DA          Designated Account                         MoH      Ministry of Housing and Local Government
            Disbursement and Financial Information     NBS      Nature-Based Solutions
DFIL
            Letter
                                                       NCDMS    National Comprehensive Disaster
DMP         Disaster Management Project
                                                                Management Strategy
DoED        Department of Economic Development         NDC      Nationally Determined Contribution
            and Youth Economy
DRM         Disaster Risk Management                   NEMO     National Emergency Management
                                                                Organization
DVRP        Disaster Vulnerability Reduction Project   NIPPU    National Integrated Programme and
                                                                Planning Unit
E&S         Environmental and Social                   OECS     Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States
ESS         Environmental and Social Standards         O&M      Operations and Maintenance
ESCP        Environmental and Social Committed         PCU      Project Coordination Unit
            Plan
EIRR        Economic Internal Rate of Return           PDO      Project Development Objective
EP&R        Emergency Preparedness and Response        POM      Project Operations Manual
EU          European Union                             PPG      Project Preparation Grant
EWS         Early Warning Systems                      PPSD     Project Procurement Strategy for
                                                                Development
FHH         Female-Headed Household                    PSC      Project Steering Committee
FM          Financial Management                       SDGs     Sustainable Development Goals
GDP         Gross Domestic Product                     SLFFGS   Saint Lucia Flash Flood Guidance System
GFDRR       Global Facility for Disaster Reduction     SLMS     Saint Lucia Meteorological Services
            and Recovery
GoSL        Government of Saint Lucia                  UNOPS    United Nations Office for Project Services
GRS         Grievance Redress Service                  WRMA     Water Resources Management Agency
IFR         Interim Financial Report




                                                                            Official Use Only
         The World Bank
         Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)                                                                 PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT



                                                      TABLE OF CONTENTS

DATASHEET ........................................................................................................................... ii
I.    STRATEGIC CONTEXT ...................................................................................................... 1
      A. Project Strategic Context .................................................................................................................. 1
      B. Sectoral and Institutional Context .................................................................................................... 1
II.   PROJECT DESCRIPTION.................................................................................................... 3
      A. Project Development Objective ........................................................................................................ 3
      B. Theory of Change and PDO Indicators .............................................................................................. 3
      C. Project Beneficiaries ......................................................................................................................... 4
      D. Project Components ......................................................................................................................... 5
      E. Role of Partners ................................................................................................................................. 8
      F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design....................................................................... 8
III. PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION ........................................................................................... 9
      A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements ............................................................................. 9
      B. Results Monitoring, Evaluation, and Verification Arrangements ................................................... 10
      C. Disbursement Arrangements .......................................................................................................... 10
PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY .......................................................................................... 11
      A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis ................................................................................... 11
      B. Fiduciary .......................................................................................................................................... 15
      C. Environmental, Social and Legal Operational Policies .................................................................... 17
V. KEY RISKS...................................................................................................................... 18
ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK ......................................................................................... 20




                                                                                                                                                                               i


                                                                                                                                                                   Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)                      PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padbasicinformation#doctemplate
DATASHEET


BASIC INFORMATION


Project
                         Operation Name
Beneficiary(ies)
St. Lucia                Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project
                                                     Environmental and Social Risk
Operation ID             Financing Instrument
                                                     Classification
                         Investment Project
P504998                                              Moderate
                         Financing (IPF)

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padprocessing#doctemplate
Financing & Implementation Modalities

[ ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA)                      [ ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)
[ ] Series of Projects (SOP)                                    [ ] Fragile State(s)
[ ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs)                         [✓] Small State(s)
[ ] Financial Intermediaries (FI)                               [ ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country
[ ] Project-Based Guarantee                                     [ ] Conflict
[ ] Deferred Drawdown                                           [ ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster
[ ] Alternative Procurement Arrangements (APA)                  [ ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS)


Expected Approval Date                 Expected Closing Date
03-Oct-2025                            31-Oct-2031
Bank/IFC Collaboration
No


Proposed Development Objective(s)
(i) enhance resilience to floods in selected areas, and (ii) strengthen the Government’s capacity for managing climate-
related risks.

Components
 Component Name                                                                                              Cost (US$)


                                                                                                                          ii


                                                                                                             Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)                 PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


 Institutional and system strengthening for flood resilience and
                                                                                                       2,500,000.00
 preparedness
 Enhancement of critical flood-risk reduction infrastructure                                          20,000,000.00
 Project management and supervision                                                                    2,500,000.00

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padborrower#doctemplate

Organizations

 Borrower:                      Saint Lucia

 Contact                       Title                     Telephone No.      Email
 Philip Pierre                 Minister for Finance      758 468 2100       opm@govt.lc
 Implementing Agency:          Department of Economic Development and Youth Economy

 Contact                       Title                           Telephone No.   Email
 Paul Hilaire                  Permanent Secretary             7584682180      paul.hilaire@govt.lc



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padfinancingsummary#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                      No

Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?                No

SUMMARY

  Total Operation Cost                                                                                        25.00

  Total Financing                                                                                             25.00
                of which IBRD/IDA                                                                             25.00

  Financing Gap                                                                                                0.00

DETAILS

 World Bank Group Financing
   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                25.00

      IDA Credit                                                                                              25.00


                                                                                                                    iii


                                                                                                         Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)                         PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


IDA Resources (US$, Millions)

                                                                                             Guarantee
                           Credit Amount     Grant Amount           SML Amount                            Total Amount
                                                                                               Amount

National
Performance-Based                   25.00               0.00                 0.00                 0.00            25.00
Allocations (PBA)

Total                               25.00               0.00                 0.00                 0.00            25.00


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@paddisbursementprojection#doctemplate
Expected Disbursements (US$, Millions)
WB Fiscal
Year                2026            2027        2028               2029             2030          2031          2032

Annual              0.50            1.00         2.00              3.00             5.00           9.00         4.50
Cumulative          0.50            1.50         3.50              6.50             11.50         20.50        25.00


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padclimatechange#doctemplate
PRACTICE AREA(S)


Practice Area (Lead)                                           Contributing Practice Areas
Urban, Resilience and Land

CLIMATE


Climate Change and Disaster Screening
Yes, it has been screened and the results are discussed in the Operation Document


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padrisk#doctemplate
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK- RATING TOOL (SORT)


Risk Category                                                                Rating
1. Political and Governance                                                   Moderate
2. Macroeconomic                                                              Moderate
3. Sector Strategies and Policies                                             Moderate

                                                                                                                       iv


                                                                                                            Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)                    PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


4. Technical Design of Project or Program                                    Moderate
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability              Moderate
6. Fiduciary                                                                 Moderate
7. Environment and Social                                                    Moderate
8. Stakeholders                                                              Moderate
9. Overall                                                                   Moderate


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padcompliance#doctemplate
POLICY COMPLIANCE


Policy
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects?
[ ] Yes      [✓] No

Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?
[ ] Yes [✓] No



ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL


Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal
E & S Standards                                                                     Relevance
ESS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and
                                                                                    Relevant
Impacts
ESS 10: Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                           Relevant
ESS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                                                 Relevant
ESS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                  Relevant
ESS 4: Community Health and Safety                                                  Relevant
ESS 5: Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement      Relevant
ESS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural
                                                                                    Relevant
Resources
ESS 7: Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved
                                                                                    Not Currently Relevant
Traditional Local Communities
ESS 8: Cultural Heritage                                                            Relevant
ESS 9: Financial Intermediaries                                                     Not Currently Relevant

                                                                                                                        v


                                                                                                             Official Use Only
       The World Bank
       Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)                   PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review
Summary (ESRS).

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalcovenants#doctemplate
LEGAL
Legal Covenants
Sections and Description
Schedule 2, Section I.A.1: The Recipient, through MOF, shall, by not later than ninety (90) days after the Effective Date,
establish, and thereafter maintain during the Project implementation a Project Steering Committee, with powers,
functions, staffing, facilities, and other resources acceptable to the Association, as further detailed in the Project
Operations Manual.
Schedule 2, Section I.A.2: The Recipient, through MOF, shall, by not later than thirty (30) days after the Effective Date,
establish, and thereafter maintain during the Project implementation the following entities with powers, functions,
staffing, facilities, and other resources acceptable to the Association, as further detailed in the Project Operations
Manual, a Project Coordination Unit within the Department of Economic Development and Youth Economy of MOF.
Schedule 2, Section I.C.1: The Recipient, through MOF, shall prepare and furnish to the Association by not later than
November 30 of the Recipient’s each calendar year, for the Association’s consideration, a draft work plan of activities
proposed for inclusion in the Project for the following calendar year, containing all Project activities and expenditures
proposed to be included in the Project in the following calendar year, including a specification of the sources of
financing for all expenditures, and environmental and social risk, and impact management measures taken or planned
to be taken in accordance with the provisions of Section I.E of this Schedule.
Schedule 2, Section I.D.1: For the implementation of Parts 1.1(a), 1.1(b), and 2 of the Project, the Recipient, through
MOF, shall select the flood reduction investments on the basis of the eligibility criteria and requirements acceptable to
the Association as set forth below in this Agreement and further detailed in the Project Operations Manual, unless
otherwise approved by the Association in writing and thereafter set forth in the Project Manuals: (a) the Selected Flood
Reduction Investments shall address identified community needs or vulnerabilities to climate change impacts; (b) the
Selected Flood Reduction Investments shall be economically and financially viable, supported by an appropriate budget;
(c) the Selected Flood Reduction Investments shall incorporate measures that enhance climate resilience and reduce
vulnerability to climate-related risks; (d) the Selected Flood Reduction Investments shall undergo, prior to their
commencement, extensive consultations with a range of stakeholders through participatory processes to ensure that
community needs are incorporated and the investments are inclusive and equitable; and (e) the amount for each
Selected Flood Reduction Investment shall not exceed eighteen million Dollars ($18,000,000).

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padconditions#doctemplate
Conditions
Type                           Citation                       Description                    Financing Source
                                                              The Project Operations
                                                              Manual has been adopted
Effectiveness                  Articale IV.4.01               by MOF in form and             IBRD/IDA
                                                              substance satisfactory to
                                                              the Association.

                                                                                                                        vi


                                                                                                             Official Use Only
    The World Bank
    Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)                     PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


                                                            Notwithstanding the
                                                            provisions of Part A of this
                                                            section, no withdrawal
                                                            shall be made for Eligible
                                                            Expenditures under
                                                            Category (2), until and
Disbursement                Schedule 2, Section III.B.1.b                                   IBRD/IDA
                                                            unless the Association has
                                                            notified the Recipient that
                                                            the conditions set forth in
                                                            Section 5.15 (a) of the
                                                            General Conditions have
                                                            been fulfilled.
                                                            Notwithstanding the
                                                            provisions of Part A of this
                                                            section, no withdrawal
                                                            shall be made for
                                                            Complementary Financing
                                                            for the Cat DDO under
                                                            Category (3), until and
                                                            unless: (i) the Recipient has
                                                            furnished to the
                                                            Association a request to
                                                            reallocate and thereafter
                                                            withdraw all or part of the
                                                            Unwithdrawn Credit
                                                            Balance for the
Disbursement                Schedule 2, Section III.B.1.c   Complementary Financing         IBRD/IDA
                                                            for the Cat DDO, and such
                                                            notice specifies the Cat
                                                            DDO Legal Agreement; and
                                                            (ii) the Association has
                                                            accepted said request and
                                                            notified the Recipient
                                                            thereof, and is satisfied,
                                                            based on evidence
                                                            satisfactory to it, that the
                                                            conditions precedent to
                                                            withdrawal of the financing
                                                            provided under the Cat
                                                            DDO Legal Agreement have
                                                            been fulfilled




                                                                                                                 vii


                                                                                                       Official Use Only
           The World Bank
           Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)                                      PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT



      I.     STRATEGIC CONTEXT


 A. Project Strategic Context
1.       Saint Lucia is a small island state in the Lesser Antilles island chain between Saint Vincent to the south and
Martinique to the north and has an estimated population of 180,000 (2022). 1 The island has an area of 617 km2 with
nearly half of its population concentrated in the coastal zones of the north and south, such as the capital city Castries, and
Gros Islet. The island is volcanic in origin, composed of a north-south-oriented mountainous interior. Saint Lucia faces
significant flood risk due to its steep terrain, high rainfall, and dense coastal settlements, which make the island vulnerable
to riverine and flash flooding. Climate change exacerbates these risks by increasing the intensity and frequency of extreme
weather events, which threaten lives, infrastructure, livelihoods, and economic stability.

2.       Saint Lucia is in the Caribbean Hurricane Belt and is highly exposed to hydrometeorological and geological
hazards, including hurricanes, storm surges, sea level rise, and high volcanic and seismic activity. Between 1980 and 2015,
Saint Lucia was affected by at least six major hurricanes and tropical storms, including Hurricane Tomas in 2010, which
caused damages of around 45 percent of Saint Lucia’s gross domestic product (GDP). Saint Lucia has an Annual Average
Loss (from hurricanes alone) of approximately US$9.5 million, or 0.4 percent of its 2023 GDP. 2 Flash floods from heavy
rainfall are the most dominant source of flooding, exacerbated by the high tides and storm surges, which impede gravity
drainage in the coastal zone. Historically, extreme flooding events took place in 1980 (Hurricane Allen), 1994 (Tropical
Storm Debby), 2010 (Hurricane Tomas), and 2013 (Christmas Eve Trough). The 2013 Christmas Eve Trough triggered
several landslides and resulted in total damage and loss of US$99.88 million, equivalent to 8.3 percent of GDP, with
infrastructural damages of US$71.9 million and flash floods affecting over 20,000 people, or 11 percent of the total
population.

3.        Disaster damage and vulnerabilities are particularly pronounced in the low-lying coastal zones, where nearly
60 percent of the population lives. These areas boast key tourism attractions and concentrated economic activities,
making them attractive for high-value assets. The availability of job opportunities in the informal and service sectors has
also drawn many low-income communities to these zones. Critical infrastructure assets like airports, seaports, fuel storage
facilities and major road networks are predominantly located along the coast or on low-lying reclaimed coastal land, along
with natural flood management solutions such as mangroves or wetland areas serving as effective barriers to inundation
events. Almost 80 percent of the country’s economic assets are exposed to one of the four hazards of sea-level rise, storm
surge, flash floods, or landslides. 3 Research suggests that under a global high emissions scenario, Saint Lucia could lose up
to US$20 million annually by 2025 and US$70 million by 2100, under a global high emissions scenario without significant
improvements in coastal resilience. 4

 B. Sectoral and Institutional Context
4.       The Government of Saint Lucia (GoSL) has developed national strategies and policies to promote more climate-
resilient development planning. Its regulatory framework is guided by the Disaster Management Act of Saint Lucia 2006,


1 Government of Saint Lucia. 2022. Population and Housing Census. https://stats.gov.lc/wp-content/uploads/2024/08/StLucia-Provisional-Census-

Report-2022-Release-1Rev1.pdf
2 Disaster Risk Profiles - Saint Lucia (English). Washington, D.C.: World Bank

Group. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/471581493284709842
3 United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS). 2020. Saint Lucia: National infrastructure assessment.

https://content.unops.org/publications/Saint-Lucia-National-Infrastructure-Assessment.pdf
4 Bueno, Ramón, Cornelia Herzfeld, Elizabeth A. Stanton, and Frank Ackerman. 2008. Stockholm Environment Institute—US Center & Global

Development and Environment Institute, Tufts University. The Caribbean and Climate Change: The Costs of Inaction.
                            Official Use Only                                                                                          Page 1
       The World Bank
       Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)                       PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


the National Emergency Management Plan, and the National Comprehensive Disaster Management Strategy (NCDMS).
The Disaster Management Act aims to improve the mitigation of, preparedness for, response to, and recovery from
emergencies and disasters and established the National Emergency Management Organization (NEMO). In 2018, the
Cabinet approved a National Disaster Risk Financing Strategy to systematically assess and quantify the economic and fiscal
impact associated with disasters.

5.      Saint Lucia’s disaster risk management (DRM) strategies and regulatory framework are aligned with
international standards. ‘Adaptation for environmental sustainability, climate change and disaster vulnerability
reduction’ is recognized as one of the Strategic Development Pillars of the country’s Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs). Saint Lucia updated its Nationally Determined Contribution in February 2025 (NDC 3.0) to reflect an increased
ambition in mitigation, adaptation, and reduction of loss and damage from climate-related disasters.

6.      The country has advanced its disaster resilience agenda through a series of donor-supported initiatives and
partnerships. The Saint Lucia Disaster Vulnerability Reduction Project (DVRP, P127226) reduced vulnerability to natural
hazards and climate change impacts by supporting investments in risk assessment, financing and infrastructure sectors.
The Air Transport Connectivity Project (P170860) enhanced air transport resilience to natural disasters. Notably, the Saint
Lucia Disaster Risk Management Catastrophe Draw Down Option (Cat DDO) (P181432), approved on April 10, 2025,
provides the GoSL with immediate liquidity following a natural catastrophe, including natural disasters and public health
emergencies. Other sector-specific and flood risk-focused initiatives include: Building Resilience for Adaptation to Climate
Change and Climate Variability in Agriculture, financed by the Caribbean Development Bank (CDB); Increasing the
Resilience of the Education System to Climate Change Impacts in the Eastern Caribbean led by UN-Habitat; and Anse La
Raye Mangrove Restoration and Flood Mitigation financed by the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility
Segregated Portfolio Company (CCRIF SPC) and Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) Commission.

7.       The Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project will focus on the urban centers of Castries and Anse
La Raye and the river basins in which they are located. The capital city, Castries, hosts 60,614 people (35 percent of the
country's population, 2022), and is heavily urbanized, with an economy driven by tourism, cargo, construction,
manufacturing, commerce and retail, and public services. The city is highly vulnerable to fluvial and pluvial flooding, as it
is built on a floodplain and on reclaimed land. Flooding is particularly severe in the low-lying Central Business District
between the King George V Gardens (designated as a retention pond) and the coast and is expected to worsen with climate
change. Flooding is exacerbated by clogged drains filled with sediment and debris, blocked trash screens, limited discharge
capacities of culverts and malfunctioning pump systems, which severely restrict water discharge, particularly at high tide.
With a smaller population of 5,841 (2022) and a poverty rate of 44.9 percent, Anse La Raye is a fishing village 16 km south
of the capital and one of the most vulnerable communities in Saint Lucia. It is located between two rivers flowing into the
bay – the Petite Rivière to the north and the Grande Rivière to the south. The pluvial and fluvial flood hazards in this area
are high, mainly along the Petite Rivière, due to insufficient conveyance capacity towards the mouths of both rivers in the
village, caused by flow-obstructing culverts, road crossings and accretion in the river outfall to the sea. Anse La Raye was
among the hardest-hit areas during the 2013 Christmas Eve Trough and the 2014 November Rainfall.

8.      National efforts are ongoing to strengthen flood resilience in the two target areas. Castries Vision 2030 aims for
transformation into a resilient, livable, and economically vibrant city through the incorporation of green infrastructure,
upgrading of stormwater drainage systems, and implementation of sustainable land use and water management practices,
including redevelopment of public space. The Community-Based Disaster Risk Reduction Programs led by NEMO installed
physical infrastructure and empowered local communities to identify and manage disaster risks, reduce response time,
and thus lower vulnerabilities to flash floods, landslides, and other hazards. Anse La Raye is deploying nature-based
solutions (NBS), including mangrove restoration and tree plantations, as well as riverbank stabilization through protective


                       Official Use Only                                                                              Page 2
       The World Bank
       Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)                      PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


walls and educational programs to raise awareness with support from CCRIF SPC, OECS Commission, the Government of
New Zealand, Division of Forests and Land Resources Development, and the Anse La Raye Disaster Committee.

9.       Disaster resilience is integral to advancing sustainability and social equity. Saint Lucia is actively involving
women, ethnic minorities, the indigent, and people with disabilities in DRM and climate change adaptation programs and
public financial management. Furthermore, the country’s progress on poverty reduction and shared prosperity has been
steadily advancing, despite economic shocks due to extreme weather events. According to the most recent poverty
estimates from 2016, Saint Lucia’s poverty rate declined by 3.8 percent compared to 2006, reaching 25 percent, with the
most significant decrease observed in rural areas where poverty dropped by nearly 10 percent to 32.9 percent. 5 While the
unemployment rate fluctuated between 15 and 20 percent over the past decade, a significant proportion of Saint Lucia’s
population is still in vulnerable employment: 16.7 percent of women and 28.1 percent of men. This is particularly true for
those in informal work arrangements or without social protection, leaving them vulnerable to external shocks.

 II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION


 A. Project Development Objective

10.     The Project Development Objectives (PDO) are to (i) enhance resilience to floods in selected areas, and (ii)
strengthen the Government’s capacity for managing climate-related risks.

 B. Theory of Change and PDO Indicators


11.      Critical assumptions are as follows: (a) procurement processes advance smoothly with adequate market
responses and quality local supply of goods, works, and services; (b) adequate operation and maintenance (O&M) budget
is allocated by the relevant agencies (at national and local levels) to maintain investments in drainage infrastructure; and
(c) emergencies causing significant damage (e.g., heavy rains, landslides, floods, and hurricanes) do not occur in the first
two foundational years of Project implementation.




                       Official Use Only                                                                             Page 3
         The World Bank
         Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)                      PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


                                                  Figure 1. Theory of Change




12.       The PDO will be measured by the following indicators:

      (a) People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure (Number of people disaggregated by gender and youth) –
          World Bank Group Scorecard indicator

      (b) Climate and disaster risk-informed strategies and feasibility studies available to the government for investments
          in infrastructure (Number).

 C. Project Beneficiaries

13.      Under Component 1, beneficiaries will include: (a) the communities of Castries and Anse La Raye that are expected
to directly benefit from training and skills transfer, and (b) representatives from Castries City Council, Department of
Infrastructure, the Ministry of Housing and Local Government (MoH), the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) and its Forestry
Division, the Water Resources Management Agency (WRMA), National Integrated Programme and Planning Unit (NIPPU),
NEMO, and Saint Lucia Meteorological Services (SLMS), which will receive capacity building and systems strengthening
support. An additional community to be identified, which may include Vieux Fort, Laborie or Dennery, will also benefit
from flood risk assessments and feasibility studies for future risk mitigation investments. Capacity development provided
under this component is expected to improve the way communities and institutions plan, prepare for, and respond to
disasters. An estimated 8,500 citizens and officials are expected to benefit from the capacity-building programs.

14.     Under Component 2, the Project will reduce flood risk in the urban centers of Castries and Anse La Raye, and the
river basins in which they are located, which have a population of 60,614 and 5,841 people, respectively, cumulatively
representing 39 percent of the total population. As the economic center of the island, Castries is critical for tourism, cargo,
                        Official Use Only                                                                               Page 4
       The World Bank
       Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)                       PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


construction, manufacturing, commerce and retail, and public services for the entire Saint Lucia, and therefore, this
component will benefit the entire population of 171,000.

 D. Project Components
15.     The PDO will be achieved through three components.

Component 1: Institutional and System Strengthening for Flood Resilience and Preparedness (US$2.5 million
equivalent)

16.      This component will finance the detailed engineering designs and construction supervision for selected flood
mitigation investments within Castries and Anse La Raye, while also strengthening the GoSL’s capacity to prepare for and
manage the impacts of climate change and natural hazards. It will focus on technical assistance and capacity-building to
support the integration of DRM in infrastructure planning, design, financing, O&M, and institutional strengthening and
coordination. Improvements to existing infrastructure practices will support efforts to prolong the design life and
resilience of infrastructure investments. The component will also support investments in equipment and systems that will
strengthen O&M processes, improve asset management and strengthen early warning system (EWS) capacity,
functionality, and community-based coordination and preparedness.

Sub-component 1.1: Enhancing Flood Infrastructure Planning, Design, and Construction Supervision

17.      This Sub-component will finance the detailed engineering designs and construction supervision for selected
flood reduction investments. Technical pre-feasibility and feasibility studies are being carried out under a Recipient-
executed Global Facility for Disaster Reduction (GFDRR) Project Preparation Grant (PPG), mobilized under the GFDRR’s
European Union (EU) Resilient Caribbean Program Single-Donor Trust Fund, to guide the selection of the Project’s
investments in Castries and Anse La Raye. Under the PPG, a hydrological and hydraulic modeling framework is being
developed for the two target areas using a basin-wide approach, leveraging the availability of the new, high-resolution
terrain model developed under the DVRP. The hydrological and hydraulic models, representing the current state of the
drainage system, will be used to assess and map flood risk for a range of current and future climate scenarios. The PPG
will help identify locations with the highest flood risk and where the implementation of flood mitigation strategies will
result in the highest reduction of flood risk. Based on this analysis, the Project will finance preliminary and detailed
engineering designs for the selected flood reduction investments and construction supervision for the civil works to be
carried out under Component 2. Designs will be guided by universal design standards and use inclusive approaches to
address the needs of vulnerable populations, including women, the elderly, and persons with disabilities.

18.      The Project will leverage the multifunctional characteristics of NBS and offer additional benefits for biodiversity,
local economic development, and community well-being. In and around cities, NBS supports Sustainable Urban Drainage
Systems and may include small-scale bioswales and green corridors along streets and urban parks. Coastal NBS include
mangroves, coral reefs, salt marshes and sandy shores. Upstream NBS include afforestation, the creation of retention
through terraces, flow attenuation features, and bio-retention ponds, as well as stream renaturation along the whole
channel and tributaries to limit bank erosion. The NBS are expected to improve the urban environment and livability,
particularly through upgrading public spaces, integrating green and open areas, and enhancing experiences for tourism
and recreation. NBS may include opportunities to integrate new development with regeneration that boosts economic
activities and brings long-term benefits, creating more sustainable, vibrant, and investor-friendly communities.




                       Official Use Only                                                                              Page 5
        The World Bank
        Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)                                     PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


Inclusiveness and safety, particularly for women and girls, will be addressed through improved lighting, controlled
vegetation and other design features to preserve visibility. 6

19.      Flood mitigation infrastructure investment options will be assessed and prioritized based on cost-benefit and
multi-criteria analyses. The selection of flood mitigation investments will be based on economic, social and environmental
factors, including costs, benefits in terms of hazard and/or damage reduction, cost-benefit ratios, and environmental and
social (E&S) impacts. This process will include extensive consultations with a range of stakeholders through participatory
processes, such as workshops and roundtables, to ensure that community needs are addressed, and investments are
inclusive and equitable. NBS investments will also be validated with local communities to confirm needs, the process of
land acquisition, and maintenance planning with local authorities.

20.     The Project is also envisioned as an operation scalable to other priority areas vulnerable to flood hazards. Flood
risk management is a challenge in low-lying towns and urban areas across Saint Lucia, including Vieux Fort, Laborie, and
Dennery, which are characterized by sandy beaches. To expand flood resilience in Saint Lucia, the Project will finance the
development of additional risk assessments and feasibility studies in priority areas to establish a pipeline of future
investments for the GoSL.

Sub-component 1.2: Strengthening Local Flood Preparedness through better Operations and Maintenance

21.      This Sub-component will finance consulting services and goods to enhance O&M of drainage systems in the
Project areas. While drainage infrastructure is regularly maintained by the Department of Infrastructure and the local
governments of Castries and Anse La Raye, the effectiveness of existing protocols and equipment could be significantly
strengthened to enhance water management system maintenance, planning, and operational performance. The Project
will support the review of existing protocols, institutional arrangements, O&M plans, equipment and provision of technical
assistance and goods required to enhance flood management capacity for current and future risk. Selected interventions
will be guided by the outcomes of the PPG-financed assessments and may include improvements to asset management
systems and standard operating procedures for annual and emergency infrastructure repairs/maintenance.

Sub-component 1.3: Strengthening Flood Early Warning Systems

22.     This Sub-component will finance consulting services and goods to strengthen flood EWS. Informed by evidence
and anchored in the NCDMS, a national multi-hazard EWS policy and adaptation guide was developed in 2019. In the same
year, the SLMS and the WRMA began implementing a Saint Lucia Flash Flood Guidance System (SLFFGS), aimed at real-
time computation of flood risk for small watercourses. The system uses gridded global satellite-based precipitation
estimates, real-time automatic weather station data, and gridded Meteo-France forecast data to help predict severe
weather. The system was enhanced in 2023 to include LiDAR and RADAR 7 data; however, the system is not yet used to
inform flash flood response. Under the PPG, performance review of the SLFFGS will be conducted, and recommendations
made for improvements.

23.    Community-based EWS for floods in Castries and Anse La Raye will also be improved. Castries flood risk
management is supported by a network for monitoring rainfall and stream flows within the growing urban area. In Anse
La Raye, an EWS has been established, with NEMO supporting community outreach and awareness-raising initiatives.
These community-based EWS for floods are no longer functioning well and require rehabilitation. Studies have indicated

6
  Trohanis,Zoe Elena; Jongman,Brenden; Escobar Saenz,Mirtha Liliana.
Integrating Gender and Social Inclusion in Nature-Based Solutions: Guidance Note (English). Washington, D.C.: World Bank
Group. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/099060123165042304
7
  LIDAR = Light Detection and Ranging, RADAR = Radio Detection and Ranging
                           Official Use Only                                                                                   Page 6
        The World Bank
        Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)                                       PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


that essential real-time data for issuing accurate warnings is missing and sufficient knowledge of the country’s hydrology
is lacking. This sub-component will, therefore, assess community-based EWS and communications infrastructure needs
and protocols, identify gaps and enhance the current EWS infrastructure by procuring and installing suitable
instrumentation such as automatic water level monitors, automatic weather stations, and tipping-bucket rain gauges.
Participatory approaches will be adopted for information gathering, validation, dissemination, and capacity building,
particularly to ensure that ‘last-mile’ warnings are not only understandable but also actionable by the community
(especially vulnerable groups). This will foster local ownership and accessibility, particularly among the vulnerable groups
such as women and people with disabilities. The aim is to set up more accurate and live information in the established
community-based EWS and strengthen flood preparedness in the Project areas.

Component 2. Enhancement of Critical Flood-Risk Reduction Infrastructure (US$20 million equivalent)

24.      This component will finance select infrastructure investments that will increase the resilience of communities
to flood and climate change-induced hazards in Castries and Anse La Raye. The component will finance the
implementation of activities designed under Component 1, which will support an integrated river basin approach toward
urban flood risk management and reduction. The identification of key infrastructure investments is ongoing under the
PPG. Given the vulnerability of Saint Lucia to climate change and natural hazards, the design and construction of all
infrastructure supported by this component will be assessed against future climate patterns and include opportunities to
integrate mitigation and adaptation measures. For example, drainage and stabilization infrastructure will prioritize the
use of higher-quality, more disaster-resilient materials that incorporate climate change considerations. 8

25.     Selected investments will comprise both gray infrastructure solutions and NBS. Gray infrastructure investments
are expected to include rehabilitation of urban drainage (e.g. new, enhanced or rehabilitated water retention areas;
pumping stations; flood walls and channel widening; dredging or removal of obstacles; and increasing access to drainage
systems), slope stabilization, river embankment protection and sea defense. Depending on the scope of these
investments, the Project may also need to support the realignment of road and water management infrastructure
networks. The NBS are expected to include the establishment of green corridors, river and stream renaturation,
improvements to upstream small-scale catchment areas and storm water retention systems, and the establishment of
bioretention and sediment areas within green spaces and long public corridors.

26.     For Castries, redevelopment of the Constitution and King George V Parks and solutions for drainage downstream
in the market area, which is the lowest point and where both the downtown and the King George areas naturally drain,
are identified as potential opportunities for multipurpose recreation and flood management infrastructure. As a natural
low point, gravity-based drainage is impeded at high tides, and flood risk management interventions will likely require a
combination of NBS and gray-infrastructure investments, such as repair or replacement of pumping stations to discharge
water in certain areas. Upstream interventions to manage sediment and waste entering the urban drainage system are
envisioned, as the current drainage system is heavily silted, limiting drainage capacity during heavy rainfall events.
Potential solutions such as sediment traps and permeable check dams could help slow runoff and reduce clogging. Flood
risk reduction, including riverine flooding, could also be improved by floodplain recovery and detention areas along

8
   The use of more resilient materials and construction techniques is economically beneficial and provides savings in total ownership costs over the
life of the building —including annual maintenance costs, energy costs, and hazard costs—were generally lower. These economic benefits stem
from the reduced hazard loss from using more resilient materials and construction methods, as well as from reduced energy use and CO2 emissions
from improving the building’s insulation and using greener concrete options with less embedded CO2. Bailey, J., Carvajal, P., García Fernández, J.,
Gischler, C., Henriquez, C., & Minoja, L. 2021. Building a more Resilient and Low-Carbon Caribbean - Report 1: Climate Resiliency and Building
Materials in the Caribbean. https://doi.org/10.18235/00038429 Trohanis,Zoe Elena; Jongman,Brenden; Escobar Saenz,Mirtha Liliana. 2023.
Integrating Gender and Social Inclusion in Nature-Based Solutions: Guidance Note (English). Washington, D.C.: World Bank
Group. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/099060123165042304
                           Official Use Only                                                                                                Page 7
       The World Bank
       Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)                          PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


waterways, and by designing multifunctional civic/recreation spaces and linear parks downstream, where space is
available. The Project may finance coastal protection (e.g. seawalls, NBS), street lighting, public facilities like toilets, and
amenities such as seating based on current land use and the availability of public land in upstream areas.

27.     In Anse La Raye, possible NBS and gray solutions, integrated at the urban, riverine and coastal levels, include
improvements in the river discharge. By managing the sand barriers at the coast and stabilizing its outfalls with abutments,
more retention areas upstream and in the coastal town itself will be created, improving the drainage system in the village
with sluice gates upstream and downstream pumps. Historically, the sports field in the village served as a flood retention
area, which may be restored to create a larger retention space for flood waters. A previous raising of the sports field
rendered the central drain largely ineffective, leading to stagnant water and associated public health risks due to
discharges from open sewers and limited flushing caused by backwater from the river mouth. Installing a pumping station
downstream of the drain, along with a sluice gate upstream, may enable controlled flushing and help restore drainage
function. Besides their primary flood management function, these investments will also accrue socio-economic and health
benefits to the community.

Component 3: Project Management and Supervision (US$2.5 million equivalent)

28.      This component will finance consulting services, goods and equipment for the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) to
provide technical and operational support for: (i) Project management and coordination, including financial management
(FM) and disbursement, audits, procurement, contract administration, E&S risk and impact management, grievance
mechanisms, communications, training, Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E), and reporting and evaluation; and (ii) carrying
out citizen engagement and social awareness activities. Incremental Project operating costs for the PCU will also be
financed through this component. The PCU, through the Department of Economic Development and Youth Economy
(DoED), will also be responsible for reporting Project progress to the Project Steering Committee (PSC).

 E. Role of Partners

       Name of Partner     Nature of Involvement /Description
                           The EU is financing the PPG and the World Bank is closely coordinating with the EU Regional
                           Climate Program and their EU-funded program (a project with the Water and Sewerage Company
       EU                  for integrating climate resilience into policies, planning, and development of the investment
                           program), and with the European Investment Bank, which is financing a regional project on water
                           management.
                           The World Bank will coordinate with the OECS Commission on ongoing efforts in Anse La Raye to
       OECS                deploy NBS approaches (including mangrove restoration and tree plantations, as well as
       Commission          riverbank stabilization through protective walls), educational programs to raise awareness and
                           build local capacity.

 F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design
29.     Project design draws on lessons from the World Bank’s Saint Lucia DRM operations and regional experience.
Countries such as Saint Lucia, Grenada, Barbados, and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines have faced repeated climate-
related shocks, including Hurricane Beryl (2024), and other shocks such as the La Soufrière eruption (2021), and the COVID-
19 pandemic, with shared vulnerabilities. The importance of long-term institutional engagement in countries with limited
technical or institutional capacities was emphasized in project design. The Project will build on Saint Lucia DVRP’s efforts
to strengthen its hydrometeorological network with the repair and upgrade of monitoring equipment. It will improve
emergency preparedness and response (EP&R) by raising awareness of climate risks and improving climate monitoring

                         Official Use Only                                                                                   Page 8
       The World Bank
       Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)                      PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


and flood EWS through community-level preparedness under Component 1. The DVRP and Hurricane Tomas Recovery
Project underscored comprehensive procurement packages and prioritization of hands-on support tailored to the small
island developing states context instead of traditional capacity-building activities. This hands-on support will be provided
under Component 3.

30.     Global best practices were leveraged to ensure the long-term sustainability of climate-resilient infrastructures.
Enhancing urban flood risk management and coastal city resilience is a critical agenda across many countries. A consistent
lesson is the importance of integrating O&M planning into project design when indicative construction costs are being
estimated. This helps minimize future costs and ensures infrastructure remains functional in the face of recurrent
disasters. In addition, setting up EWS, conducting simulation drills, and building community capacity help formulate a
robust EP&R system. The Project is enhancing infrastructure sustainability by: (a) incorporating O&M and associated
budget planning in the design stages; and (b) strengthening emergency preparedness and response capacity by
implementing community-led EWS in response to recurrent natural disasters.

31.     Prioritizing NBS alongside traditional infrastructure enhances flood resilience while delivering ecological and
social co-benefits of safer livelihoods and improved public awareness and preparedness for climate risks. The Project
design emphasizes NBS complementing traditional infrastructure investments for flood resilience, informed by
international experience from initiatives funded by developing partners in Saint Lucia and the Caribbean. These included
the Flood Mitigation Project for Castries and Anse La Raye of the CDB (2016), Building Resilience for Adaptation to Climate
Change and Climate Variability in Agriculture (2019), and Enhancing Climate Resilience in Cariforum Countries project of
the European Development Fund (2024), and Caribbean Action for Resilience Enhancement Programme by CDB and EU
(2024), which tested similar hybrid approaches.

 III. PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION

 A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

32.      The Project will be implemented by the Ministry of Finance, Economic Development and Youth Economy (MoF),
through the DoED, and has a track record of successfully implementing World Bank investment projects. In over 30
years, the MoF, through its DoED, has successfully executed projects across sectors, with a focus on DRM-related
initiatives. These projects include the Emergency Recovery and Disaster Management Project (DMP) (P070430, 1998-
2005), Disaster Management II (P086469, DMP II, 2004-2012), the Hurricane Tomas Recovery Project (P125205, 2011-
2014), DVRP (P127226, 2014-2023), and the recently approved Saint Lucia Disaster Risk Management CAT DDO (P181432,
2025). The GoSL’s performance on these projects has consistently been rated satisfactory by the World Bank.

33.      Project oversight will be managed by a PCU within the DoED. The PCU will be headed by a dedicated Project
Coordinator and supported by a Project Engineer, FM specialist and officer, Procurement specialist and analyst, E&S
specialist, and a Project Officer. Reporting directly to the Permanent Secretary of DoED, the Project Coordinator will lead
project implementation and provide oversight in planning, organizing, and executing the Project’s daily administrative,
technical, and fiduciary activities. The PCU will also coordinate with government agencies and technical counterparts,
including the Castries City Council, Department of Infrastructure, MoH, MoA and its Forestry Division, WRMA, NIPPU,
NEMO and SLMS, to ensure their inputs are effectively integrated in key Project activities. The organizational structure of
the Project team, along with the duties and responsibilities of all the team members, will be provided in the Project
Operations Manual (POM).



                       Official Use Only                                                                             Page 9
       The World Bank
       Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)                     PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


34.     An interim PCU has been established to support Project preparation and expedite implementation upon Project
effectiveness. The interim PCU comprises an interim Project Coordinator and FM, procurement, and E&S specialists (with
experience on four other IDA-financed projects in Saint Lucia), hired with funding from the PPG. The PPG is also financing
the early procurement processes for hiring of remaining PCU staff. The interim PCU will transition to the PCU and be
financed by the Project following effectiveness. The FM and procurement specialists are currently financed by the OECS
Data for Decision Making Project (P174986), and through a cost-sharing arrangement, will also support the Project,
thereby leveraging expertise built on existing IDA-financed projects.

35.     Given the multi-sectoral nature of the Project, an inter-ministerial PSC will be established, comprising
permanent secretaries of relevant ministries. The PSC will consist of the heads of respective Ministries, agencies and
departments or their designated representatives and be maintained throughout Project implementation. The PSC will be
the principal coordinating body for the Project; however, it will not be a decision-making body. The PSC will be chaired by
the Permanent Secretary of the DoED. It will be responsible for oversight of Project implementation as well as central
policy guidance, as required. The frequency of the PSC meetings will be confirmed in the POM.

 B. Results Monitoring, Evaluation, and Verification Arrangements

36.     The DoED will have overall responsibility for Project M&E and will report to the World Bank on the Project’s
performance indicators, progress and implementation, quality control, and E&S risk management. In doing so, it will
leverage: (a) the Project’s Results Framework; (b) the comprehensive M&E plan detailing information requirements,
recording tools, and methodologies for data collection, analysis, and reporting; and (c) periodic assessments and
evaluations, including baseline studies, beneficiary assessments, quarterly financial reporting, biannual progress
reporting, annual audits, Project mid-term review, and ex-post evaluations.

 C. Disbursement Arrangements

37.     The funds flow and disbursement arrangements will follow standard World Bank Disbursement Guidelines and
Procedures. The disbursement methods available to the Project include: (a) advance, (b) reimbursement, and (c) direct
payment. A segregated US dollar Designated Account (DA) has been opened at Bank of Saint Lucia (for the PPG) and will
be used to receive advances disbursed by the World Bank and pay US dollar expenditures. Funds will be periodically
transferred from the DA to a segregated local currency operating account, which will also be maintained at Bank of Saint
Lucia to facilitate payment to suppliers and vendors in local currency.

38.      The disbursement arrangements are included in the Disbursement and Financial Information Letter (DFIL) and
are as established in the Disbursement Guidelines for Investment Project Financing (IPF), dated February 2017. The
minimum application size for direct payments and reimbursements will be recorded in the DFIL. Disbursement from the
World Bank to the DA will be based on unaudited interim financial reports (IFRs) submitted within 45 days after the closing
of each semi-annual reporting period (September and March), in the format agreed and included in the DFIL. The Project
will prepare 6-month cash forecasts based on agreed Project activities and submit them to the World Bank for approval
of the initial advance. Subsequent advances shall be based on IFRs, inclusive of a 6-month cash forecast net of available
cash balance in the DA and local currency accounts as of the end of the reporting period. Advances and documentation of
DA outstanding balance will be done using the World Bank client connection system. The MoF will submit the ‘authorized
signatory letter’ to the World Bank, to designate the officials who will be responsible for signing the withdrawal
applications in Client Connection.




                       Official Use Only                                                                           Page 10
       The World Bank
       Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)                       PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT




     PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY

 A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis

Technical Analysis

39.     Castries and Anse La Raye are highly exposed to flooding. Pluvial and fluvial flood hazards along Saint Lucia's
coastal zone are compounded by high tidal levels, storm surges, and rising sea levels, which significantly increase the
frequency and severity of flood events. In both these areas, the tide, which defines the downstream water level boundary,
at times hampers the gravity-based discharge of flood water with backwater, particularly when combined with wind.
Flooding along the coastal zone due to high tidal levels exacerbated by storm surge may, in the future, become an
additional risk factor.

40.       Ground surveys in these two areas will be conducted under the PPG to map and evaluate the drainage capacity of
critical systems and the urban drainage network under various climate scenarios. These analyses will include water flow
patterns and rainfall-runoff responses at both urban/village and river basin levels, providing insights into the conditions
that lead to flooding. Key factors such as drainage infrastructure capacity, sea-level impacts, and urban drainage
inefficiencies will be assessed. In Castries, a significant driver of flooding is the extent of impervious surfaces, which
combined with heavily silted drains and pumps in need of repairs, exacerbates runoff and intensifies rainfall concentration
in the urban environment. The analyses will support targeted interventions to mitigate flood risks and enhance resilience.

41.     The World Bank 2023 NBS opportunity scanning report examined opportunities for open green corridors and
stream renaturation, and determined that for Castries, around 40 ha of open green space could yield high flood protection
benefits while an additional 60 ha of land could yield medium benefits. The report also suggested that 65 ha of green
corridors and stream renaturation would only yield low flood protection benefits for pluvial flooding, and fluvial flood risk
reduction could be improved by exploring opportunities for floodplain recovery and detention areas along the river, for
instance, by designing multifunctional recreation spaces and linear parks. In the upstream areas, bioretention and urban
forests may also be useful. These solutions also offer the highest potential for heat stress reduction, with up to 50 ha of
green corridors providing a high level of benefit.

42.     For Anse La Raye, the NBS opportunities scanning report identified several prospects for the protection and
creation of NBS for open green spaces (10-12 ha), green corridors (9 ha) and stream renaturation (6 ha). Although these
improvements would mostly yield low to medium pluvial flood risk reduction, they are likely to have a greater impact on
reducing flooding from fluvial sources. These solutions also offer the highest potential for heat stress reduction. Flood risk
in Anse La Raye is exacerbated by wave overtopping in the fish market area, high tides, and the lack of discharge capacity
of the north and south rivers— impeded by a sandy beach and a low hydraulic gradient. Possible solutions to improve
discharge include managing the sand barriers through abutments along the river outfalls and the inclusion of pumps to
drain excess pluvial water from the main drain in the center of town.

Paris Alignment Assessment

43.      While contributing minimally to greenhouse gas emission, Saint Lucia is disproportionally affected by climate risks.
This Project is aligned with the goals of the Paris Agreement on both mitigation and adaptation and supports the country’s
NDC 3.0. Grounded in Climate Change Adaptation Policy, Saint Lucia’s 2018–28 National Adaptation Plan, and the
landmark Climate Change Act (2024) underscore that physical interventions are critical adaptation channels to prepare
for or respond to the impacts of climate change. In addition, the Project aligns with key recommendations of the OECS
                       Official Use Only                                                                              Page 11
         The World Bank
         Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)                       PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


Country Climate and Development Report, including the need to build resilience through infrastructure investments and
NBS, and to improve governments' capacities to systematically respond to emergencies. The Project directly contributes
to the climate agenda on the adaptation front by advancing physical infrastructure resilience to manage the impacts of
climate change. Specifically, the Project reinforces these goals through retrofitting and constructing flood risk
management infrastructure, strengthening resilience through improved drainage systems, and reducing risks in urban
centers by integrating climate-resilient, green-gray solutions in public spaces.

44.      On the mitigation front, Saint Lucia is accelerating its transition to a low-carbon economy by diversifying energy
sources and reducing dependence on fossil fuel imports. The Project supports this shift not only through direct resilience-
building measures but also by promoting low-emission, resource-efficient infrastructure solutions. By linking NDC
implementation to the country’s SDGs agenda 2030, the Project aligns closely with its prioritized strategic Development
Pillars 2. Adaptation for environmental sustainability, climate change and disaster vulnerability reduction, and Pillar 5.
Infrastructure, connectivity and energy — key for growth and competitiveness. Both pillars are critical to achieving
climate-resilient and low-carbon growth.

45.       The operation is aligned with the goals of the Paris Agreement on both mitigation and adaptation.

      (a) Assessment and reduction of mitigation risks. The Project does not pose a material risk to Saint Lucia’s transition
          to a low-carbon development pathway and is likely to positively contribute to the national mitigation efforts. Non-
          structural activities under Component 1 are universally aligned. Flood risk management and urban resilience
          interventions proposed under Component 1, such as NBS, improved drainage systems, and climate-smart urban
          planning, contribute to reducing carbon emissions by lowering the unnecessary need for energy-intensive repairs
          and reconstruction, preserving ecosystem services, and encouraging sustainable land use. The constructions
          under Component 2 will follow low-emission and sustainable practices to minimize carbon footprint by prioritizing
          locally sourced materials to reduce transportation-related emissions and costs, reusing demolition waste in
          reconstruction, and utilizing local vegetation in NBS. The adoption of green-gray integration design principles and
          NBS will facilitate carbon absorption, lower energy use, and reduce reliance on high-emission infrastructures,
          providing long-term resilience while avoiding future emissions. All construction sites will be strictly delineated
          without extending to surrounding natural habitats, ensuring the preservation of vegetation and minimizing land
          use change to help maintain ecosystem carbon sinks.

      (b) Assessment and reduction of adaptation risks. Enhancing flood risk management is a critical approach for climate
          adaptation, particularly in low-lying coastal areas, where infrastructure and economic activities are at greater risk
          of climate change-induced disasters. The designs to be proposed under Component 1 will be informed by
          comprehensive data analysis, including flood hazard and flood risk modeling supported by multi-dimensional
          spatial and risk analysis and ground-truthing. Climate variables such as evaporation, wind speed, and wind
          direction during extreme rainfall events will be leveraged to support climate projections in accordance with the
          latest Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change reports, based on both realistic and pessimistic scenarios. To
          best respond to the growing demand for climate-resilience infrastructures, particularly coastal flood risk
          management systems with return periods ranging from 2 to 100 years, the Project will not only strengthen the
          existing infrastructures based on historical hazard records but also thoroughly consider the increasing intensity
          and frequency of future climate events. Climate adaptation will also be supported by the integration of NBS
          principles to complement engineered interventions, using ecosystems and natural processes to reduce climate-
          related risks, and through climate-resilient designs and constructions, incorporating durable, hazard-appropriate
          materials, optimized siting, and building techniques that account for projected climate risks. The infrastructure
          design will be complemented by comprehensive maintenance and asset management plans to enhance the


                         Official Use Only                                                                             Page 12
        The World Bank
        Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)                                    PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


         lifespan, resilience, reliability, and functionality of the facilities under changing climate conditions, and help save
         long-term costs associated with emergency repairs or replacement after climate-related damages.

46.     Gender. The Project is aligned with the World Bank Group Gender Strategy 2024-30: Accelerate Gender Equality
to End Poverty on a Livable Planet. The results chain is as follows:

    (a) Gender gap. Women in Saint Lucia are disproportionately exposed to climate change and the impacts of disasters,
        due to their vulnerabilities across multiple sectors, including health, education, employment, and DRM decision-
        making. Women are predominantly engaged in caregiving, market-related activities, and service delivery,
        particularly in agriculture, fishery, and tourism sectors, making them more vulnerable to climate-related
        disruptions. Female-headed households (FHHs), while having better access to electricity and sanitation, may
        encounter greater disruptions to their daily lives when these services are interrupted. Moreover, land and vehicle
        ownership among FHHs, largely low-income, is 5-14 percent lower than male-headed households, limiting their
        ability to recover from damages and losses due to the limited asset ownership and access to financial markets or
        social benefit programs. While the existing DRM and climate change adaptation strategies often lack
        considerations of women and gender balances, the GoSL has taken concrete steps to integrate a gender
        perspective into disaster-related policies, such as the shelter policy, and post-disaster needs assessments, involve
        women in policy development (e.g. National Adaptation Plan), and promote their leadership in political and
        technical roles.

    (b) Activities the Project will finance. This Project will support women’s participation in the extensive consultation
        process for the design and maintenance of flood management infrastructure in Castries and Anse La Raye under
        Component 1, 9 and provide inclusive capacity building opportunities ensuring women’s participation in decision-
        making roles as facilitators, equipping them with the technical knowledge, facilitation skills, and tools to engage
        in community dialogues and planning processes. In Saint Lucia, women are highly involved in community outreach
        and local engagement efforts. By serving as facilitators, women will not only help bridge communication between
        technical teams and residents but also gain direct experience in coordinating DRM-related activities, fostering
        their leadership in DRM-related decision-making. Overall, these efforts will ensure that the proposed designs and
        maintenance plans adequately reflect their needs and priorities; the EWS meets gender-specific information
        needs via inclusive language and materials; and dissemination effectively reaches communities, particularly in
        rural areas.

    (c) Indicator. The outcome of the Project activities will be tracked by an intermediate results indicator – Women
        designated as EWS facilitators for community-level emergency preparedness in selected target areas
        (Percentage).

47.      Citizen engagement. Citizen engagement will be integrated into Components 1 and 2, in both technical assistance
and physical interventions. Under Component 1, the Project will conduct at least three structured citizen engagement
sessions in each of the two Project areas to inform the proposed interventions. These community engagement sessions
will serve the following sequential objectives: (a) identifying information gaps related to community-level flood impacts,
including geographic distributions, service disruptions, and other locally observed vulnerabilities, to strengthen the
robustness of analytical work; (b) obtaining community feedback on proposed design and maintenance plans, including
NBS, to ensure the relevance and effectiveness of flood risk management infrastructure and strategies; and (c) presenting
the final flood risk management strategies for community validation, endorsement and ownership, supporting lasting

9
 Trohanis,Zoe Elena; Jongman,Brenden; Escobar Saenz,Mirtha Liliana. 2023. Integrating Gender and Social Inclusion in Nature-Based Solutions:
Guidance Note (English). Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/099060123165042304
                           Official Use Only                                                                                            Page 13
       The World Bank
       Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)                       PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


impacts and sustainability of the Project. The procedures and results of community engagements will be documented in
detail, along with satisfaction surveys on the effectiveness of engagement approaches. Various community engagement
methods, such as awareness campaigns, E&S implication consultations, and beneficiary interviews, will be employed to
facilitate the construction of prioritized interventions under Component 2. Additionally, a grievance redress mechanism
will be established to address citizens’ concerns and feedback in a timely and effective manner, supporting the transparent
and responsive execution of construction activities. Three citizen engagement indicators are included in the results
framework: (i) Beneficiaries expressing that the Project is responsive to identified flood vulnerability; (ii) Completed
consultations/Information meetings that document citizen feedback received/addressed; and (iii) Grievances that are
resolved within three months after they were formally registered.

Economic Analysis

48.      The benefits of investing in gray and green measures to reduce urban flooding in Castries and Anse La Raye are
expected to be substantial. Benefits come through four main categories: (a) avoided damage to property, public
infrastructure, and environmental assets, measured as the net difference of the damage costs with and without the
Project; (b) reduced time lost from work, school, and other activities due to decreased mobility from flooding; (c) reduced
premature deaths and illnesses due to exposure to contaminated flood waters; and (d) reduced costs of reconstructing
infrastructure and facilities following future natural disasters due to use of resilient approaches. As the specific
investments to be supported under the Project are not yet known, the economic analysis is based on estimates of net
benefits from other projects investing in similar types of activities. A summary of the benefits of each category of benefits
is provided below.

Avoided damage to property, public infrastructure, and environmental assets

49.      The economic benefits of reducing vulnerability to flooding are significant, according to cost-benefit analyses
undertaken for similar interventions in Saint Lucia and Suriname. For example, investments under the Saint Lucia DVRP
generated an economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of 15.6 percent over a period of 25 years, well above the cost of
capital. Investments in flood risk reduction under the Suriname Preparedness and Enhancing Resilient Communities
Project (P504548) are estimated to generate an EIRR of 25 percent over a period of 20 years with a discount rate of 6
percent.

Reduced time lost from work, school, and other activities due to decreased mobility from flooding

50.     Reducing time lost from work, school, and other activities due to flooding generates substantial economic
benefits. Investments in stormwater drainage under the Kenya Municipal Project (P066488) reduced time lost by residents
by 5.625 days a year. This resulted in an EIRR of 32 percent over a period of 20 years with a discount rate of 5 percent.

Reduced premature deaths and illnesses due to exposure to contaminated flood waters

51.      Reducing premature deaths and illnesses from exposure to contaminated flood waters is expected to generate
significant economic benefits. Investments in stormwater drainage under the Senegal Stormwater Management and
Climate Change Adaptation Project 2 (P175830) and its Additional Financing (P180203) are estimated to reduce the
premium of an insurance policy against the risk of death and injuries by two-thirds. Considering both direct damage to
property and infrastructure, and the reduction in the risk of death and injuries, the investments generate an EIRR of 23
percent over a period of 17 years using a discount rate of 6 percent.



                       Official Use Only                                                                             Page 14
        The World Bank
        Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)                                   PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


Reduced costs of reconstructing infrastructure and facilities following future natural disasters due to the use of resilient
approaches

52.       Using climate-resilient approaches in the construction and rehabilitation of investments to reduce flood risk
will increase their resilience to natural disasters. This includes the use of NBS and innovative technology. While a climate-
resilient approach may require higher initial capital expenditures, the costs of maintaining the infrastructure and facilities,
including avoiding the need to reconstruct them over their design life, are expected to significantly exceed the cost of the
initial investments. Reducing the risk of flooding in Castries will also help ensure that ports, roads, and storage facilities —
essential for the import and movement of food and fuel — will operate without interruption.

Additional benefits of reducing flood risk

53.      Additional benefits of reducing the risk of flooding in Castries and Anse La Raye are worth noting. These include:
(a) increased property values in the areas that used to flood; (b) reduced loss of income from businesses whose hours are
curtailed and access reduced; (c) improved travel times on streets prone to flooding; and (d) lower maintenance costs for
vehicles.

Benefits of institutional strengthening and capacity building are also considerable

54.      Strengthening the Government’s capacity to prepare for and respond to natural disasters will save lives and
reduce injuries in the face of future disasters. Assisting the Government in preparing for and managing the impacts of
climate change and natural hazards will provide long-term benefits for the inhabitants of and visitors to Saint Lucia. By
strengthening the flood EWS, the Government will be able to call for evacuations in a timelier manner and respond with
assistance more rapidly. According to a 2022 report by the World Bank’s Independent Evaluation Group, support for
institutional strengthening in disaster preparedness and response is key to saving lives and preventing injuries from future
disasters.10 Support for the integration of DRM in infrastructure planning, design, financing, and O&M will result in more
appropriate and resilient infrastructure. Investing in green spaces, which reduces the risk of flooding and provides
recreational opportunities for residents, will contribute to community well-being. Improved O&M of the flood reduction
investments will help prolong their lives and the benefits they provide.

 B. Fiduciary

 Financial Management

 55.      Overall, the FM arrangements for the Project are assessed as adequate, and the residual risk is moderate.
 The objective of the FM assessment conducted in June 2025 during the Project preparation phase was to determine
 whether the DoED meets the World Bank’s minimum FM requirements as laid out in OP/BP 10.00 (IPF). The assessment
 concluded that DoED has adequate FM capacity to provide reasonable assurance that Project funds are used for the
 intended purpose, and that it is capable of recording, reporting and tracking the Project transactions accurately and
 reliably. Key aspects of these FM arrangements include staffing, budgeting, funds flow and disbursements, accounting,
 internal controls, financial reporting, and external auditing.

 56.      Risk assessment. The PCU in Saint Lucia has experience implementing World Bank-financed projects. While the
 DoED has adequate FM rules, regulations, and checks and balances that will apply to the Project, the assessment
 identified FM risks of the Project before mitigating measures as Substantial. This is mainly due to: (a) deficiency in

10
  World Bank. 2022. Reducing Disaster Risks from Natural Hazards An Evaluation of the World Bank’s Support, Fiscal Years 2010–20. Independent
Evaluation Group. Washington, DC: World Bank
                          Official Use Only                                                                                           Page 15
      The World Bank
      Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)                       PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


budgets that are not in line with the status of procurement activities and actual expenditures; (b) weaknesses in internal
control procedures; (c) unutilized multicurrency function available in advanced versions of the computerized accounting
system resulting in manual conversion for/and reporting; (d) the inherent fiduciary risks associated with the long-term
nature of infrastructure works and construction activities contracts and advances paid; and (e) bureaucratic approval
processes, which will delay approval of contracts and payment for Project transactions.

57.     The FM risk can be reduced to Moderate after implementing the following proposed mitigating measures: (a)
prepare a credible budget for the Project and ensure it is incorporated in the Government approved annual budget, (b)
design and document applicable Project internal controls in the POM and regularly strengthen the internal controls to
address identified weaknesses by management and through auditors; (c) conduct regular training on World Bank
requirements for the PCU team, (d) conduct periodic FM reviews and field visits by the World Bank during Project
implementation to assess the continued adequacy of the FM arrangements and updating the Project’s risk; and (f)
ensure timely and accurate submission of semi-annual IFRs. FM risks and compliance will be monitored through annual
external audits.

58.      Staffing. The FM arrangements will be executed by the PCU in the DoED, which will be supported by an FM
officer to be hired under the Project. The FM staff will work under the supervision of the PCU Project Coordinator. The
functions, responsibilities, and procedures of different stakeholders in the execution of FM for the Project will be
outlined in the POM.

FM and Accountability Arrangements

59.     Planning and budgeting. The DoED will prepare a budget for the life of the Project, which will be revisited
periodically and updated, as needed, to reflect the implementation progress. An annual work plan (AWP) and annual
budget will be derived from this overall budget, which will be agreed with the World Bank and then included in the line
ministry’s annual budget for approval by parliament. The implementation of the budget will be monitored regularly
during the life of the Project, and significant variances between actual and budgeted figures will be investigated and
addressed. The external auditors will also monitor the execution of the AWP and will recommend mitigation measures
to strengthen the Project’s internal controls, as needed.

60.     Disbursements and funds flow. The overall disbursement arrangements will follow standard disbursement
policies and procedures, included in the DFIL established in the Disbursement Guidelines for Investment Project
Financing, dated February 2017, and outlined in section III. C.

61.      Accounting and internal controls. The DoED will use existing FM systems to record and maintain all Project
transactions and will follow the cash basis of accounting. The annual budget for the Project, once approved, will be the
guiding factor for recording all the Project transactions. To accomplish this, the DoED will develop and incorporate a
distinct Chart of Accounts in the accounting system. This will allow for the Project transactions to be captured by
categories, Components, Sub-component, and activities in the system.

62.     Internal controls. The DoED will prepare a Project financial manual guidance for its Project staff, which will also
be an integral part of the POM, governing the internal control framework of the Project. The POM will be reviewed and
approved by the World Bank and will include strong FM internal controls in line with the Financing Agreement, POM,
DFIL, and Project Appraisal Document.

63.     Financial reporting. The DoED will submit to the World Bank semi-annual unaudited IFR within 45 days after
the closing of each semester. The elements of the IFR include sources and uses of funds by Component/category, DA

                      Official Use Only                                                                             Page 16
       The World Bank
       Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)                       PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


 activity statement, bank account reconciliation statements, and summary statement of DA expenditures for contracts
 subject to prior review. The IFR will be generated from the accounting records, and they will indicate actual revenues
 and expenditures compared to budgeted figures. The IFR format will be agreed and included in the DFIL. Advances will
 be disbursed based on a six-month cash forecast. The DoED will also prepare the Project annual financial statements
 and submit these to the external auditors two months after the end of the fiscal year. The Project financial statements
 will include a Statement of Sources and Uses of Funds/Cash Receipts and Payments.

 64.      External auditing. The external audit of the Project will be conducted by the Office of the Director of Audit of
 Saint Lucia. The Project will produce annual financial statements that will be submitted to the external auditors to be
 audited as per terms of reference agreed between the DoED and the World Bank. The Project budget will include the
 cost of technical support to be obtained from the Office of the Director of Audit (Supreme Audit Institution), if needed.
 The Project will submit the Audit Report along with the Audited Financial Statements and the Management Letter to
 the World Bank no later than six months after the close of each financial year.

 Procurement

 65.      Overall, procurement risk for the Project is assessed as Moderate. Procurement for the Project will be carried
 out in accordance with the World Bank’s Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers (Procurement Regulations), dated
 March 2025. Consideration will be given to ‘Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and Corruption in Projects
 Financed by IBRD Loans and International Development Association (IDA) Credits and Grants,’ dated July 1, 2016, as
 revised and amended in February 2020, and other provisions stipulated in the Financing Agreement. In accordance with
 paragraph 5.9 of the Procurement Regulations, the World Bank’s Systematic Tracking and Exchanges in Procurement
 tool will be used to prepare, clear, and update Procurement Plans and monitor all procurement transactions for the
 Project.

 66.     Short-form Project Procurement Strategies for Development (PPSD) were developed, defining the applicable
 procurement arrangements, appropriate selection methods, including market approach, and type of review to be
 conducted by the World Bank. The PPSD describes how procurement in this Project will support the PDO and deliver
 value for money using a risk-based approach. The PPSD provides adequate supporting market analysis for the selection
 methods detailed in the Procurement Plan.

 67.    The PCU prepared a Procurement Plan for the first 18 months of the Project. Mandatory procurement prior
 review thresholds detailed in Annex I of the World Bank’s Procurement Procedures are applied. All procurement
 procedures, including roles and responsibilities of different participating entities and units, will be defined in the POM.
 Procurement risks are related to the limited availability of procurement experts in countries and lack of experience with
 World Bank procedures. Training will be provided to limit this risk.

 C. Environmental, Social and Legal Operational Policies

68.      A hydrologic model prepared under the PPG will analyze the causes of flooding at Castries and Anse La Raye and
collate the information (including E&S analysis) needed to identify options for potential investments in resilient
infrastructure. Such options may include NBS for attenuation of storm-water runoff and to protect and enhance the
urban/village environments during extreme climate events.

69.     As the specific nature of the potential investments is yet to be determined, a 'baseline scoping report for options
analysis' was prepared at appraisal to aid in the comparison and selection of resilient infrastructure options and
management services to be delivered under the Project. The report identified and described the E&S features in the

                       Official Use Only                                                                             Page 17
       The World Bank
       Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)                      PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


modelled areas and immediate surroundings; provided information relating to national planning and permitting
requirements; and identified land ownership using readily available information sources. The report collected the data
needed for the efficient selection of appropriate options to take forward under the main Project, not only ensuring the
selection of the options is made on a justified and robust basis but also ensuring that realistic timeframes are integrated
in the works contracts.

70.     A Stakeholder Engagement Plan has been prepared, consulted and disclosed prior to appraisal. An Environmental
and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), which will be part of the legal agreement for the Project and set out the GoSL’s
commitments to delivering the Project in accordance with the World Bank’s Environmental and Social Framework and
national requirements, has been discussed and disclosed before appraisal. The ESCP sets out the E&S instruments and
documentation that would need to be developed during Project implementation and the corresponding timeframes.

71.     Constructing the selected options may require works in protected areas, in congested urban areas with high traffic
and many pedestrians, or in more rural communities, and may require land to be acquired or used. The works may impact
areas protected for their historic and biodiversity importance directly or indirectly, and the safety and health of the
workers who will undertake the construction. Members of the community living and working in the vicinity may also need
to be protected.

72.    The E&S risk rating is considered Moderate, and ESS1, ESS2, ESS3, ESS4, ESS5, ESS6, ESS8, and ESS10 are
considered relevant at this stage.

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalpolicy#doctemplate
 Legal Operational Policies                                                           Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                          No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                    No



 Grievance Redress Services:
 73.     Grievance redress. Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a project
 supported by the World Bank may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance mechanisms or the Bank’s
 Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to address
 project-related concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the Bank’s
 independent Accountability Mechanism (AM). The AM houses the Inspection Panel, which determines whether harm
 occurred, or could occur, as a result of Bank non-compliance with its policies and procedures, and the Dispute
 Resolution Service, which provides communities and borrowers with the opportunity to address complaints through
 dispute resolution. Complaints may be submitted to the AM at any time after concerns have been brought directly to
 the attention of Bank Management and after Management has been given an opportunity to respond. For information
 on how to submit complaints to the Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS), visit http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For
 information on how to submit complaints to the Bank’s Accountability Mechanism, visit
 https://accountability.worldbank.org.


 V. KEY RISKS


                       Official Use Only                                                                           Page 18
       The World Bank
       Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)                    PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


74.     The Project’s overall risk is assessed as Moderate. All risk categories are assessed as Moderate or Low including
Fiduciary, Political Governance, Institutional, Environmental and Social, and Macroeconomic.




                      Official Use Only                                                                          Page 19
       The World Bank
       Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)                                                                             PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT



ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padannexresultframework#doctemplate
PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes

   Baseline                  Period 1                   Period 2                  Period 3                 Period 4                 Period 5              Closing Period
   Enhanced resilience to floods in selected localities
   People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure (Number of people) CRI
   Oct/2025                  Oct/2026                   Oct/2027                  Oct/2028                 Oct/2029                 Oct/2030              Oct/2031
   0                         0                          0                         0                        6,600                    33,000                66,400
     People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure - Female (Number of people)   CRI

   Oct/2025                  Oct/2026                   Oct/2027                  Oct/2028                 Oct/2029                 Oct/2030              Oct/2031
   0                         0                          0                         0                        3,300                    16,000                33,500
     People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure - Youth (Number of people) CRI
   Oct/2025                  Oct/2026                   Oct/2027                  Oct/2028                 Oct/2029                 Oct/2030              Oct/2031
   0                         0                          0                         0                        900                      4,000                 9,000
   Strengthened Government capacity for managing climate-related risks
   Climate and disaster risk-informed strategies and feasibility studies available to the government for investments in infrastructure (Number)
   Oct/2025                  Oct/2026                   Oct/2027                  Oct/2028                 Oct/2029                 Oct/2030              Oct/2031
   0                         1                          2                         2                        3                        4                     4


Intermediate Indicators by Components

   Baseline                  Period 1                  Period 2                   Period 3                 Period 4               Period 5                Closing Period
   Institutional and system strengthening for flood resilience and preparedness
   Detailed engineering design for selected project localities incorporating relevant climate resilience measures (Number)
   Oct/2025                  Oct/2026                  Oct/2027                   Oct/2028                 Oct/2029               Oct/2030                Oct/2031
   0                         0                         1                          2                        3                      3                       3
   Early warning systems improved and operational (Number)
   Oct/2025                  Oct/2026                  Oct/2027                   Oct/2028                 Oct/2029               Oct/2030                Oct/2031
   0                         0                         0                          0                        1                      2                       2
   Women designated as EWS facilitators for community-level emergency preparedness in selected target area (Percentage)



                                                                                                                                                                              Page 20


                                                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
    The World Bank
    Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)                                                           PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


Oct/2025                  Oct/2026                  Oct/2027                   Oct/2028                Oct/2029   Oct/2030           Oct/2031
0                         0                         0                          60                      60         60                 60
Enhancement of critical flood-risk reduction infrastructure
Area provided with improved drainage services (Hectare(Ha))
Oct/2025                  Oct/2026                  Oct/2027                   Oct/2028                Oct/2029   Oct/2030           Oct/2031
0                         0                         0                          0                       1,000      3,500              7,500
Beneficiaries expressing that the project is responsive to identified flood vulnerability (Percentage)
Oct/2025                  Oct/2026                  Oct/2027                   Oct/2028                Oct/2029   Oct/2030           Oct/2031
0                         0                         0                          0                       80         80                 80
Project management and supervision
Grievances that are resolved within three months after they were formally registered (Percentage)
Oct/2025                  Oct/2026                  Oct/2027                   Oct/2028                Oct/2029   Oct/2030           Oct/2031
0                         85                        85                         85                      85         85                 85
Completed consultations/Information meetings that document citizen feedback received/addressed (Number)
Oct/2025                  Oct/2026                  Oct/2027                   Oct/2028                Oct/2029   Oct/2030           Oct/2031
0                         0                         0                          1                       2          2                  2




                                                                                                                                                   Page 21


                                                                                                                                                Official Use Only
        The World Bank
        Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)                                       PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT



Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes

  Enhanced institutional capacities and infrastructure resilience to flood risk in the target areas of Castries and Anse La Raye
  People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure (Number)
                                     This indicator will measure the number of people benefiting from enhanced climate resilient
  Description
                                     infrastructure financed by this project.
  Frequency                          Monthly
  Data source                        Progress Reports (DoED)
  Methodology for Data
                                     Progress Reports prepared by the PCU
  Collection
  Responsibility for Data
                                     PCU M&E section
  Collection
  of which are women (Number)
                                     This indicator will measure the number of women beneficiaries benefitting from the climate
  Description
                                     resilient infrastructure financed by this project.
  Frequency                          Monthly
  Data source                        Progress Reports (DoED)
  Methodology for Data
                                     Progress Reports prepared by the PCU
  Collection
  Responsibility for Data
                                     PCU M&E section
  Collection
  of which are youth (Number)
                                     This indicator will measure the number of youth beneficiaries benefitting from the climate
  Description
                                     resilient infrastructure financed by this project.
  Frequency                          Monthly
  Data source                        Progress Reports (DoED)
  Methodology for Data
                                     Progress Reports prepared by the PCU
  Collection
  Responsibility for Data
                                     PCU M&E section
  Collection
  Climate and disaster risk-informed strategies and feasibility studies available to the government for investments in infrastructure
  (Number)
                                     This indicator will measure the number of climate and disaster risk-informed strategies and
  Description                        feasibility studies produced for government investment planning toward strengthening
                                     infrastructure resilience.
  Frequency                          Semi-annual
  Data source                        Progress Report (DoED)
  Methodology for Data
                                     Progress Reports prepared by the PCU
  Collection
  Responsibility for Data
                                     PCU M&E section
  Collection


Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: Intermediate Results Indicators by Components

   Institutional and system strengthening for flood resilience and preparedness
   Detailed engineering design for selected project localities incorporating relevant climate resilience measures (Number)
                                                                        This indicator will measure the number of engineering designs with
   Description
                                                                        climate resilience measures for selected project localities produced


                                                                                                                                           Page 22


                                                                                                                                    Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)                                       PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


                                                                     under the project.
Frequency                                                            Semi-annual
Data source                                                          Progress Report (DoED)
Methodology for Data Collection                                      Progress Reports prepared by the PCU
Responsibility for Data Collection                                   PCU M&E section
Early warning systems improved and operational (Number)
                                                                    This indicator will measure the number of early warning systems
Description
                                                                    improved and operational in the selected project areas.
Frequency                                                           Semi-annual
Data source                                                         Progress Report (DoED, WRMA, NEMO, SLMS)
Methodology for Data Collection                                     Progress Reports prepared by PCU
Responsibility for Data Collection                                  PCU M&E section
Women designated as EWS facilitators for community-level emergency preparedness in selected target area (Percentage)
                                                                    This indicator will measure the proportion of women in decision-
Description                                                         making roles among the total number of EWS facilitators for
                                                                    community-level emergency preparedness.
Frequency                                                           Semi-annual
Data source                                                         Progress Report (DoED, WRMA, NEMO, SLMS)
Methodology for Data Collection                                     Progress Reports prepared by PCU
Responsibility for Data Collection                                  PCU M&E section
Enhancement of critical flood-risk reduction infrastructure
Area provided with improved drainage services (Hectare[Ha])
                                                                    This indicator will measure the total area that benefits from improved
Description                                                         drainage services as a result of interventions financed under the
                                                                    project.
Frequency                                                           Semi-annual
Data source                                                         Progress Report (DoED)
Methodology for Data Collection                                     Progress Reports prepared by the PCU
Responsibility for Data Collection                                  PCU M&E section
Beneficiaries expressing that the project is responsive to their community's needs (Percentage)
                                                                    This indicator will measure the percentage of surveyed beneficiaries
Description                                                         who believe that the project effectively addresses the specific needs of
                                                                    their community through appropriate design and delivery.
Frequency                                                           Semi-annual
Data source                                                         Progress Report (DoED)
Methodology for Data Collection                                     Progress Reports prepared by the PCU
Responsibility for Data Collection                                  PCU M&E section
Project management and supervision
Grievances that are resolved within three months after they were formally registered (Percentage)
                                                                    The indicator will measure the percentage of grievances related to
Description                                                         Component 1 & 2 resolved within three months after they were
                                                                    formally registered.
Frequency                                                           Semi-annual
Data source                                                         Progress Report (PCU)
Methodology for Data Collection                                     Progress Reports prepared by the PCU
Responsibility for Data Collection                                  PCU M&E section
Completed consultations/Information meetings that document citizen feedback received/addressed (Number)
                            The indicator will measure the number of consultations and information meetings where citizen feedback is
Description
                            collected, documented, and addressed where applicable.



                                                                                                                                        Page 23


                                                                                                                                Official Use Only
     The World Bank
     Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)   PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT


Frequency                 Semi-annual
Data source               Progress Report (PCU)
Methodology for Data
                          Progress Reports prepared by the PCU
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                          PCU M&E section
Collection




                                                                                           Page 24


                                                                                    Official Use Only
