Public Disclosure Authorized
                                    The World Bank
                                    Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project(P504998)




                               Note to Task Team: The following sections are system generated and changes must be made in Data Sheet(s). Delete
                               this note when finalizing the document.


                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                  Project Information Document (PID)

                                                 Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 09-Mar-2025 | Report No: PIDDC00369




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project(P504998)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                   Operation Name
St. Lucia                      P504998                        Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project
Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date       Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
LATIN AMERICA AND              23-Jul-2025                    29-Aug-2025                   Urban, Resilience and Land
CARIBBEAN
Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
Investment Project             Ministry of Finance,           Department of Economic
Financing (IPF)                Economic Development           Development, Ministry
                               and Youth Economy              of Finance, Economic
                                                              Development and Youth
                                                              Economy

Proposed Development Objective(s)
Enhance resilience to flood risk in the key areas of Castries and Anse La Raye.


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                     No
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?               No

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                           20.00

  Total Financing                                                                                                20.00
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                   20.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                                      0.00

DETAILS
  World Bank Group Financing
    International Development Association (IDA)                                                                  20.00


                                                                                                                      Page 1
      The World Bank
      Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project(P504998)


       IDA Credit                                                                                                   20.00




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                    Concept Review Decision
Moderate                                                        The review did authorize the preparation to continue



 Note to Task Team: End of system generated content, document is editable from here. Delete this note when
 finalizing the document.


Other Decision (as needed)

B. Introduction and Context

Country Context

1. Saint Lucia is a small island state located in the Lesser Antilles island chain between Saint Vincent to the south
   and Martinique to the north and has an estimated population of 180,000. The island area measures 617 km2 with
   nearly half of its population concentrated in the coastal zones of the north and south, such as Castries and Gros
   Islet. The island is volcanic in origin, largely composed of a north-south oriented mountainous interior. Saint Lucia’s
   climate is classified as tropical rainforest, with a hurricane season running administratively from June 1 to November
   30 under the influence of southeast trade winds and a dry season from February 1 to May 31 when the trade winds
   shift to the northeast. The average annual rainfall is about 2000 mm, and the temperature is fairly constant
   throughout the year varying between 30 oC during the day and 24 oC at night.

2. Favorable global supply developments, tighter monetary policy, and lower commodity prices drove inflation
   down from 4.1 percent in 2023 to 1.5 percent in 2024. Since 2022, better government revenues and reduced public
   spending have led to primary surpluses. Furthermore, primary fiscal balance is expected to remain positive in the
   medium term.

3. According to the most recent World Bank Debt Sustainability Analysis (May 2024), the public debt-GDP ratio is
   assessed to be sustainable but with high risks. Public debt is projected to remain stable – around 74 percent of
   GDP over the medium term – significantly above the regional target of 60 percent of GDP by 2035. Over the medium
   term, gross financing needs (GFNs) are expected to be around 15–18 percent of GDP, driven by amortization of
   medium- and long-term debt. GFNs should be adequately financed by the rollover of short-term domestic debt and
   longer-term concessional financing from multilateral and bilateral creditors. The demand for Saint Lucia securities
   in the regional market has been tested and proved robust during the pandemic. Market liquidity is expected to
   remain high, and rollover rates for Saint Lucia securities are assumed to remain stable over the medium term,
   sufficient to meet the gross financing needs.



                                                                                                                       Page 2
          The World Bank
          Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project(P504998)


    4. The country’s progress on poverty reduction and shared prosperity, though temporarily hampered by the recent
       public health crises, global economy shocks, and extreme weather events, is steadily advancing. According to the
       most recent poverty estimates from 2016, Saint Lucia’s poverty rate declined by 3.8 percent compared to 2006,
       reaching 25 percent, with the most significant decrease observed in rural areas where poverty dropped by nearly
       10 percent to 32.9 percent1. While the unemployment rate fluctuated between 15 and 20 percent over the past
       decade, the GINI index was estimated at 51.3 in 2016, indicating a high level of income inequality. The bottom 40
       percent of population accounted for only 10 percent of the country’s total income. Although lower than the regional
       average, a significant proportion of the population of Saint Lucia’s population remains in vulnerable employment:
       16.7 percent of women and 28.1 percent of men. This is particularly true for those in informal work arrangements
       or without social protection, leaving them susceptible to external shocks.

    5. From 2010 to 2019, Saint Lucia experienced an average annual growth rate of 4 percent of GDP. COVID had a
       major impact on the island’s economy. In 2020, as a result of travel restrictions, tourism revenues fell by an
       estimated US$725 million from US$1.64 billion in 2019 to US$340 million. This contributed to most of the 28
       percent contraction in GDP from 2019. Recovery has been strong and in 2022, the economy posted a 12 percent
       increase in GDP over pre-COVID 2019 revenues. GDP reported in 2023 showed an 8 percent increase over 2022
       and represented a 20 percent growth compared to pre -COVID 2019. GDP is projected to grow 2.9 percent in 2024,
       marking four consecutive years of growth. Additionally, large public investment projects, including the
       recommencement of the Hewanorra International Airport redevelopment in 2023, are expected to strongly boost
       Saint Lucia’s long-term economic growth.

    Sectoral and Institutional Context

    6. The Government of Saint Lucia (GoSL) has developed national strategies and policies to promote more resilient
       development planning. The regulatory framework is guided by three main policies: the Disaster Management Act
       of Saint Lucia 2006, the National Emergency Management Plan, and the National Comprehensive Disaster
       Management Strategy. The Disaster Management Act sought to provide a more effective organization for the
       mitigation of, preparedness for, response to, and recovery from emergencies and disasters, and established
       National Emergency Management Organization (NEMO). Several supporting policies, such as Hazard Mitigation
       Policy, the Disaster Management Policy Framework, etc. were in place, outlining broad goals and objectives for
       vulnerability reduction. In June 2024, Saint Lucia developed its National Disaster Preparedness Baseline Assessment,
       which examines various factors including the country’s unique hazard profile, historical events, etc. that could
       impact a country’s ability to manage disasters. Recommendations at both strategic and tactical levels are developed
       based on the Risk and Vulnerability Assessment (RVA) and the Disaster Management Analysis (DMA). These
       recommendations align with the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and the Sendai Framework
       for Disaster Risk Reduction.

    7. Saint Lucia’s DRM strategies and regulatory framework are closely aligned with international standards.
       “Adaptation for environmental sustainability, climate change and disaster vulnerability reduction” is recognized as
       one of the Strategic Development Pillars of the country’s Sustainable Development Goals agenda. Saint Lucia
       updated its Nationally Determined Contribution in 2020 to reflect an increased ambition in mitigation, adaptation,
       and reduction of loss and damage from climate-related disasters. Despite these efforts and Saint Lucia’s status as a
       regional champion of Disaster Risk Management (DRM), significant gaps remain in the need for increased financial
       resources, information management systems, and targeted training programs.

1
     Survey of Living Conditions and Household Budget Survey 2016.

                                                                                                                        Page 3
      The World Bank
      Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project(P504998)



8. Saint Lucia is situated in the Caribbean Hurricane Belt and highly vulnerable to climate change induced
   hydrometeorological and geological impacts, as well as public health–related events. The country faces several
   risks such as hurricanes, storm surges, sea level rise, and non-climate-related risks such as high volcanic and seismic
   activity. Between 1980 and 2015, Saint Lucia was affected by at least six major hurricanes and tropical storms, three
   of which occurred between 2002–2007. During this time, the island also experienced eight major landslides, two
   earthquakes (1990 and 2007), and a major drought in 2009 and 2010. Saint Lucia faces significant flood risk due to
   its steep terrain, high rainfall, and dense coastal settlements, which make the island vulnerable to riverine and flash
   flooding. Climate change exacerbates these risks by increasing the intensity and frequency of extreme weather
   events, threatening lives, infrastructure, and economic stability. Flash floods from heavy rainfall are the most
   dominant source of flooding, exacerbated by the tide and storm surges, which impede gravity drainage in the
   coastal zone. Historically, extreme flooding events took place in 1980 (Hurricane Allen), 1994 (Tropical Storm
   Debby), 2010 (Hurricane Tomas), and 2013 (Christmas Eve trough). Most recently, the exceptionally high rainfall in
   November and December 2022 set a record on the island, causing massive flash flooding and landslides in the
   northern part of the island and impacting over 1000 households. These events caused major damage, particularly
   in the low-lying coastal zones where most of the population lives.

9. The proposed project will prioritize support for the urban areas of Castries and Anse La Raye. Based on the 2022
   census, Castries has a population of 65,614 persons or about 36 percent of the country's population. The population
   of Anse La Raye is considerably smaller with 5,841 persons according to the census. Castries, the country's capital
   is a heavily urbanized area that is most vulnerable to flooding along the Castries River and the low-lying Central
   Business District between King Georg V Gardens. Tourism, cargo, construction, manufacturing, commerce & retail
   and public services are key pillars of Castries’ urban economy. Flood water discharge is often impeded by clogged
   drains (filled with sediment and debris), blocked trash screens (solid waste) and limited discharge capacities of
   culverts and bridges. Anse La Raye is a fishing village located on the west coast, 16 km south of the capital. This
   proposed project area is drained by the Petite Rivière to the north and the Grande Rivière to the south and borders
   the catchment of the Roseau River, which, area-wise, is the largest of the island. The flood hazards in this area are
   high, mainly along the Petite Rivière, due to insufficient conveyance capacity towards the mouths of both rivers in
   the village, caused by flow obstructing culverts and road crossings.

Relationship to CPF

10. As presented in the World Bank Group Regional Partnership Strategy for the Organizations of Eastern Caribbean
    States, FY22–25 (Report 160349-LAC), the Project directly supports the goals of HLO1, "Strengthened Resilience
    to Climate Change and Other Shocks" by investing in flood management and flood reduction activities in the areas
    of Castries and Anse La Raye. Specific activities included in this high-level objective are: (i) improving the climate
    resilience of roads, bridges, electricity networks, public buildings, schools, and hospitals; (ii) strengthening flood
    management infrastructure such as river embankments; (iii) retrofitting and rehabilitating emergency shelters; (iv)
    conducting slope stabilization works to reduce landslide risks; and (v) supporting resilient housing to reduce
    damages from future disasters; and (vi) identifying additional measures to strengthen the resilience of vulnerable
    groups to face emergencies.

11. The proposed Project supports the World Bank’s twin goals to end extreme poverty and promote shared
    prosperity. It aims to reduce the frequency and impact of flooding by enhancing flood risk management measures
    and improving access to services and emergency management. The design and construction of flood control
    interventions will enhance infrastructure to protect the poor and vulnerable who are disproportionately affected


                                                                                                                       Page 4
      The World Bank
      Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project(P504998)


    by natural hazards and economic shocks. The Project will promote shared prosperity by creating risk profiles for the
    study areas, informing DRM strategies and physical infrastructure interventions. These measures will protect
    livelihoods and economic activities while reducing disruptions caused by flooding, particularly in sectors such as
    small-scale trading, tourism and services that poorer communities depend on. By improving flood resilience, the
    Project supports income stability and strengthens the economic prospects of vulnerable populations.

12. The Project will contribute to the World Bank's Gender Equality Strategy (2024–30). The objectives of the strategy
    are to (a) end gender-based violence and elevate human capital; (b) expand and enable economic opportunities;
    and (c) engage women as leaders. The gender-inclusive principle will be applied throughout the Project’s
    implementation, actively involving women and vulnerable communities in gender-responsive infrastructure
    planning and design, community engagement, stakeholder consultation, and capacity building efforts. The Project
    will ensure equal access to climate-resilient infrastructure and DRM resources, providing inclusive benefits and
    opportunities for all social groups. Additionally, the Project will provide guidance on disaster preparedness and
    response and resilience to natural disasters by closely engaging women. It will advance Outcome 4 ‘Greater
    ownership and use of economic assets and Outcome 6 ‘Advances in women’s participation in decision-making’ of
    the World Bank’s Gender Strategy. By empowering women and vulnerable groups in decision-making processes,
    particularly those related to flood risk management activities, the Project will promote inclusive approaches that
    reflect the needs and priorities of the entire community, hereby enhancing disaster resilience.

13. The Project aligns with the goals of the Paris Agreement and Saint Lucia's Nationally Determined Contributions
    (NDC), which aim to reduce greenhouse gas emissions through a holistic and multi-sectoral approach to low-carbon
    development and climate resilience. This approach encompasses education, health, food security, water and
    sanitation, housing and social protection, in line with its Medium-term Development Strategy (MTDS) 2020-2023.
    Adaptation for Environmental Sustainability, Climate Change and Disaster Vulnerability Reduction, and
    Infrastructure, Connectivity and Energy are two strategic development pillars in Saint Lucia's updated NDC. These
    bridge the country's NDC goals and SDGs awhile aligning directly with its climate change priorities. Additionally,
    infrastructure is identified as one of the key sectors and priority areas in both MTDS and NDC. The operation
    supports enhancing resilience in flood management infrastructure planning, ensuring that Saint Lucia can better
    withstand climate impacts while fostering long-term sustainability. The Project will support the analytics, design
    and construction of targeted flood management interventions, without significant energy-consuming approaches,
    to achieve adaptation goals, meet mitigation targets, and contribute to the country’s broader climate change
    agenda.

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)

Note to Task Team: The PDO has been pre-populated from the datasheet for the first time for your convenience.
Keep it up to date whenever it is changed in the datasheet. Delete this note when finalizing the document.


14. The project's development objective is to enhance resilience to flood risk in the key areas of Castries and Anse La
    Raye.

 Key Results (From PCN)

15. The PDO will be measured by the following key results:


                                                                                                                     Page 5
       The World Bank
       Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project(P504998)


     (i) Number of people with increased resilience to climate risks (of which women (number) and youth (number)) –
         CRI.
     (ii) Risk informed strategies and designs available to the government for investment planning toward
          strengthening infrastructure resilience (number)


 D. Concept Description

16. Project Concept Overview. The proposed Project aims to provide focused interventions to improve the resilience of
    infrastructure and communities to flood and climate risk in the urban areas of Castries and Anse La Raye. The Project
    will finance targeted interventions which: (i) enhance flood controls to current and future climate hazards; (ii)
    strengthen the capacities of institution and communities to manage disaster and climate risk; (iii) improve resilience
    of infrastructure services; (iv) enable nature-based solution and green investments; and (v) provide a replicable and
    scalable model of urban resilient upgrades for other vulnerable urban centers across Saint Lucia. The Project will also
    support technical assistance (TA) activities to support improvements to operations and maintenance of infrastructure
    assets and the sustainability of investments.

17. The PDO will be achieved through three components. These components are: (a) Strengthening resilience of
    infrastructure planning, design, and management; (b) Enhancing resilience and sustainability of critical infrastructure
    services; and (c) Project Management.

18. Component 1. Strengthening resilience of infrastructure planning, design, and management. This component will
    support the integration of climate and disaster resilience considerations into technical and feasibility studies, as well
    as the detailed engineering designs of infrastructure interventions. The studies will aim to enhance flood control
    systems in the two project areas, Castries and Anse La Raye, while also strengthening the Government of Saint Lucia’s
    (GoSL) capacity to prepare for and manage the impacts of natural hazards and climate change. The project will adopt
    a basin-wide approach to understanding hydrodynamics and flood risks, targeting flood management infrastructure
    investments through a multi-criteria analysis. This analysis will consider factors such as flood hazard and damage
    reduction, costs, benefits, cost-benefit ratios, environmental and social impacts. These studies will support efforts to
    build resilience into both physical and operational infrastructure. They will be guided by universal design standards to
    address the needs of vulnerable populations, including women, the elderly, and persons with disabilities. Participatory
    processes will play a vital role by ensuring that community needs are incorporated, and investment efforts are inclusive
    and equitable.

19. In both Project areas, the tide, which defines the downstream water level boundary, at times hampers the discharge
    of flood water by backwater, particularly in combination with wind. Flooding along Saint Lucia's coastal zone - driven
    by high tidal levels, storm surges, and rising sea levels - significantly increases the frequency and severity of flood
    events. Effective flood risk management will commence with a comprehensive analysis of the affected areas to identify
    the underlying factors contributing to these events. Advanced modeling techniques will be utilized to assess hydrologic
    and hydraulic regimes, leveraging the high-resolution terrain model developed under the Saint Lucia Disaster
    Vulnerability Reduction Project (DVRP, P127226). Ground surveys will map and evaluate the drainage capacity of
    critical systems with a particular focus on the Castries urban drainage network under various climate scenarios. This
    analysis will include water flow patterns and rainfall-runoff responses at both urban and river basin levels, providing
    insights into the conditions that lead to flooding. Key factors such as drainage infrastructure capacity, sea-level
    impacts, and urban drainage inefficiencies will be assessed. In Castries, a significant driver of flooding is the dense

                                                                                                                         Page 6
       The World Bank
       Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project(P504998)


    coverage of impervious surfaces, which exacerbates runoff and intensifies rainfall concentration in the urban
    environment. By identifying these challenges, the analysis will support targeted interventions to mitigate flood risks
    and enhance resilience.

20. The Project will also explore the integration of Nature-Based Solutions (NBS) principles into the design of physical
    interventions. The Project will investigate potential areas for green-grey infrastructure integration and optimal types
    of NBS solutions for local context will be identified, responding to the risk profile of the Project areas. In addition to
    enhanced resilience, the Project will leverage the multifunctional characteristics of NBS and offer additional benefits
    for biodiversity, local economic development, and community well-being. The NBS solutions are expected to improve
    the urban environment and improve livability, particularly through upgrading the public spaces, integrating green and
    open areas, and enhancing experiences for tourism and recreation. In Castries, where the Project’s focus area is near
    the business district, government functions, tourism attractions, and social infrastructures (e.g. hospitals), the Project
    will fabricate new development with regeneration that boost economic activities and bring long-term benefits,
    creating more sustainable, vibrant, and investor-friendly communities.

21. Component 2. Enhancing resilience and sustainability of critical infrastructure services. The primary objective of this
    component is to support the construction of prioritized gray and green infrastructure investments that will increase
    the resilience of communities to flood and climate induced hazards in Castries and Anse La Raye. The component will
    support the implementation of prioritized activities designed under component 1, which will support an integrated
    river basin approach toward urban flood risk management and reduction. The identification of key infrastructure
    investments is being identified though a Project Preparation Grant, mobilized under the Global Facility for Disaster
    Reduction and Recovery’s (GFDRR) EU Resilient Caribbean Program Single-Donor Trust Fund (EUReCA), which will
    support a recipient executed study to “Development of Pre-Feasibility and Feasibility Studies for Flood Mitigation
    Measures in Castries and Anse La Raye.”

22. Prioritized investment activities expect to include both green and gray infrastructure solutions. The identification or
    suitable solutions will be determined based on an assessment of the current flood risk and effectiveness of proposed
    interventions under current and future climatic conditions and storm water drainage models. Gray infrastructure
    investments are expected to included solutions such as the rehabilitation of urban drainage, slope stabilization, river
    embankment protection, and sea defense. Green infrastructure solutions are expected to include solutions such as
    the establishment of green corridors, river and stream renaturation, improvements to upstream small scale catchment
    areas and storm water retention systems, and the establishment of bioretention areas within green spaces and long
    public corridors. In Castries, these interventions could likely involve redevelopment of the Constitution and George
    King V Parks and solutions for drainage downstream, in the market area, which is the lowest point and where both the
    downtown area and the George King area naturally drain. Flood risk reduction, including riverine flood risk, could also
    be improved improving floodplain recovery and detention areas along water ways by designing multifunctional
    recreation spaces and linear parks where space is available. In Anse La Ray possible NBS and gray solutions, integrated
    at the urban, riverine and coastal scale, could include improvements in the river discharge through management of
    the sand barriers through structures, porous media for filtration or structural solutions.

23. Given the vulnerability of Saint Lucia to climate and natural hazards, the construction of all infrastructure supported
    by this component will be assessed against future climate patterns, and opportunities to integrate mitigation and
    adaptation measures will be included. For example, construction of drainage and stabilization infrastructure will
    investigate the use of higher-quality, more disaster-resilient materials, and that incorporate climate change


                                                                                                                         Page 7
       The World Bank
       Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project(P504998)


    considerations. In addition, the Project will finance design and construction supervision for works contracts, as well
    as training and technical assistance (TA) to support the integration of DRM in infrastructure planning, design, financing,
    operations and maintenance, contingency programing, and institutional capacities and regulatory systems.
    Improvements to existing infrastructure practices will support efforts to prolong lifespans and resilience of
    infrastructure investments. Efforts are also being made through stakeholder meetings, dialogues with World Bank
    trust fund programs, and bilateral donor discussions to further strengthen coordination towards the comprehensive
    integration of climate and disaster resilience in Project investments.

24. Component 3: Project Management. This component will support essential positions for effective project
    management by a Project Management Unit under the leadership of the Ministry of Finance, Economic Development
    and Youth Economy (MoF). These include the staffing of a project coordinator, engineer, environmental specialist,
    social specialist, financial management specialist, and procurement specialist. Additionally, this component will
    finance (a) all fiduciary aspects of the project including audits; (b) the provision of training and workshops; and (c)
    administrative, management, and operating costs, including essential goods and equipment for project
    implementation.

25. Results Chain: To develop the results chain for the proposed Project, a theory of change approach was adopted and
    is illustrated in figure 1




26. Critical assumptions are as follows: (a) procurement processes advance smoothly with adequate market responses
    and quality local supply of goods, works, and services; (b) inflation of costs for materials and services is maintained;
    and (c) no other emergencies causing significant damages (that is, heavy rains, landslides, floods, and hurricanes) occur
    during implementation.

                                                                                                                         Page 8
       The World Bank
       Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project(P504998)




  2. Overall Risk and Explanation

27. The Project’s overall risk is assessed as Moderate. With respect to the World Bank’s Systematic Operations Risk-
    Rating Tool (SORT) categories, only one risk category is assessed as “high”, as outlined below.

28. Macroeconomic risk is rated High for this operation due to the presence of significant downside risks. Major risks
    stem from a delayed implementation of fiscal consolidation measures, more profound economic deceleration in the
    main tourism source countries, rising geopolitical tensions, natural disasters, and climate change. Despite ongoing
    reforms, Saint Lucia remains highly vulnerable to external shocks. These shocks could reduce economic growth and
    tax revenue collection, while increasing public spending to mitigate the impacts. In addition, a sudden shift of regional
    investor appetite toward other ECCU countries may pose rollover risks to public debt. A drop in the number of tourists
    could also affect the projected collection of the airport redevelopment tax to pay back the public guaranteed debt for
    the airport project. Economic recession could also affect the implementation of the Medium-term Debt Strategy,
    affecting its role in anchoring market expectations. Historically, macro shocks hit small businesses harder, especially
    microenterprises, which could deter increased applications for new financing.




 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                      Policies                                                      Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                           No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                     No



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts



29. A hydrologic model will analyze the causes of flooding at Castries and Anse La Raye, and be used to identify and select
    interventions, including nature-based solutions that will protect and enhance the urban environments during extreme
    weather events. Selected options will then be implemented, which may require works in protected areas, in congested
    urban areas with high traffic and many pedestrians, or in more rural communities, and may require land to be acquired
    or used. The works could impact areas protected for their historic and biodiversity importance directly or indirectly,
    and the safety and health of the workers who will undertake the construction as well as members of the community
    living and working in the vicinity will need to be protected.

30. The Environmental and Social risk rating is considered Moderate and ESS1, ESS2, ESS3, ESS4, ESS5, ESS6, ESS8, ESS10
    are considered relevant at this stage.

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

                                                                                                                         Page 9
     The World Bank
     Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project(P504998)



World Bank
 Jared Phillip Mercadante
 Senior Disaster Risk Management Specialist

 Artessa Saldivar-Sali
 Senior Infrastructure Specialist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
 Ministry of Finance, Economic Development and Youth Economy
 Philip Pierre
 Prime MInister
 opm@govt.lc

Implementing Agencies
 Department of Economic Development, Ministry of Finance, Economic Development and Youth Economy
 Paul Hilaire
 Permanent Secretary
 paul.hilaire@govt.lc

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                    Jared Phillip Mercadante, Artessa Saldivar-Sali

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:               Federica Ranghieri                       10-Dec-2024

Country Director:                       E. Gail Richardson                       09-Mar-2025




                                                                                                   Page 10
     The World Bank
     Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project(P504998)



Note to Task Team: This is the end of document. No further content should be added. Delete this note when
finalizing the document.




                                                                                                            Page 11
