Public Disclosure Authorized
                               Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project
                                                    (P504998)




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                  Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                    July 18, 2025




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                          1


                                                                                      Official Use Only
Contents
   1. Introduction/Project Description .......................................................................................................... 3
2. Objective/Description of SEP .................................................................................................................... 3
   3.      General Principles to Guide the Engagement Procedures ................................................................ 5
   4. Stakeholder identification and analysis ................................................................................................ 5
   4.2 Methodology....................................................................................................................................... 6
        4.3 Affected parties and other interested parties .............................................................................. 7
        4.4 Disadvantaged/ vulnerable individuals or groups ........................................................................ 7
   5. Stakeholder Engagement Program ..................................................................................................... 10
        5.1. Summary of stakeholder engagement during project preparation .......................................... 10
        5.2. Summary of project stakeholder needs and methods, tools, and techniques for stakeholder
        engagement ........................................................................................................................................ 11
        5.3. Stakeholder engagement plan .................................................................................................... 12
        5.4. Reporting back to stakeholders .................................................................................................. 14
   6. Resources and Responsibilities for implementing stakeholder engagement activities ..................... 16
        6.1. Resources..................................................................................................................................... 16
        6.2. Management functions and responsibilities .............................................................................. 16
   7. Grievance Redress Mechanism [GRM] ............................................................................................... 17
        7.1. Description of GM ....................................................................................................................... 17
   8. Monitoring and Reporting .................................................................................................................. 20
   8.1. Summary of how SEP implementation will be monitored and reported ........................................ 20
        8.2. Reporting back to stakeholder groups ....................................................................................... 21
9. Conclusion ............................................................................................................................................... 21
10. Annexes ................................................................................................................................................. 22
   Annex 1 ................................................................................................................................................... 22
   Annex 2. .................................................................................................................................................. 23
   Annex 3 – Project GRM ........................................................................................................................... 24




                                                                               2


                                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
1. Introduction/Project Description
The Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project –aims to facilitate the preparation of a project
designed to enhance the Government of Saint Lucia’s capacities to prepare and respond to disaster and
climate events and to strengthen the resilience of infrastructure in Castries and Anse La Raye to flood
risk management.

The Project Development Objective is “To enhance institutional capacities and infrastructure resilience
to flood risk in the target areas of Castries and Anse La Raye.” The project comprises the following
components:
Component 1. Institutional and system strengthening for flood resilience and preparedness: This
component will finance the detailed engineering designs and construction supervision for selected flood
mitigation investments within the Castries and Anse La Raye areas, while also strengthening the
Government of Saint Lucia’s capacity to prepare for and manage the impacts of natural hazards and
climate change.

Component 2. Enhancement of critical flood-risk reduction infrastructure: The primary objective of this
component is to support the construction of prioritized infrastructure investments that will increase the
resilience of communities to flood and climate change-induced hazards in Castries and Anse La Raye.
The component will support the implementation of prioritized activities designed under component 1,
which will support an integrated river basin approach toward urban flood risk management and
reduction.

Component 3: Project Management: This component will support essential positions for effective
project management by a Project Coordination Unit (PCU) under the leadership of the Ministry of
Finance, Economic Development and Youth Economy (MoF). These include the staffing of a Project
Coordinator, an FM Specialist and an FM Officer, a Procurement and Contract Management Specialist
and a Procurement Analyst, an E&S Specialist, and a Project Engineer.



2. Objective/Description of SEP

The overall objective of this SEP is to define a program for stakeholder engagement inclusive of public
information disclosure and consultation throughout the entire project cycle.

The SEP outlines the ways in which the project will communicate with stakeholders and includes a
mechanism by which people can raise concerns, provide feedback, or make complaints about project
activities or any activities related to the project. Stakeholder engagement will be undertaken
continuously throughout the process of development, preparation and implementation of the project

This stakeholder engagement plan has been designed with the following specific objectives in mind,
namely to:

    (i)     Inform stakeholders about the project, including the project purpose and scope;
    (ii)    assess the level of stakeholder interest and support and allow for stakeholders’ views to be
            considered throughout the project development and implementation process;


                                                    3


                                                                                                     Official Use Only
    (iii)    promote and provide means for effective and inclusive engagement with stakeholders on
             issues that could potentially affect them - including stakeholders who may be disadvantaged
             and vulnerable - throughout the entire project development and implementation process;
    (iv)     ensure that appropriate project information on environmental and social risks and impacts
             is disclosed to stakeholders in a timely, understandable, accessible and culturally
             appropriate manner and format;
    (v)       ensure there are opportunities for stakeholders to provide feedback, ask questions and
             raise concerns which will contribute to the fostering of strong project-stakeholder
             relationships,
    (vi)     ensure the existence of a culturally appropriate and gender sensitive mechanism for filing
             complaints and grievances
    (vii)    communicate the benefits of the project at different governance levels and with different
             stakeholders at the national and community level to ensure meaningful consultation and
             promote social acceptability of the project.
    (viii)   gather feedback and information from stakeholders to project parameters
    (ix)     work constructively with stakeholders to successfully manage their varied interests and
             ensure any issues raised by stakeholders are properly considered and managed.
    (x)      respond to stakeholders’ feedback, including concerns about the various issues which
             should be addressed and an indication of how they could be handled in the design of the
             project.

ESS 10 recognizes the importance of open and transparent engagement between project implementer
and project stakeholders as an essential good practice. Effective stakeholder engagement can improve
the environmental and social sustainability of projects, enhance project acceptance, and make a
significant contribution to successful project design and implementation.
The engagement with Stakeholders will take place as an inclusive process to be conducted throughout
the project life cycle. The SEP is intended to support the development of a strong, constructive, and
responsive relationship that is critical to the successful management of the project’s environmental and
social risks.
It is acknowledged and accepted within this plan that engagement with stakeholders is most effective
when initiated at an early stage in the project development process and should be an integral part of
early project assessment and decision making, management, and monitoring of environmental and
social risks and impacts.
This stakeholder consultation plan identifies the major stakeholders for the SURF-IN project and
highlights the roles and responsibilities of each major stakeholder or grouping. It identifies critical
project activities, the most suitable or appropriate methods of consultation for engaging the various
stakeholders, and presents proposed timelines and the parties who will be responsible for undertaking
key activities
The stakeholder consultation process will serve as a fundamental mechanism for collecting information,
perspectives, and feedback from individuals involved in the project. This is critical in ensuring the proper
alignment of the project with the needs, expectations, and concerns of all relevant stakeholders.




                                                     4


                                                                                                        Official Use Only
The plan is a living document and will be updated as the specific dates for undertaking the activities are
set. Consequently, it may be updated to include any additional stakeholders who are identified through
the process of project development and implementation.
    3. General Principles to Guide the Engagement Procedures
General principles guiding the design and conduct of the engagement process:
    •   STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT is vital to ALL CHANGE -RELATED PROCESSES , particularly in relation to
        projects that aim to generate long-term transformational change across different sectors of the
        society;
    •   PROCEDURES MUST BE DOCUMENTED AND FORMALISED , this should be made compulsory whenever
        possible;
    •   THERE IS NO PRE -DETERMINED “PREFERRED ” APPROACH OR METHOD           in the type and form of
        stakeholder engagement to be employed which will vary depending on the specific
        circumstances. While in some instances all that is needed is the sharing of information, in others
        it may be necessary to use more elaborate and iterative participatory processes;
    •   the METHODS OF CONSULTATION will also vary, and may involve workshops, focus groups,
        interviews (particularly with key informants) and surveys (including questionnaires delivered in
        person or online);
    •   ENGAGEMENT IS A PROCESS THAT MUST BE SUPPORTED AND FACILITATED BY ADEQUATE COMMUNICATION
        prior to, during and following specific events. Participants must be provided with the
        information they need to contribute meaningfully (background to the issues, how they can/may
        contribute, expectations from other stakeholders, etc.). In most cases, information should be
        provided well in advance;
    •   in the design and execution of engagement processes, it is useful to make A DISTINCTION BETWEEN
        “REPRESENTATION” AND “REPRESENTATIVENESS ”, i.e. it is important to ensure that the processes
        are representative of the main stakeholder categories, even if some are not formally
        represented (in other words, there is always a danger of giving a stronger voice to organised
        groups and sectors, at the expense of those that do not have a representative organisation);
    •   regardless of the purpose sought and the methods used, it is critical to ensure that the
        consultation PROCESS IS EQUITABLE (see Section Error! Reference source not found. below);
    •   ENGAGEMENT IS NOT A ONE - OFF EXERCISE , it requires sustained dialogue and follow-up, including
        keeping stakeholders informed at the implementation stage of the project; and
    •   effective and equitable engagement of stakeholders requires human, technical and financial
        resources, therefore institutions responsible for the engagement processes and activities must
        ensure the availability of the requisite CAPACITY AND ADEQUATE BUDGET .


4. Stakeholder identification and analysis
4.1 Stakeholder Overview
It is foreseen that stakeholders of this initiative will come from the following main groups that is
representative of all major groups and institutions that have an interest in the project (whether as
executing and co-executing agencies, beneficiaries or impacted sectors or communities):
 Policymakers and Regulators: This group includes the Ministries responsible for economic
development, Infrastructure, agriculture, environment and forestry, water resources, sustainable

                                                    5


                                                                                                      Official Use Only
development and others. This group accommodates the project, ensuring that it aligns with national
priorities.
Project proponents: This group includes the Department of Economic Development and the
Government agencies responsible for oversight of infrastructure development and others. These
agencies are all involved in any or a combination of the oversight, execution or funding of project
activities.
Technical Agencies/Units: These are technical agencies such as the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry
Dept, and the Water Resource Management Agency.
Community members or households: this category includes residents of the Castries and Anse La Raye
communities, inclusive of youth, women, farmers and community leaders such as teachers and heads of
churches or other faith-based organizations.
The Private Sector and Community governance entities including but not limited to St Lucia Chamber
of Commerce, the Castries City Council, The Anse La Raye Village Council, Southeast Castries
Constituency Council


        4.2 Methodology
To satisfy best practice approaches, the project will apply the following principles for stakeholder
engagement:
• Openness and life-cycle approach: Public consultations for the project(s) will be arranged during the
  whole life cycle, carried out in an open manner, free of external manipulation, interference, coercion,
  or intimidation.

• Informed participation and feedback: Information will be provided to and widely distributed among
  all stakeholders in an appropriate format; opportunities are provided for communicating stakeholder
  feedback, and for analyzing and addressing comments and concerns

• Inclusiveness and sensitivity: Stakeholder identification is undertaken to support better
  communications and build effective relationships. The participation process for the projects is
  inclusive. In so far as is feasible and possible all stakeholders will be encouraged to participate in the
  consultation process. Equal access to information will be provided to all stakeholders. Sensitivity to
  stakeholders’ needs is the key principle underlying the selection of engagement methods. Special
  attention is given to vulnerable groups that may be at risk of being marginalized particularly women,
  the elderly, persons with disabilities, displaced persons, and migrant workers and communities, and
  the cultural sensitivities of diverse ethnic groups.

• Flexibility: In addition to traditional forms of face-to-face engagement, the methodology adopted shall
  involve other forms of engagement, including various forms of internet or phone-based
  communication.




                                                     6


                                                                                                        Official Use Only
          4.3 Affected parties and other interested parties 1
Affected parties include local communities, community members, and other parties that may be
impacted by the Project. Specifically, the following individuals and groups fall within this category (not
exhaustive): households, business owners and their employees in the central business district and the
farmers in rural communities, street vendors, fisherfolk, entities and individuals in the social services
sector -health, education, emergency services, the agriculture sector, sports, the utilities (water
electricity and telecommunications), and the transportation sector
Other Parties
Generally, the project has the potential to have an impact on all aspects of society in the participating
communities. Therefore, other interest groups and interested parties may include NGOs, CSOs or similar
professional bodies such as the Association of professional engineers, drivers, boat owners, minibus
associations operating in Castries and Anse La Raye, fisher folks, particularly in Anse La Raye, service
providers such as the water, electricity and cable companies, government agencies and departments
not directly involved in project implementation, but because of their mandate may have interest in the
project, such as the Ministry of Social Transformation and the Ministry of Education.
The list is not exhaustive, and as stakeholder consultations commence in earnest any new stakeholders
who are identified will be included


          4.4 Disadvantaged/ vulnerable individuals or groups2
Within the Project, vulnerable or disadvantaged groups may include but are not limited to the elderly,
persons with disabilities and their caretakers, women-headed households and the unemployed. The
project will seek to identify representative organizations and leaders for these groups who can be
partners in the stakeholder engagement process. Vulnerable groups within the communities affected by
the Project may be added, further confirmed, and consulted through dedicated means, as appropriate.



1
  For the purposes of effective and tailored engagement, stakeholders of the proposed project(s) can be divided into the following core
categories:
     •     Affected Parties: Persons, groups, and other entities within the Project Area of Influence (PAI) that are directly influenced (actually
           or potentially) by the project and/or have been identified as most susceptible to change associated with the project, and who need
           to be closely engaged in identifying impacts and their significance, as well as in decision-making on mitigation and management
           measures.
     •     Other Interested Parties: Individuals/groups/entities that may not experience direct impacts from the Project but who consider or
           perceive their interests as being affected by the project and/or who could affect the project and the process of its implementation in
           some way.
     •     Vulnerable Groups: Persons who may be disproportionately impacted or further disadvantaged by the project(s) compared with any
           other groups due to their vulnerable status, and that may require special engagement efforts to ensure their equal representation in
           the consultation and decision-making process associated with the project.
     •     It is important to note that sometimes projects have different components with very different sets of stakeholders for each
           component. Those different stakeholders should be considered in preparing the SEP.

2
  It is particularly important to understand whether project impacts may disproportionately fall on disadvantaged or vulnerable individuals or
groups, who often do not have a voice to express their concerns or understand the impacts of a project, and to ensure that awareness raising
and stakeholder engagement be adapted to take into account such groups’ or individuals’ particular sensitivities, concerns, and cultural
sensitivities and to ensure a full understanding of project activities and benefits. Engagement with vulnerable groups and individuals often
requires the application of specific measures and assistance aimed at the facilitation of their participation in the project-related decision
making so that their awareness of and input into the overall process are commensurate with those of other stakeholders.


                                                                        7


                                                                                                                                               Official Use Only
Description of the methods of engagement that will be undertaken by the project is provided in Table 1
below.

DISABILITY : people living with disabilities have limited opportunities to participate in formal processes,
yet they are the most directly affected by environmental degradation and natural disasters and should
be among the primary beneficiaries of interventions designed to address negative impacts of these
natural phenomena.
LANGUAGE: while English is St Lucia’s only official language a large proportion of the population is
bilingual with Kweyol being the preferred language especially among the elderly and rural populace.
Consequently, a large measure of interactions will have to be conducted using the native lingua franca.

Gender: Special consideration must be given to the circumstances of two essential gender-based
groups viz:
    -   Poor, single female heads of households, who are particularly vulnerable and have very limited
        opportunities to contribute to decisions and actions that affect them; and
    -   Unemployed young men who are increasingly marginalized and rarely participate in the
        development process.

Table 1: Methods and instruments applicable to specific groups or sectors
            GROUP OR SECTOR                                METHODS AND INSTRUMENTS
Policymakers and Regulators: This         -   Meetings and site visits
group includes the Ministries             -   Workshops and presentations
responsible         for       economic    -   Formal correspondence
development,            Infrastructure,   -   Electronic correspondence
agriculture,      environment       and
forestry,       water        resources,
sustainable development and others.
This group accommodates the
project, ensuring that it aligns with
national priorities.
Project proponents: This group            -   Meetings and site visits
includes     the     Department      of   -   Workshops and presentations
Economic Development and the              -   Formal correspondence
Government agencies responsible for       -   Electronic correspondence
oversight        of      infrastructure
development and others. These
agencies are all involved in any or a
combination of the oversight,
execution or funding of project
activities.




                                                    8


                                                                                                       Official Use Only
          GROUP OR SECTOR                                 METHODS AND INSTRUMENTS
The Private Sector and Community         -   Meetings and site visits
governance entities including but        -   Workshops and presentations
not limited to St Lucia Chamber of       -   Formal correspondence
Commerce, the Castries City Council,     -   Electronic correspondence
The Anse-La -Raye Village Council,
Southeast Castries Constituency
Council
Local communities potentially            -   Community consultations, through meetings, and site
impacted (positively or negatively) by       visits.
the project                              -   Focus groups and individual interviews with community
                                             leaders and key informants.
                                         -   Use of both Creole and English in community
                                             consultations and other communications and activities.
                                         -   Ensuring that all consultations with affected communities
                                             are conducted in a manner that is transparent, inclusive
                                             and responsive.
                                         -   Ensuring that consultations are conducted free of
                                             coercion and of any undue political or other form of
                                             influence.
Women                                    -   Ensuring that an equitable number of males and females
                                             are engaged at all stages of the project cycle whenever
                                             possible (design, inception, implementation, monitoring,
                                             evaluation and reporting).
                                         -   Developing project-level action plans that cater to the
                                             specific needs of this group including scheduling
                                             consultations and other activities at times that are most
                                             convenient for women and allow for their full
                                             participation.
Men                                      -   Ensuring that an equitable number of males and females
                                             are engaged at all stages of the project cycle (design,
                                             inception, implementation, monitoring, evaluation and
                                             reporting).
                                         -   Developing project-level action plans to cater to the
                                             needs and requirements of this specific group.
Youth (15-35 years)                      -   Involving relevant national and community-based youth
                                             organizations in all consultation processes, including
                                             seeking nominations from the Council to participate in
                                             workshops and other events that have to do with project
                                             design and implementation.
People living with disabilities          -   Involving relevant organizations, notably the National
                                             Council of and for Persons with Disabilities, in the design
                                             of consultation activities that facilitate the participation
                                             of persons living with disabilities.




                                                    9


                                                                                                        Official Use Only
           GROUP OR SECTOR                                  METHODS AND INSTRUMENTS
Elderly- persons over the age of 65      -   Including people of all ages, including the elderly in
                                             consultations and other activities.
                                         -   Scheduling consultations and other activities at times
                                             that are more convenient for the elderly and facilitating
                                             their access to these events (e.g. free transportation).
                                         -   Providing information in a culturally appropriate manner
                                             yeah you see itself though she’s fell from the elderly
Farmers                                  -   Ensuring that meetings are held during hours that will
                                             allow the participation of farmers, preferably in the
                                             afternoon between 3:00 to 5:00 pm.
                                         -   Liaising with Agricultural Extension Officers of the
                                             Ministry of Agriculture who can transmit information to
                                             farmers, and are key players in the valuation of crops
                                             when payment of crop compensation is required.
                                         -   Providing information in a culturally appropriate manner.
Women farmers                            -   Ensuring that meetings are scheduled at times that will
                                             facilitate their participation.
                                         -   Engaging groups which represent women farmers.
                                         -   Liaising with Agricultural Extension Officers of the
                                             Ministry of Agriculture who can transmit information to
                                             farmers, and are key players in the valuation of crops
                                             when payment of crop compensation is required.
                                         -   Providing information in a culturally appropriate
                                             manner.

5. Stakeholder Engagement Program

        5.1. Summary of stakeholder engagement during project preparation

As part of the process of project development, and preparation, consultations were conducted during
the Bank Mission from June 23 to 27. The stakeholders were mainly representatives from government
ministries, departments and agencies.         Among the stakeholders who were engaged were
representatives from the Ministry of Finance (MoF), the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) and its Forestry
Division, Department of Infrastructure, National Integrated Programme and Planning Unit (NIPP), Water
Resources Management Agency (WRMA), Saint Lucia Meteorological Services (SLMS), Ministry of Local
Government, Castries City Council, Constituency Development Program (CDP) and Anse La Raye
Constituency Council.

The engagements were mainly for fact finding, geared at identifying and analyzing the causes and
potential interventions needed to mitigate flooding in the most at-risk areas of Castries and Anse La
Raye. The four main causes of flooding in Castries and the two main causes of flooding in Anse La Raye
were identified.

From 7th to 11th July the Consultant undertaking the prefeasibility and feasibility studies participated in a
mission where once again stakeholders as mentioned above but including new stakeholders such as the
Ministry of Tourism, the Chamber of Commerce, the Statistics Department and Global Port Holdings

                                                     10


                                                                                                         Official Use Only
were engaged in meetings as well as on the ground site visits. The objective of the engagements was as
follows:
   1. To obtain information from local stakeholders on the extent, timing and depth of past flood
      events, including annotating flooded areas on maps and noting down past flood levels and
      locations which can be used to validate the flood models.

   2. To obtain information on any previous flood alleviation interventions and their effectiveness
      (noting works completed following the Halcrow study in 2004.

   3. To obtain available data as it pertains to flooding in the two districts.

   4. To discuss with stakeholders the framework and criteria and metrics for appraising flood
      alleviation measures (for example: feasibility, effectiveness, ecosystem services benefits,
      amenity benefits) and their weightings
   5. To obtain feedback on flood alleviation solutions which are considered to be promising, or
      conversely are likely to not be feasible.

The stakeholders highlighted what in their view and experience contributes to the flooding challenges in
the two districts, citing the lack of maintenance of drains and rivers (desilting) and indiscriminate
garbage disposal as the main contributors to flooding. All stakeholders, agreed that the intervention
was necessary, but also recommended that the need for regular maintenance of drains and rivers and
measures for the control of indiscriminate dumping of garbage, be strongly proposed as measures for
increasing resilience to flood risk in the Consultant’s report.

 Feedback received from the stakeholders centered mainly on the need for continued engagement
during preparation of the project to ensure that all parties are kept informed of the project stages
thereby creating interest and buy

Careful attention will be paid to ensuring that future stakeholder engagement sessions are carefully
planned, organized and executed to derive optimal value from these engagements which should lead to
better project design and implementation.

       5.2. Summary of project stakeholder needs and methods, tools,
       and techniques for stakeholder engagement
                                                                                         Individual
                                                                                         Meetings
DIFFERENT METHODS will be used to engage stakeholders in
decision-making and other processes related to the
                                                                    Media
project including:                                                                                              Focus Groups
                                                                 Engagement
   •   individual meetings: while workshops and other
       forms of group consultation are the methods most
       commonly used, individual and preferably face-
       to-face meetings are important for many                                           Methods
       reasons, namely to elicit views from key         Experienced
                                                                                                                       Workshops
       informants, to fill information gaps, and to      Facilitators
       give individuals or groups an opportunity to


                                                    11
                                                                          Tailoring to
                                                                                                      Presentations
                                                                         Local Context

                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
        raise issues or receive guidance
    •   workshops, focus groups and other group discussions: these enable the “high quality
        conversations” that allow people to interact, share views and ideas, and develop an
        understanding of the issue at hand, and therefore contribute meaningfully to project
        formulation;
    •   when presentations are made in workshops and other gatherings, the information should be
        made available in varied ways to accommodate the range of learning styles and needs of the
        audience. Complex or difficult information should be presented in plain language and face-to-
        face, and participants must have the opportunity to make inputs into decisions (as opposed to
        just being told what to do or just being asked to identify issues);
    •   all participants in the engagement process should respect one another’s viewpoint and inputs,
        and should gain a sense of personal responsibility towards the issue and the programme /project
        under consideration. This helps to increase participant motivation, promote changes in
        behaviour, and raise external recognition and impact;
    •   whenever possible, experienced facilitators who are neutral (and are perceived as neutral by
        participants) should be used;
    •   other methods and media can be used, including popular theatre (for example, if role playing
        can assist a particular community, institution or target group to develop a scenario for a desired
        intervention) and performances by local artists (to encourage participation and illustrate issues);
        and
    •   there are a number of practical ways to facilitate the engagement of local stakeholders,
        including the presentation of handouts and tokens, the provision of refreshments at and
        transportation to meetings and events, the scheduling of meetings at times most convenient to
        target groups, and making arrangements for parents to attend in the company of young
        children.
    •  Consideration will be given to the adoption of approaches that are specifically tailored to THE
       PRIVATE SECTOR . In particular: (i) communication activities that illustrate how companies and
       businesses, including small and micro enterprises, can incorporate responses to flood mitigation
       and other natural disasters, climate change and other weather phenomenon in their ethos and
       practices, and benefit from such; and
        (ii) youth entrepreneurs must be considered as a very important group in engagement and
       communication because of their role in innovation and the challenges they face in accessing
       finance.
All engagement activities will be supported by adequate communication and suitable knowledge
products.


        5.3. Stakeholder engagement plan
 Project Stage    Estimate     Information to be          Method Used             Target       Responsibili
                      d       Disclosed or Shared                              Stakeholders    ties
                  Date/Tim
                  e Period
Preparation       July       ESCP                    Disclosure on website General            PIU
Pre-feasibility   2025       GRM                     of Government and     Populace


                                                    12


                                                                                                       Official Use Only
and feasibiitly   SEP                       Department of            with access
studies           Project objectives and    Economic                 to internet
                  components                Development              services
                  Project designs           Posted in community      Public
                                            Human Resource           servants
                                            Centres and other
                                            municipal buildings
                                            such as the Office of
                                            the Anse La Raye
                                            Constituency Council
                                            and the Castries
                                            Constituency Council
                                            Office / Town Hall.
                                            Meetings
                                            Presentations and
                                            site visits
Implementati                                Meetings                 Government     PIU
on                Consultancy reports       Presentations            Ministries,    Consultants
                  Training Plans            Project signs            Department
                  Monitoring and            Training workshops       and Agencies
                  maintenance plans         Progress meetings        NGOs and
                  Grievance Reporting       Posted in community      CBOs
                  Procedures                centres and other        Residents
                                            municipal buildings.
                                            Meeting discussion
                                            held in local language
                                            / kweyol for persons
                                            who are more
                                            comfortable with this
                                            language.
Closure           Project completion        Closing ceremony         Government     PIU
                  report                    press releases           ministries
                                            documentaries            department
                                                                     and agencies
                                                                     NGOS and
                                                                     CBO
                                                                     residents




                                           13


                                                                                           Official Use Only
 Vulnerable groups such as poor women, male and female farmers, persons with disabilities, and the elderly 3 will
 be engaged separately to ensure that their views are captured and adequately addressed.

 Project documents such as this SEP, the ESCP, and the Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM), project
 pre-feasibility and feasibility reports, ESIA/ ESMPs and other environmental and social documentation,
 as required will be disclosed on the websites of the Government of St. Lucia and the Department of
 Economic Development. Regular updates on project developments will be provided via the Government
 Information Service (GIS) news updates and programs, and through press releases via mass media
 organisations; Periodic stakeholder consultation meetings will be held with key stakeholders to provide
 project updates and to listen to stakeholder concerns and feedback; Project information will be shared
 through leaflets and brochures which will be placed at strategic locations in government offices and in
 the communities; Separate focus group meetings will take place with vulnerable groups. Pertinent
 information will be disclosed in English and Kweyol as appropriate.


           5.4. Reporting back to stakeholders
 Stakeholders will be kept informed as project preparation and implementation unfolds. Reports will be
 presented on project environmental and social performance; implementation of the stakeholder
 engagement plan and Grievance Mechanism, and on the project’s overall implementation progress.
Communication with stakeholders should be done through several modes, as described in the table
below:

                                     Table 2: Information Dissemination Method

Information Dissemination Method                                       Use

Phone/text/instant messages                                            Inform stakeholders of Consultations and
                                                                       meetings

Email                                                                  Inform Stakeholders of Consultations and
                                                                       meetings and confirm attendance; Provide
                                                                       attachments such as prepared reports and
                                                                       communication materials; Provide updates on
                                                                       initiatives or reports of related meetings and
                                                                       working sessions.

Print Media                                                            Develop and disseminate brochures or reports
                                                                       to provide background or update on initiatives,
                                                                       implementation progress and results. Placement
                                                                       can be at strategic location, such as government

 3
   Examples may include (i) Women: ensure that community engagement teams are gender-balanced and promote women’s leadership within
 these, design online and in-person surveys and other engagement activities so that women in unpaid care work can participate; consider
 provisions for childcare, transport, and safety for any in-person community engagement activities; there may also be women who face multiple
 challenges, for example, indigenous women, women with disabilities, etc. (ii) Elderly and people with existing medical conditions: develop
 information on specific needs and explain why they are at more risk and what measures to take to care for them; tailor messages and make
 them actionable for particular living conditions (including assisted living facilities), and health status; target family members; (iii) People with
 disabilities: provide information in accessible formats, such as braille or large print; offer multiple forms of communication, such as text
 captioning or signed videos, text captioning for the hearing impaired, and online materials for people who use assistive technology; and (iv)


                                                                         14


                                                                                                                                                Official Use Only
                       and public utility, city, town and village council
                       offices.

Radio and Television   Disseminate      information    on initiatives,
                       implementation progress and results; Engage
                       facilitators and audience in Q&A.

Social media           Provide regular updates on implementation
                       progress and related developments for key
                       stakeholders, that are as prepared and
                       approved for release on the various popular.

Website                Develop a web portal for the initiative that
                       ought to be updated periodically. The websites
                       of the GoSL and the Department of Economic
                       Development.

Interviews             Illicit and record direct input from stakeholders;
                       establish connection and rapport.

Focus Group Meetings   Provide background and update on the
                       initiative; use a structured approach to engage
                       participants and encourage dialogue; record
                       participants inputs; provide feedback where
                       possible.

Roundtable             Present and review update on the project;
                       Identify and discuss key issues that would affect
                       implementation or output; present reports on
                       issues relevant to the project that are within the
                       purview of participants and which have been
                       previously identified for inquiry, research and
                       study. Record key discussions and findings.

Public Consultations   Present background and update on the project;
                       engage in Q&A; record participants input and
                       feedback.

Workshops              Present background and update on the project;
                       use participatory activities to facilitate dialogue,
                       brainstorming,     feedback,      analyses      and
                       recommendation; record outputs

Formal Meetings        Provide background and update on the project;
                       distribute or exchange technical material and
                       data; Record key issues and inputs




                        15


                                                                              Official Use Only
6. Resources and Responsibilities for implementing stakeholder engagement activities

         6.1. Resources
The Department of Economic Development and the Youth Economy which is spearheading the
implementation of the project will oversee stakeholder engagement activities.

The budget for the SEP is as shown in Table below:


                                                                                Total
                                                                                Costs
                                                          Unit
Budget Category                              Quantity     Costs   Times/Years   XCD         Remarks
1. Events
                                                                                            Provision for
                                                                                         refreshment venue
                                                4         500
                                                                                          transportation if
1a. E.g., organization of focus groups                                          2000          required

2. Communication campaigns

2a.E.g., posters, flyers                       100         10                   1000

2b. E.g., social media campaign                 5         150                    750
3. Trainings
3a. E.g., training on social/environmental
                                                4         200
issues for PIU and contractor staff                                              800
3b.E.g., training on gender-based violence
(GBV) for Project Implementing Unit (PIU)       4         200
and contractor staff                                                             800
4. Beneficiary surveys

4a. E.g., mid-project perception survey         1         1000                  1000

4b. E.g., end-of-project perception survey      1         1000                  1000
5. Grievance Mechanism
5a.E.g., training of GM committees              1         150                    150
5b. E.g., suggestion boxes in villages
5c. E.g., GM communication materials           500         5                    2500
6. Other expenses

TOTAL STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT BUDGET:
                                                                                10,000


         6.2. Management functions and responsibilities
The entity responsible for carrying out stakeholder engagement activities is the PIU under the
Department of Economic Development with support from partner agencies such as the Castries and

                                                     16


                                                                                                      Official Use Only
Anse La Raye Constituency Councils. The ESS attached to the project will have specific responsibility for
overseeing the stakeholder engagement process.

The stakeholder engagement activities will be documented through reports, and Audio-visual
documentaries.

7. Grievance Redress Mechanism [GRM]
A GRM has been defined for the project; the principal aim of the GRM is to provide an avenue through
which grievances from the communities, groups, individuals, local authorities, NGOs, and any other
affected parties can be resolved amicably in an effective and efficient manner that satisfies all parties
involved.

        7.1. Description of GM
Specifics of the structure and administration of the GRM, its objectives, purpose, processes, operation,
responsible parties and other pertinent information is outlined in detail in the attached GRM document;
Please refer to GRM document for a detailed description of the Grievance Redress Mechanism that will
be used

 Step                         Description of Process                   Time Frame       Responsibility
 GM implementation    The Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) is        Throughout             PIU
 structure           consistent with the requirements of the          project
                     World Bank’s Environmental and Social            preparation and
                     Framework          (ESS10-       Stakeholder     implementation
                     Engagement). The GRM is a means for
                     affected parties to submit complaints, where
                     project beneficiaries or other stakeholders
                     may have a concern/grievance about the
                     SURF-In Project. The issue could relate to an
                     activity that has or is likely to render an
                     adverse effect(s) on them as individuals, the
                     community          and/or        surrounding
                     environments. Through the GRM, Project
                     affected parties or general members of the
                     public have the freedom to express concerns,
                     raise issues and seek satisfactory resolution
                     to grievances relevant to Project activities.
                     This mechanism allows for the minimisation
                     of reputational risk and financial risk(s) via
                     early identification and resolution of
                     problems by the PIU.




 Grievance uptake    Grievances can be submitted via the                 Throughout
                     following channels:                               implementation
                     •   Grievances can be made verbally to the
                         Environmental and Social Specialist (E&S
                         Specialist) in person at stakeholder
                         engagement meetings.


                                                         17


                                                                                                         Official Use Only
Step                              Description of Process                  Time Frame              Responsibility
                      •       Additionally, the complaint can be made
                              to the PCU by telephone, and the person
                              receiving the call will guide the
                              complainant toward the            proper
                              channel.
                      •       Complaints can be anonymous;

                      The GRM would include appropriate channels
                      for receiving GBV related complaints. All GBV
                      complaints will be handled directly by the
                      E&S Specialist who       has been trained in
                      the handling of these cases, consistent with
                      the WB guidance notes.

                      The GRM would also incorporate channels to
                      address worker related complaints that are
                      transmitted by the contractors and sub-
                      contractors. All project workers will be
                      trained on the use of the GRM and its SEA/SH
                      aspects.
                           • By letter addressed to:
                       Project Coordinator
                      Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project
                      Project Coordination Unit (PCU)
                      Department of Economic Development
                      2nd Floor, Finance Administrative Centre
                      Pointe Seraphine
                      Castries

                          •       By email to the following addresses:
                                  Email: madonna.monrose@govt.lc
                                   vincent.peter@govt.lc

                              •    By   phone      at        telephone
                                   number: 758 468 2413

Sorting, processing   The PIU, through the Administrative                Upon receipt of    PIU Administrative Secretary
                      Secretary/E&S Specialist, will receive a           complaint          ESS
                      complaint or advise complainants on the
                      appropriate procedure for filing a
                      complaint. All grievances will be recorded in
                      a general Grievance Office Log.
                      In circumstances where a stakeholder’s
                      grievance lies directly with the Project
                      Manager, the Administrative Secretary/E&S
                      Specialist will direct the stakeholder to
                      submit their complaint to the office of the
                      Permanent Secretary.


Acknowledgment        Receipt of the grievance is acknowledged by        Within 2 days of   PIU Administrative Secretary
and follow-up         the PIU Administrative Secretary and a             receipt            ESS
                      response communicated to the complainant
                      via a Grievance Acknowledgement Form


                                                              18


                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
 Step                             Description of Process                     Time Frame            Responsibility
 Verification,           Investigation of the complaint is led by the       Within 10        PM
 investigation, action   ESS and if necessary, assistance will be           working days     ESS
                         requested from government agencies with                             Grievance Redress
                         interest or authority over the grievance                            Committee comprising
                         subject.                                                            representatives from
                         A proposed resolution is formulated by the                          partnering government
                         PM and communicated to the complainant by                           implementing agencies
                         the ESS. For level 2 grievances the GRC will
                         spearhead the investigation and propose a
                         resolution, which will be communicated by
                         the ESS to the complainant.
 Monitoring and          Data on complaints are collected in the               Monthly ,                  ESS
 evaluation              Grievance Log and reported to the Project             quarterly                  PM
                         Coordinator monthly and quarterly, as part of         As required
                         progress reports, to the Bank. Complaints
                         with serious implications that may lead to
                         reputational or financial risks will be reported
                         immediately to the Bank
 Provision of feedback   Feedback from complainants regarding their            As required                ESS
                         satisfaction with complaint resolution is
                         collected by the ESS and recorded in the
                         Grievance Closure Form
 Training                Training needs for staff/consultants in the           As required                ESS
                         PIU, Contractors, and Supervision Consultants
                         are as follows:
                         - Sensitisation for staff of the PIU
                         - General induction for the PIU, contractors
                         and consultants
                         -Role of the GRC for members
 If relevant, payment    Where applicable, appropriate payment of              As required   PM
 of reparations          compensation made in accordance with                                GRC
 following complaint     national regulations and /or the ESF                                Department of Physical
 resolution              requirements.                                                       Planning
                                                                                             Department of Infrastructure
                                                                                             Ministry of Agriculture



The GRM provides an appeals process if (see the detailed GRM in Annex 3 for additional information)
the complainant is not satisfied with the proposed resolution of the complaint. Once all possible means
to resolve the complaint have been proposed and if the complainant is still not satisfied, they should be
advised of their right to legal recourse.

Addressing Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment
The specific nature of sexual exploitation and abuse and of sexual harassment (SEA/SH) requires tailored
measures for the reporting, and safe and ethical handling of such allegations. The GRM promotes the
use of the survivor-centered approach which aims (the process is described in detail in Section 6 in the
GRM in Annex 3 ) to ensure that anyone who has been the target of SEA/SH is treated with dignity, and

                                                                19


                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
that the person’s rights, privacy, needs and wishes are respected and prioritized in any and all
interactions.

The project’s E&S Specialist will be responsible for dealing with any SEA/SH issues, should they arise. A
list of SEA/SH service providers will be kept available by the project. The GM would assist SEA/SH
survivors by referring them to Services Provider(s) for support immediately after receiving a complaint
directly from a survivor.

To address SEA/SH, the project will follow the guidance provided on the World Bank Technical Note
“Addressing Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) in Investment Project
Financing Involving Civil Works”. The GRM will follow the official WB definitions and procedures
described in the Technical Note

Grievances from project staff, contractors and consultants will be managed in keeping with ESS2 Labour
and Working Conditions. The Project would ensure that contractors and sub-contractors put in place a
GRM that would serve the needs of workers to report on grievances. The contractors’ employee who
serves as the ESHS officer or the supervisor /foreman will be responsible for recording and reporting on
complaints from the contractors’ workers.

The World Bank and the Borrower do not tolerate reprisals and retaliation against project stakeholders
who share their views about Bank-financed projects. This would be reinforced during stakeholder
engagements throughout the project’s life cycle.

8. Monitoring and Reporting

8.1. Summary of how SEP implementation will be monitored and reported
Stakeholder engagement shall be monitored and reported on by the PIU throughout the entire project
cycle/life in numerous ways including but not limited to the following:
    ❖ Monitoring of the objectives defined in the SEP and specifically indicators defined for those
      objectives
    ❖ Records of all consultations held during a reporting period;
    ❖ Records of all grievances received and dealt with via the Grievance Redress Mechanism
    ❖ Updates of the stakeholder list as merited.
    ❖ Feedback gathered from the engagements whether in the form of surveys, posted comments,
      emails and conversations looking at standard questions such as (a) how do you feel about the
      project or engagement? (b) what is going well, what is not going well, (c) if there’s anything you
      will change about the project and or engagement what would it be? Etc.
    ❖ Overall tracking of the Engagement Process will be done by collecting information on: Who were
      the stakeholders, their location, level of impact, influence and interest in the project, specific
      stakeholder interests, relationships between stakeholders, stakeholder sentiments (how they
      feel about the project, the organization, whether positive negative or neutral)
    ❖ Modes of interaction and feedback: Form and survey responses, Emails (sent and received),
      Comments, Conversations, Complaints, Events/meetings, Any other interactions
    ❖ Through the semi-annual and annual participatory reviews of the project ascertain progress
      made and results obtained in the implementation of the project



                                                   20


                                                                                                     Official Use Only
    ❖ Through the M & E Framework to be established for the project- e.g since stakeholder
      engagement is a critical component of the project development process, it will be valuable for
      the M&E process to include an evaluation of the stakeholder engagement process in addition to
      the more conventional project evaluation criteria that is commonly used such as relevance,
      impact, effectiveness, efficiency and sustainability.
    ❖ The Role of the Project Steering Committee (PSC)- a review of the status of stakeholder
      engagement should be an integral part of the remit of the PSC.


INFORMATION MANAGEMENT
Every meeting and interaction relating to the project and specifically in relation to stakeholder
engagement should be recorded by the PIU through the following means:
        ▪     Stakeholder lists;
        ▪     Grievance Mechanism Log;
        ▪     Minutes of all meetings; and
        ▪     Meeting attendance registers.
The ESSS officer shall have specific responsibility for stakeholder engagement monitoring and recording


            8.2. Reporting back to stakeholder groups

The SEP will be periodically revised and updated as necessary during project implementation. Quarterly
or other summaries and internal reports on public grievances, enquiries, and related incidents, together
with the status of implementation of associated corrective/preventive actions, will be collated by PIU
staff and referred to the senior management of the project and the Ministry. The summary documents
will provide a mechanism for assessing both the number and nature of complaints and requests for
information, along with the Project’s ability to address those in a timely and effective manner.
Information on public engagement activities undertaken by the Project during the year may be
conveyed to the stakeholders in various ways including but not limited to:

    •   Through the website of the GoSl and the Department of Economic Development
    •   The Production of at least two short Television Promotional pieces/documentaries;
    •   Dissemination of Information via Social Media Platforms with the view of sensitizing the Youth,
        targeting, in particular, the 15 to 35 age group.
    • Articles in the local print media;
    • Promotion of the initiative at community events e.g. Fish Fry Friday, cultural events, song, art
        etc.
9. Conclusion

This SEP will be used to engage and consult with all major stakeholders in the project development,
preparation process and during implementation. The plan is a living document and will be updated as
the specific dates for undertaking the activities are set. It will be updated to include any additional
stakeholders identified in the process of project development and implementation, and any additional
activities that are included as part of the project scope.


                                                        21


                                                                                                    Official Use Only
10. Annexes


Annex 1
Table 1 Template to Capture Consultation Minutes

Stakeholder           Dates of       Summary of     Response of Project     Follow-up      Timetable/
(Group or           Consultations     Feedback       Implementation       Action(s)/Next     Date to
Individual)                                               Team                 Steps        Complete
                                                                                           Follow-up
                                                                                            Action(s)




                                                   22


                                                                                                    Official Use Only
Annex 2.
Table 3: Information Flow

Stakeholder        Information to be Engagement   Timing   Other comments
                   Exchanged         method




                                           23


                                                                            Official Use Only
                            ANNEX 3

Ministry of Finance, Economic Development and Youth Economy
  Financial Administrative Centre, Pointe Seraphine, Castries,
                            St. Lucia

                             For the



Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment
              Project (SURF-IN )

                      Project GRM

                        June 2025




                               24


                                                                 Official Use Only
       Contents
Acronyms and Abbreviations ...................................................................................................................... 26
1.      Project Background and Description .................................................................................................. 29
2.      Introduction ........................................................................................................................................ 29
3.      Purpose of the Grievance Redress Mechanism .................................................................................. 30
4.      Objectives of the Grievance Redress Mechanism .............................................................................. 30
5.      GRM Principles .................................................................................................................................... 31
     5.1 Types of Grievances ......................................................................................................................... 31
     5.2 The main actors for the GRM/Responsibility for Grievance Redressal............................................ 33
6.      Grievance Redressal Process............................................................................................................... 36
     6.1 Levels of Grievance Redress.............................................................................................................. 37
        6.1.1 First Level of Redress ................................................................................................................. 38
        6.1.2 Second Level of Redress............................................................................................................. 41
        6.1.3 Third Level of Redress ................................................................................................................ 42
     6.2 World Bank Grievance Redressal Service (GRS)................................................................................ 42
7. Addressing Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment ...................................................... 43
8.      Building Awareness of the Grievance Redress Mechanism ................................................................ 46
9.      Monitoring and Reporting .................................................................................................................. 47
        Reporting on the GCF .......................................................................................................................... 47
        Access to Information, Confidentiality and Disclosure ....................................................................... 47
10.         Periodic Review by Grievance Redress Committee ........................................................................ 48
11. Annexes ................................................................................................................................................. 49
     Annex 1- Grievance Information Form [GIF]........................................................................................... 49
     Annex 2- Grievance Acknowledgement Form (GAF) .............................................................................. 52
     Annex 3 - Grievance Redressal Registration Monitoring Sheet .............................................................. 53
     Annex 4: Grievance Meeting Record Form ............................................................................................. 54
     Annex 5 - Grievance Closure/Release Form ........................................................................................... 55
     Annex 6 Grievance Redress Mechanism Checklist ................................................................................. 56
     Annex 7: List of GBV Service Providers in Saint Lucia ............................................................................. 58
     Annex 8 The Survivor Centered Approach .............................................................................................. 61



                                                                              25


                                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                                       Acronyms and Abbreviations


ALRVC – Anse La Raye Village Council

APESL– Association of Professional Engineers in St. Lucia

CCC- Castries City Council

CC – Chamber of Commerce

ESS- Environmental and Social Standard

EU- European Union

GBV- Gender Based Violence

GCF – Grievance Closure Form

GoSL – Government of Saint Lucia

GRC- Grievance Redress Committee

GRM- Grievance Mechanism

GRRMS - The Grievance Redressal Registration and Monitoring Sheet

MIF – Ministry of Infrastructure

MoFEDYE - Ministry of Finance, Economic Development and Youth Economy

NEMO – National Emergency Management Organization

NIPPU - National Integrated Program and Planning Unit

PAI- Project Area of Influence

PAP(s)- Project Affected Persons

PC – Project Coordinator

PDO- Project Development Objective



                                                   26


                                                                        Official Use Only
PCU- Project Implementation Unit

PPG – Project Planning Grant

PSC- Project Steering Committee

SEA- Sexual Exploitation and Abuse

SH- Sexual Harassment

SLU- Saint Lucia

SST- Social Safeguards Team

SLURFIP – Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project

WB – World Bank

Table 1 provides definitions of key terms used throughout the grievance process.

Term                                               Definition

Grievance                                          A grievance refers to an issue, concern, problem
                                                   or claim, whether actual or perceived, that affects
                                                   the physical, social and economic conditions of
                                                   individuals and or communities in the project
                                                   area of influence. They can occur at different
                                                   stages of the project cycle. The project activity
                                                   often determines the nature of the grievance

Grievance Redress Mechanism                        A Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) refers to
                                                   methods and processes by which a redressal to a
                                                   grievance is sought and provided. The GRM can
                                                   be designed specifically and separately for a
                                                   project or it can be built on existing institutions
                                                   and processes, whether they are formal or
                                                   informal. GRMs are designed to benefit both the
                                                   project and the project affected persons (PAPs).

Grievance Owner                                    A member of the PIU who is assigned to
                                                   coordinate, investigate and develop an action
                                                   plan for a particular logged grievance

Grievant                                           a grievant can be any stakeholder affected by the
                                                   project (such as natural persons in Saint Lucia,
                                                   partners, workers or other).




                                                  27


                                                                                                     Official Use Only
Internal       Internal Stakeholders are those directly involved
               in the project work, such as the PCU Coordinator,
Stakeholders   PCU team, IST, Beneficiaries, Consultants,
               Contracted Entities, MoH and the World Bank.

External       Individuals or community groups who are not
               directly linked to the project’s implementation
Stakeholders
               but who can influence the activities of the project
               in various ways. This includes NGOs, the
               government, political groups, local councils, and
               the surrounding communities


Recipient      Staff member of the PIU , particularly the Project
               Coordinator, E & S Specialist and the Project
               Administrative Assistant who receive grievances
               via email, telephone, the online Grievance and
               Complaints Logging System or in person.




               28


                                                                 Official Use Only
                               1.      Project Background and Description
The districts of Castries and Anse La Raye are affected yearly by flooding which results in damage to
public infrastructure and private homes. To find solutions to this perennial problem the government has
sought the assistance of international partners, who have responded positively. As such the
Government of Saint Lucia (GoSL) has embarked on the implementation of an Urban Resilient Flood
Investment Project (URFIP) hereinafter referred to as “the Project” spearheaded by the Department of
Economic Development, of the Ministry of Finance, Economic Development and Youth Economy. The
Government of Saint Lucia requested and has obtained a Project Preparation Grant (PPG) from The
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/International Development Association which
will be applied to finance project preparation activities relating to the Project.

The project will be implemented in keeping with the World Bank’s Environmental and Social Standards
(ESS), inclusive of ESS 10 Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure.

   Project Components

   •   Component 1: Identification of Prioritized Investments for Flood Risk Reduction: This
       component will identify and prioritize effective flood risk reduction investments by first
       developing comprehensive models and databases to assess flood hazards and risks under
       current and future climate scenarios. This includes determining baseline risk conditions and
       conducting a pre-feasibility study to evaluate potential mitigation measures—particularly
       nature-based solutions—through cost-benefit analyses, environmental and social impact
       assessments, and stakeholder input. Following this, the feasibility of these measures is further
       examined through economic, technical, environmental, and sensitivity analyses, with the aim of
       selecting the most suitable and sustainable interventions for investment.

   •   Component 2: Training and Capacity Building for Implementation Readiness: This component
       will enhance the capacity of key government agencies to ensure they are ready to implement
       the proposed project effectively. This includes strengthening skills in project management,
       meeting social, environmental, and fiduciary requirements, and providing on-the-job training for
       staff in flood risk analysis, designing interventions, and carrying out maintenance activities.


                                         2.      Introduction


The purpose of this document is to define/outline a formal grievances redress mechanism (GRM) that
will register, track, address and resolve any complaints raised by individuals or groups or communities
affected by the project and other stakeholders. Grievances resulting from the implementation of SURF-
IN project activities (including environmental and social) will be reviewed and addressed by the Project
Coordination Unit (PCU) of the DOEDYE). The grievance redress process and procedures defined in this
document, provides an avenue for stakeholders to voice their concerns, and outlines a transparent
process for how grievances will be managed by the PIU. The procedures aim to provide an avenue for
resolving grievances, reduce conflict and strengthen and enhance the relationship between the project
and its stakeholders (internal and external).




                                                  29


                                                                                                    Official Use Only
The World Bank’s Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) mandates that Persons Affected by
Projects (PAPs) must be meaningfully consulted and given the opportunities to participate in
planning and implementing the project. ESS2 [Labour and Working Conditions], ESS10
[Stakeholder Engagement and Information disclosure] recommends that a Grievance Redress
Mechanism (GRM) be created to address all concerns of the PAPs and other stakeholders.

The GRM is an effective tool for early identification, assessment and resolution of complaints and
provides project affected persons (PAPs), an opportunity to voice complaints or concerns, and
clarify and resolve misconceptions about the project activities. It provides a simple, transparent,
costless and timely manner to express their opinion or grievance related to the execution of
project activities.

This document presents the Grievance Redress Mechanism for the Saint Lucia Urban Resilient
Flood Investment Project (hereinafter referred to as the SURF-IN project).




                        3.      Purpose of the Grievance Redress Mechanism


The project and its associated activities may have some short term, reversible impacts on the
community and project affected persons. To ensure the implementation of the Project in a timely
manner and effectively address concerns and complaints of beneficiary communities and people that
may be encountered during implementation, a robust GRM has been developed. It must be noted that
this GRM covers grievances that relate to the impacts that the project may have on the community and
people particularly those identified in the Stakeholder Engagement Plan.



Grievances that relate to project workers will be handled by a separate Workers Grievance Redress
Mechanism. The GRM also specifies the Environmental and Social Specialist (ESS) as the individual who
is responsible for dealing with any gender-based violence (GBV) issues, should they arise.



                       4.      Objectives of the Grievance Redress Mechanism


The objectives of the Grievance Redress Mechanism are to:


    •   provide an avenue through which grievances from communities, groups, individuals, local
        authorities, NGOs and other local stakeholders can be addressed efficiently, and constructively.
        The aim is to manage and resolve grievances amicably and in a timely manner without resort to
        other recourse including legal.


                                                   30


                                                                                                      Official Use Only
    •   offer individuals and community groups a way to express their grievances and problems in a
        rational and transparent manner and demonstrate the important role of stakeholders in
        programme design and implementation.
    •   institutionalize a system for grievance redress and remedy.
    •   be responsive to the concerns of people adversely affected by the SURF-IN project ;
    •   ensure that all World Bank Environmental and Social Standards are adhered to
    •   establish a mechanism that will contribute to the building of trust and mutual respect between
        project staff and local communities and stakeholders.
    •   resolve environmental and social grievances in the project areas


                                        5.      GRM Principles


The GRM aims to ensure and will embrace the application of the following principles in project actions:

    •   Protect the rights and interests of the participants, beneficiaries, and stakeholders (hereafter,
        “stakeholders”) of the Project;
    •   Adequately and promptly address grievances that arise during implementation.
    •   Ensure consistency with the WB ESF requirements.


The GRM pertains to grievances emanating from the SURF-IN Project which will be managed by the PIU
operating under the auspices of DOED&YE and must follow applicable provisions of the project’s
Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP). It is recognized that Grievances can occur at various
stages in the project cycle:

    •   Inception – these are complaints about the perceived macro impact (social, economic,
        environmental) of the project
    •   Implementation – these are complaints about the micro context of the project emerging from its
        specific activities. For example, complaints related to construction noise or dust, displacement
        or land acquisition, compensation etc.
    •   Close – these are complaints on the non-fulfilment of project activities.


5.1 Types of Grievances


Aggrieved persons can file different types of complaints depending on the specific issue or concern.
Grievances can be related to a number of issues including provision of service, environmental impact,
social impact, health and safety or project execution. The table 4.2 below identifies potential grievances
for this project. These may include but are not limited to the following categories:




                                                   31


                                                                                                      Official Use Only
Table 5.1 Categories and potential factors which may lead to grievances


Category                                             Potential factors which may result in a grievance

Environmental                                        Noise
                                                     Poor garbage disposal practices
                                                     Dust or chemical pollution
                                                     waste management issues
Social                                               Lack of engagement
                                                     Restriction to access
                                                     Infringement of privacy
                                                     Violence (Physical or sexual) from workers
                                                     Job opportunities,
                                                     SEA/SH (GBV)
Health and Safety                                    Risks to public health from improper handling of
                                                     waste
                                                     Traffic related impacts
                                                     Labour influx


Project Execution                                    Lack of stakeholder engagement
                                                     Failure to implement the project scope
                                                     Encroachment on private property




Types of Complaints/Grievances
The following general categories of complaints/grievances will be within the scope of the Project’s GRM:
• Communications, Consultations and Stakeholder Engagement – grievances related to information
disclosure on the project or consultation related issues and overall engagement process with the project
beneficiaries.
• Project Implementation and process – any grievance related to the project description, or
implementation process (e.g. registration, project performance, failure to implement as promised or
commitments and changes in design or scope of the project).
• Procurement – matters related to eligibility criteria, Request for Bids, Call for Expressions of Interest,
award of contracts etc.
• Staff performance- This includes matters pertaining to the behavior of staff directly linked to the
project, including bullying, mistreatment, discrimination, harassment, sexual harassment, Sexual
exploitation and abuse perpetrated by staff/workers linked to the project.

                                                    32


                                                                                                         Official Use Only
• Legal – grievances accusing the project or its personnel of breaking the law or government regulations.
• Environment, Health, Safety, Social or Community (HSEC) – complaints related to non-compliance with
any of the safeguard standards.
Complainants will be required to complete the Complaint Form Annex 1.


5.2 The main actors for the GRM/Responsibility for Grievance Redressal


Listed below are the main actors responsible for grievance redress under the project:


a. The Permanent Secretary of the Department of Economic Development and head of the Grievance
Redress Committee.


b. Project Implementation Unit (PIU) is the governing agency tasked with the responsibility of project
execution, including the fiduciary and safeguard aspects of the project.


c. Project Coordinator (PC): The PC is responsible for managing the project’s implementation. The PC
will receive all complaints and select a grievance owner who will be responsible for liaising with the
complainant.


d. The Environmental and Social Specialist: Responsible for overseeing/administering, monitoring and
evaluating the grievance redress process that includes responsibility for sexual harassment, sexual
abuse and sexual exploitation and abuse related complaints.


e. Project Steering Committee (PSC): The PSC comprises various stakeholders that provide guidance and
direction of the project activities, as designated in the project’s operations manual.


f. Grievance Redress Committee (GRC): comprising representatives of the PSC will be called into place
when a first-tier resolution is not found, but it could also meet on a quarterly basis to evaluate the
performance of the project level GRM. From this perspective it is a standing body.



Responsibility for Grievance Redressal

The Permanent Secretary, of the Department of Economic Development and the youth
economy has overall responsibility for the GRM. The Project Coordinator of SURF-IN project is
designated as the key officer in charge of Grievance Redressal. He/ she will set up a Safeguard

                                                   33


                                                                                                     Official Use Only
Team to advice and support on the grievance mechanism. The team will be tasked with the
following:
                  •   Coordinate Grievance Redressal Mechanism (GRM of project activities to
                      resolve issues in general).
                  •   Act as the Focal Point on Grievance Redressal issues and facilitate access
                      at the PS level of the Ministry of Infrastructure Development, Public
                      Utilities, Energy, Transport and Implementation.
                  •   Create awareness of the Grievance Redressal Mechanism (GRM)
                      amongst all the stakeholders through public awareness activities.
                  •   Assist in Redressal of all Grievances by coordinating with the concerned
                      parties.
                  •   Maintain information of grievances and Redressal.
                  •   Monitor the project activities of contractors and consultants on
                      Redressal of Grievances.
                  •   Regularly contact all points of receipt of complaints, receive the
                      complaints made and assist in Redressal of all Grievances by
                      coordinating with the concerned parties.
                  •   Prepare the progress for quarterly reports.
The Interim Project Coordinator (IPC) may set up a safeguard team to process the grievance in
accordance with the tier approach outlined below.
In case of the need for the second tier of Redressal, the Project Coordinator will involve the
national Grievance Redressal Committee (GRC), which consists of members of the Ministry of
Equity and the Ministry of Infrastructure Development, Public Utilities, Energy, Transport and
Implementation and civic leaders and representatives from the project locations. This
committee will be chaired by the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Infrastructure
Development, Public Utilities, Energy, Transport and Implementation or the Minister.


The terms of Reference of the GRC are as follows:
                  a) Provide relief and support to the affected persons;
                  b) Prioritize grievances and resolve them at the earliest;

                  c) Provide information to Project Coordinator and Environmental and
                     Social Specialist on serious cases at the earliest.

                  d) Coordinate on the affected person getting proper and timely
                     information on the solution worked out for his/her grievance.
                  e) Study the grievances and advise the Project Coordinator and
                     Environmental and Social Specialist.


Note: The Chair may invite other technical personnel to advise the Committee as required.


                                                    34


                                                                                                   Official Use Only
35


     Official Use Only
                                6.       Grievance Redressal Process


The key stages involved in the project’s grievance redressal process are presented in Fig 6 below and
summarized in the sections that follow.


Fig. 6 - The Grievance Redress Process




   1. Receive – The Grievance is received through one of the uptake channels.

   2. Record in Grievance Log – The grievance is recorded in the grievance log and the complainant is
       informed of approximate timeline for resolution.




                                                 36


                                                                                                 Official Use Only
          3. Acknowledge receipt of Grievance – the Grievance Acknowledgement Form is completed
                  signed by the Interim Project Coordinator and forwarded to the complainant.


          4. Screen and Investigate
                  PC will screen, and assign a grievance owner. The grievance owner will investigate and verify
                  Information. If necessary, meet with complainant. Meetings notes and deliberations will be
                  recorded in the meeting record form.

          5. Feedback
                  Provide feedback to complainant. Monitor and evaluate the process.

          6. Resolution and Closure
                  If the grievance is resolved the grievance closure form is signed.

          7. Appeal if no Resolution
                  Complainant may escalate to the GRC if dissatisfied with the timeframe or proposed resolution.
                  If unresolved at GRC, the complainant can move to the local court or access the World Bank’s
                  redressal service.


6.1 Levels of Grievance Redress
Table 6.1 below presents three levels of grievance redress



Redress Level                                                       Process
                                   •   Grievance dealt with by the PCU in accordance with the steps listed
                                       above




Level One – PCU
                                   •   The Interim Project Coordinator takes responsibility for grievance redress
                                       and assigns a grievance owner.
                                   •   Acknowledgement of receipt of grievance from grievant within 48 hours.
                                   •   The grievance is screened, and logged.
                                   •   Complainant informed of approximate timeline for addressing the
                                       grievance.
                                   •    The grievance is investigated. During the investigation a meeting or
                                       meetings may be held with the complainant to discuss the complaint.
                                   •   Ideally Resolution should occur within 10 to 14 working days of receipt of
                                       a complaint.
                                   •   If the grievance is resolved the complainant signs the grievance closure
                                       form (GCF).




                                                              37


                                                                                                                Official Use Only
Redress Level                                                        Process
                                   •    If no resolution at Level One, the grievance is escalated to level 2, for the
                                        consideration of the Grievance Redress Committee (GRC).




 Level Two- GCF
                                   •    The Chair of the GRC assumes responsibility for redress at this stage
                                   •    The Chair will call a meeting of all parties in an effort to reach a
                                        resolution.
                                   •     If the GRC lacks the expertise required to address the grievance, the GRC
                                        can seek assistance / advice from technical officers outside of the GRC.
                                   •    Ideally resolution within 35 working days can be extended to 60 working
                                        days with consent of the complainant.
                                   •    If the grievance is resolved, the complainant signs the GCF.
                                   •    If no resolution at this level the grievance is escalated to level three.

                                   •    If there is no resolution at the GRC level the grievance can be brought to
   Level                           •
                                        the Local Courts.
                                        The Office of the Attorney General will take responsibility at this level.
                                   •    Note: While complainants are encouraged to use the project level GM,
 Three- AG                              they maintain the right to access the local courts at any time that they
                                        may wish to.
   office
The complainant has the option of approaching the World Bank, if they find the established GRM cannot
resolve the issue. It must be noted that this GRS should ideally only be accessed once the project’s grievance
mechanism has first been utilized without an acceptable resolution.




                  6.1.1 First Level of Redress


Receipt of Grievance
All complaints will be received by the Project Coordinator and or the Environmental and Social Specialist
of the PCU. Via the consultation process, stakeholders will be informed of various avenues through
which the GRM can be accessed. Complaints can be made in person, writing, verbally over the phone, by
fax, emails or anonymously. The point of receipt of complaints is listed in Table 5.1.1.




                                                               38


                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
 Table 6.1. 1 Contacts Information for Submission of Grievances




Receiving          Grievances can be made verbally to the Environmental and Social Specialist (E&S
grievances     fromSpecialist) in person at stakeholder engagement meetings.
affected parties
                   Additionally, the complaint can be made to the PCU by telephone, and the person
                   receiving the call will guide the complainant toward the proper channel.

                   Complaints can be anonymous;

                   All GBV complaints will be handled directly by the E&S Specialist who has been
                   trained in the handling of these cases, consistent with the WB guidance notes, hence,
                   all project workers will be trained on the use of the GRM and its SEA/SH aspects.

                   By email to the following address: madonna.monrose@govt.lc

                   By letter addressed to:
                   Interim Project Coordinator
                   Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project
                   Project Coordination Unit (PCU)
                   Department of Economic Development
                   2nd Floor, Finance Administrative Centre
                   Pointe Seraphine
                   Castries


                   Email: vincent.peter@govt.lc
                   By phone at telephone number: 758 468 2413

                   Grievances related to the Project Coordinator can be addressed to:

                   The Permanent Secretary
                   Department of Economic Department
                   2nd Floor, Finance Administrative Centre
                   Pointe Seraphine
                   Castries


                                                   39


                                                                                                    Official Use Only
                  Email: paul.hilaire@govt.lc
Other Points    ofat the district level would be as follows:
Receipt         of
                  (a). Elected representative
Complaints
                  (b). Social Transformation Officers for the district

                  (c) Chairpersons of Environmental Organizations

                  (d). Designated Representative of Contractor



All grievances received by the established points of contact should be forwarded to the Project
Coordinator of the PCU within 24 hours of receipt.


If anonymous complaints are received all information required to complete the form will be recorded
except the name of the complainant.


STEP 1: Receive and Acknowledge Grievances

Modes of Receiving

Complaints can be made in person, writing, verbally over the phone, by fax, emails or any other media.
The person receiving the complaint will try to obtain relevant information regarding the grievance and
the complainant and will immediately inform the Project Coordinator (PC) at the PIU using the approved
format for receipt of complaints – Grievance Information Form (GIF) as given in Annex 1.



Acknowledge Grievance

All grievances will be acknowledged by telephone or in writing by the PCU using the Grievance
Acknowledgment Form (Annex 2) within 48 hours of receipt and the complainant informed of the
approximate timeline for addressing the complaint, if it can’t be addressed immediately. The PCU will
work with the grievant and to ensure the speedy resolution of the grievance. If the complaint cannot be
resolved at this level, it is taken to the next level.



STEP 2 : Register/Log Grievance

After receiving and recording the grievance on the GIF, it will be registered in the Grievance Redressal
Registration and Monitoring Sheet (GRRMS) (Annex 3).




                                                    40


                                                                                                    Official Use Only
STEP 3: Screen

The PC will review the complaint and assign a grievance owner. The complaint will be forwarded to the
grievance owner who will be responsible for investigating the claim and liaising with both the aggrieved
party and project staff to come to a mutually acceptable resolution. The grievance owner will be given a
specific timeline for resolving the claim. Meetings with grievant/complainant will be held, if necessary,
to resolve the matter.



STEP 4: Investigate

The grievance owner will investigate the complaint. This investigation will include, but is not limited to,
meetings with the grievant/complainant, site visits, meetings/interviews with project staff and
collection of relevant documentation and other forms of evidence. For meetings, the deliberations and
decision will be recorded on the Meeting Record Form included as Annex 4. Community representatives
or representatives of the complainant will be allowed to sit in on these meetings.



STEP 5: Resolution

The resolution at the first tier should normally be completed within 14 working days of receipt of
grievance and notified to the concerned party through the Grievance Closure Form (Annex 5). If the
grievance is not resolved within this period, it can be referred to the next level of the Grievance
Redressal system. However, once it is determined that progress is being made towards a resolution, the
grievance will be retained at this first level. The complainant will be informed of this decision and an
estimated time for the resolution of the matter will be given either verbally or in writing. Once a
resolution has been agreed and accepted, the complainant’s acceptance will be obtained in the form of
acceptance and signature on the Grievance Closure Form included as Annex 5. If the proposed
resolution is not accepted the grievance will be escalated to level 2.



NB The complainant may request that the issue be transferred to the next level if he or she does not
feel that the grievance is being adequately addressed by the PC.


        6.1.2 Second Level of Redress


A Grievance Redressal Committee (GRC) of relevant representatives will be constituted/activated to
serve as a standing body to review the project level GRM and to consider/review grievances that were
unable to be resolved at level 1.




                                                    41


                                                                                                       Official Use Only
This committee will be chaired by the Permanent Secretary of the Department of Economic
Development who also chairs the Project Steering Committee. The permanent secretaries of the
participant ministries represented on the PSC will assign designated representatives to serve on the
GRC. The Chair of the GRC may choose to invite an active NGO to select a representative to serve on the
GRC. When required the GRC can request assistance and advice from technical experts.



Terms of Reference for the GRC:



    1. Provide relief and support to the affected persons in a timely manner;
    2. Prioritize grievances and resolve them at the earliest reasonable time;
    3. Provide information to the PCU on serious cases at the earliest plausible time;
    4. Coordinate the process of the Affected Persons getting proper and timely information on the
       solution worked out for his/her grievance;
    5. Study the normally occurring grievances and advise the PCU as to their scale and scope.


The PC will coordinate the convening of meetings of the GRC. The PC is also responsible for briefing the
GRC on the deliberations/outcomes of the first level of Redressal and on the views of both parties.
(Complainant and the Project).

In the execution of its function, the GRC will hold meetings with the affected party /complainant and the
concerned officers and attempt to find a solution acceptable at all levels. GRC will record the minutes of
the meeting in the approved format Annex 4. The decisions of the GRC will be communicated to the
complainant formally and if she/he accepts the resolutions, the complainant’s acceptance will be
obtained on the grievance closure form Annex 5.
If the complainant does not accept the resolution offered by the GRC, then the complaint is passed on to
the next level / or the complainant can activate the next level in the process. Complaints that reach level
are expected to be resolved within 35 working days of receipt of the original complaint. However, if
both parties agree that meaningful progress is being made towards a resolution, the matter may be
retained at this level for a maximum of 60 working days.


         6.1.3 Third Level of Redress
If the affected party / complainant does not agree with the resolution at the 2nd level, or there is a time
delay of more than 60 working days in resolving the issue, the complainant can opt to consider taking it
to the third level. This level may involve resort to legal recourse.



6.2 World Bank Grievance Redressal Service (GRS)




                                                    42


                                                                                                       Official Use Only
The complainant has the option of approaching the World Bank, if they find the established GRM cannot
resolve the issue. It must be noted that the World Bank’s GRS should ideally only be accessed if the
project’s grievance mechanism has failed to deliver a satisfactory resolution. World Bank Procedures
requires the complainant to express their grievances in writing to World Bank office in Washington DC
by completing the bank’s GRS complaint form which can be found at the following URL link:
http://www.worldbank.org/en/projects-operations/products-and-services/grievance-redress-
service#5 . Completed forms will be accepted by email, fax, letter, and by hand delivery to the GRS
at the World Bank Headquarters in Washington or World Bank Country Offices.


Email:          grievances@worldbank.org
Fax:            +1-202-614-7313

By letter:      The World Bank
                Grievance Redress Service (GRS)
                MSN MC 10-1018 NW,
                Washington, DC 20433, USA
                 7. Addressing Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment


The specific nature of sexual exploitation and abuse and of sexual harassment (SEA/SH) requires tailored
measures for the reporting, and safe and ethical handling of such allegations. A survivor-centered
approach aims to ensure that anyone who has been the target of SEA/SH is treated with dignity, and
that the person’s rights, privacy, needs and wishes are respected and prioritized in any and all
interactions.
The project’s E&S Specialist will be responsible for dealing with any SEA/SH issues, should they arise. A
list of SEA/SH service providers will be retained by the project. The PCU should assist SEA/SH survivors
by referring them to Services Provider(s) for support immediately after receiving a complaint directly
from a survivor.
To address SEA/SH, the project will follow the guidance provided in the World Bank Technical Note
“Addressing Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) in Investment Project
Financing Involving Civil Works”. This GM will follow the official WB definitions described in the
Technical Note as shown below:
Sexual Abuse (SEA) is an actual or threatened physical intrusion of a sexual nature, whether by force or
under unequal or coercive conditions.
Sexual Exploitation (SE) refers to any actual or attempted abuse of a position of vulnerability,
differential power, or trust, for sexual purposes, including, but not limited to, profiting monetarily,
socially or politically from the sexual exploitation of another.




                                                   43


                                                                                                     Official Use Only
Sexual harassment (SH)
Sexual Harassment (SH) is any unwelcome sexual advance, request for sexual favour, verbal or physical
conduct or gesture of a sexual nature, or any other behaviour of a sexual nature that might reasonably
be expected or be perceived to cause offense or humiliation to another, when such conduct interferes
with work, is made a condition of employment or creates an intimidating, hostile or offensive work
environment.
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) service provider
An organization offering specific services for SEA/SH survivors, such as health services, psychosocial
support, shelter, legal aid, safety/security services, etc.
Survivor-centered approach
The survivor-centered approach is based on a set of principles and skills designed to guide
professionals—regardless of their role—in their engagement with survivors (predominantly women and
girls but also men and boys) who have experienced sexual or other forms of violence. The survivor-
centered approach aims to create a supportive environment in which the survivor´s interests are
respected and prioritized, and in which the survivor is treated with dignity and respect. The approach
helps to promote the survivor´s recovery and ability to identify and express needs and wishes, as well as
to reinforce the survivor´s capacity to make decisions about possible interventions.
SEA/SH grievances can be received through any of the available channels and will be treated as a level 3
grievance to be investigated and addressed by the GRC. Additionally, if an incident occurs, it will be
reported as appropriate, keeping the anonymity and confidentiality of the complainant and applying the
survivor-centered approach. Any cases of SEA/SH brought through the GM will be documented but
remain closed/sealed to maintain the confidentiality of the survivor. The WB will be notified as soon as
the Project Coordinator and the E&S specialist learn about the complaint.
If a SEA/SH related incident occurs, it will be reported through the GRM, with the survivor information
being kept confidential. The following course of action will be taken once an incident of this nature
occurs:
ACTION 1: COMPLAINT INTAKE AND REFERRAL
If the survivor gives consent, the E&S specialist fills in a complaints form excluding any information that
can identify the survivor:
        • The nature of the allegation (what the complainant says in her/his own words without direct
          questioning)
        • If the alleged perpetrator was/is, to the survivor’s best knowledge, associated with the project
          (yes/no)
        • The survivor’s age and/or sex (if disclosed); and,
        • If the survivor was referred to services




                                                     44


                                                                                                       Official Use Only
If the survivor does not want to provide written consent, her/his consent can be obtained verbally. If
needed or desired by the survivor, the E&S Specialist refers her/him to relevant SEA/SH service
providers, in accordance with pre-established and confidential referral procedures (See Appendix 4 for
Referral Pathway). The survivor’s consent must be documented even if it is received verbally. The
service providers will be able to direct survivors to other service providers in case the survivor wishes to
access other services. The ESS specialist will keep the survivor informed of any actions taken by the
perpetrator’s employer. If the survivor has been referred to the relevant SEA/SH service providers,
received adequate assistance, and no longer requires support; and if appropriate actions have been
taken against the perpetrator or if the survivor does not wish to submit an official grievance with the
employer, the ESS Specialist can close the case.


ACTION 2: INCIDENT REPORTING


The ESS Specialist must report the anonymized SEA/SH incident as soon as it becomes known, to the
Project Coordinator who will in turn inform the World Bank Task Team Leader (TTL). Complaint Forms
and other detailed information should be filed in a safe location by the ESS Specialist. Neither the ESS
specialist nor the Project Coordinator should seek additional information from the complainant.


SEA/SH incident reporting is not subject to survivors’ consent but the ESS Specialist needs to provide
ongoing feedback to the survivor at several points in time: (1) when the grievance is received; (2) when
the case is reported to PCU and WB; (3) when the verification commences or when a determination is
made that there is an insufficient basis to proceed; and (4) when the verification concludes or when any
outcomes are achieved or disciplinary action taken.


As long as the SEA/SH remains open the ESS Specialist and/or Project Coordinator should update the
World Bank TTL on the measures taken to close the incident.


ACTION 3: GRIEVANCE VERIFICATION AND INVESTIGATION


Each SEA/SH incident should be verified to determine if it was related to the WB financed project. The
ESS specialist should form a SEA/SH verification committee comprised of her/him, one member of the
PCU, one member of a local service provider and a representative of the contractor (if relevant). The ESS
Specialist should notify the SEA/SH Committee of the incident within 24 hours of its creation. The
SEA/SH verification committee will consider the SEA/SH allegation to determine the likelihood that the
grievance is related to the project.




                                                    45


                                                                                                        Official Use Only
If after the committee review, SEA/SH allegation is confirmed and it is determined that it is linked to a
project48, the verification committee discusses suitable actions to be recommended to the appropriate
party—i.e., the employer of the perpetrator, which could be the PCU or a contractor. The PCU will ask
contractors to take appropriate action. The committee reports the incident to the perpetrator’s
employers to implement the remedy/disciplinary action in accordance with local labour legislation, the
employment contract of the perpetrator, and their codes of conduct as per the standard procurement
documents.


For SEA/SH incidents where the survivor did not consent to an investigation, the appropriate steps
should be taken to ensure the survivor is referred to/made aware of available services and that the
project mitigation measures are reviewed to determine if they remain adequate and appropriate or if
they require strengthening.


If the survivor is interested in seeking redress and wishes to submit an official complaint with the
employer, or with entities in the St. Lucian legal system, the ESS Specialist should provide linkages to the
relevant institutions. Ensuring due legal process is up to the police and the courts, not the SEA/SH
verification committee. Unlike other types of issues, the ESS Specialist does not conduct investigations,
make any announcements, or judge the veracity of an allegation.


Any cases of SEA/SH brought through the GM will be documented but remain closed/sealed to maintain
the confidentiality of the survivor. Here, the GM will primarily serve to:
• Refer complainants to the SEA/SH Services Provider; and
           • Record the resolution of the complaint

                               8. Building Awareness of the Grievance Redress Mechanism


The ESS will initially brief all staff of the project office, the Project Steering Committee (PSC), the sub-
projects including consultants, on the Grievance Redressal Mechanism of the Project and explain to
them the procedures and formats to be used including the reporting procedures.



The ESS will brief all project stakeholders on the Grievance Redressal Mechanism and explain the
procedures and formats to be used including the reporting procedures.




4
  Project actors are: (a) people employed or engaged directly by the Borrower (including the project proponent and the project implementing
agencies) to work specifically in relation to the project (direct workers); (b) people employed or engaged through third parties (Project staff,
subcontractors, brokers, agents or intermediaries) to perform work related to core functions of the project, regardless of location (contracted
workers); (c) people employed or engaged by the Borrower’s primary suppliers (primary supply workers); and (d) people employed or engaged
in providing community labor such as voluntary services or participation in project activities and processes (community workers).


                                                                      46


                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
Awareness campaigns will be conducted targeting project stakeholders to inform them of the
availability/existence of the mechanism; various mediums will be used- as detailed in the Stakeholder
Consultation Plan. The GRM will also be published on the website of the GoSL and the Department of
Economic Development as well as the project’s website or Facebook. The GRM will also be promoted
through a public awareness and publicity campaign utilising the mass media. Local and colloquial
expressions will be used to publicize the existence, objectives and the modes of access to the GRM if
this is deemed necessary.



                                       9. Monitoring and Reporting


The Environmental Safeguards Specialist and/or Social Specialist/s at the PCU will prepare Quarterly
Reports on the Grievance Redress issues of the project. This report will provide information on the
number of grievance reports received, the types of issues or concerns being reported, the number of
cases resolved and the number still outstanding during the reporting period.


       Reporting on the GCF
The Project is committed to transparency and accountability concerning complaints, while at
the same time protecting the confidentiality of those involved. To this end, PCU reports will
include a brief section documenting the number and nature of complaints received and how
they were resolved. The identity of individuals will not be disclosed.



GRM Jurisdiction.

This is a project specific GRM that is applicable to addressing and resolving the concerns and grievances
of the stakeholders of this Project. It is not intended to bypass Governments own redress process; Its
jurisdiction does not extend beyond the scope of this project; it is intended to address affected people’s
concerns and complaints promptly, making it readily accessible to all segments of the affected people
and is scaled to the risks and impacts of the Project



       Access to Information, Confidentiality and Disclosure
The GRM recognizes and respects a complainant’s right to confidentiality (which extends to the
confidentiality of an authorized representative when requested by the complainant, but
subject to the Project Coordinator and the Safeguards Team’s consideration of the
justification) including confidentiality of identities and information provided to the Project
Coordinator and Safeguards Team.
In situations where the name and identity of a complainant or representative may need to be
disclosed to process the grievance or complaint or to provide redress, the Project Coordinator
and Safeguards Team will proactively consult with the complainant and/or the representative

                                                   47


                                                                                                      Official Use Only
and will only disclose such information with their consent. Pending consultations with the
complainant and/or the representative regarding confidentiality, the Project Coordinator and
Safeguards Team shall keep the identities of the complainant and the representative, and the
information provided by them to the Team, confidential.



                         10. Periodic Review by Grievance Redress Committee


The Grievance Redressal Committee may periodically review grievances presented to the Committee
and if there is repetition, may recommend suitable and commensurate changes in implementation
procedures and processes to the PCU for implementation.




                                                 48


                                                                                               Official Use Only
                                               11. Annexes


Annex 1- Grievance Information Form [GIF]


Date/Time received:       Date: (dd-mm-yyyy)


                          Time:                         □ am
                                                        □ pm

Name of Grievant:                                              □ You can use my name, but
                                                               do not use it in public.



                                                               □ You can use my name
                                                               when talking about this
                                                               concern in public.



                                                               □ You cannot use my name at
                                                               all.

Company             (if                                        □ You can use my company
applicable)                                                    name, but do not use it in
                                                               public.



                                                               □ You can use my company
                                                               name when talking about this
                                                               concern in public.



                                                               □ You cannot use         my
                                                               company name at all

Contact Information:      Phone:


                          Email address:


                          Address:




                                                   49


                                                                                              Official Use Only
                          (Kindly indicate the preferred method of communication)

Details of grievance:     □ One-time incident/complaint
(Who, what, when, □ Happened more than once (indicate how many times): ___________
where)
                  □ Ongoing (a currently existing problem)




How would you like
to     see   issue
resolved?




Attachments to the List here:
grievance/complaint
:
(e.g. pictures, reports
etc.)




_____________________________________                       ______________________________
Grievant/Complainant Signature (if applicable)              Date (dd-mm-yyyy)




_____________________________________                       ______________________________




                                                   50


                                                                                             Official Use Only
                                                                                Signature-
                                                                                Project
For PCU use only:                                                               personnel (to
                                                                                confirm receipt
Grievance No: ____________________
                                                                                only)
Grievance Category:

□ Problems during material transport   □ Smell
                                                                                Date (dd-mm-
                                                                                yyyy)
□ Blocked road access                  □ Problem with project staff

□ Dust                                 □ Other (specify): ___________________

□ Noise

Grievance Owner/ Department: ________________________________________




                                                 51


                                                                                           Official Use Only
Annex 2- Grievance Acknowledgement Form (GAF)


The project acknowledges receipt of your complaint and will contact you within 10working days.


Date of grievance/complaint:
(dd/mm/yyyy)

Name of Grievant/Complainant:


Complainant’s Address and Contact
Information:

Summary of Grievance/Complaint:
(Who, what, when, where)




Name of Project Staff Acknowledging
Grievance:

Signature:


Date:
(dd/mm/yyyy)


                                                 52


                                                                                                 Official Use Only
Annex 3 - Grievance Redressal Registration Monitoring Sheet


No.                                                                                                                                     Resolution
                                                                                                                                        Accepted or Not
                                                                                                       Requires
       Name                       of Date                                                                             Action(s) to   be Accepted     and
                                                      Grievance Description   Name of Grievant Owner   Further
       Grievant/Complainant          Received                                                                         taken by PCU      Date          of
                                                                                                       Intervention
                                                                                                                                        Acceptance/Non-
                                                                                                                                        acceptance

1.

2.

3.

4.




                                                                                    53


                                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
Annex 4: Grievance Meeting Record Form

Date of the Meeting: ……………………………………. Grievance No: ………………………………….

Venue of meeting: ……………………………………………………………………………………………………….

Details of Participants:

Complainant                              Project/Government/OECS




Summary of Grievance……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………

Meeting Notes: ………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………

Decisions taken in the meeting / Recommendations of GRC…………………………………………………………….

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………

……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………

Issue Resolved / Unresolved: ………………………………………………...

Signature of Chairperson of the meeting: ………………………………………………………………………

Name of Chairperson: …………………………………………………        Date (DD/MM/YYYY): ……………………………….




                                         54


                                                                                  Official Use Only
Annex 5 - Grievance Closure/Release Form


Result of Grievance Redressal

Grievance No:

Name                       of
Grievant/Complainant:

Date of Complaint:

Summary of Complaint:




Summary of Resolution:




Resolved at:                    □ First Level   □ Second Level      □ Third Level

Date of grievance resolution
(DD/MM/YYYY):



Signature of Complainant in acceptance of the suggested grievance resolution:


……………………………………………………………………………………


Name: ………………………………………………………………………


ID number: …………………………………………………. Type of ID: ………………………………………………………………….


Date (DD/MM/YYYY): …………………………………………………………


                                                             55



                                                                                    Official Use Only
Signature of Environmental and Social Specialist and Project Coordinator:


1.……………………………………………………………………….                             2………………………………………………………………………


1.Name………………………………………………………….


Place………………………………………………………….


Date:(dd –mm – yyyy): ……………………………………….


2.Name………………………………………………………….


Place………………………………………………………….


Date:(dd –mm – yyyy): ………………………………………
Annex 6 Grievance Redress Mechanism Checklist


 Process                       Description                 Time frame             Responsibility & remarks

 Establish composition of Set up Grievance                 Before start of project Grievance    Committee   (GC)
 Grievance Committee (GC)                                  implementation          comprises      the     Project
                          Committee (GC);                                          Coordinator,    ESS Specialist,
 members & procedures
                                                                                   other members as endorsed by
                               Publish article in
                                                                                   the PS DOED&YE
                               newspaper and on PMU
                               website: start date of
                               project and contact
                               information        for
                               complainants

 Identification of grievance   Complaints can be           Receipt   date     of Complainant information: Address,
                               filed anonymous, face       complaint             Email and phone
                               to face, via phone, via
                                                                                  number
                               letter, or via e-mail, or
                               recorded          during
                               public/community



                                                                        56



                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
Process                        Description                Time frame              Responsibility & remarks

                               interaction




Grievance      received,   •      Acknowledgement         5 – 10 days upon        GC confirms receipt of the
acknowledged, assessed            of       grievance   to receipt                 complaint to the complainant via
and registered                    complainant             complaint               e-mail or letter
                           •      Significance assessed
                                                                                   Significance criteria: Level 1 – A
                                  and grievance
                                  recorded or logged                              complaint that can be answered
                                  (i.e. in                                        immediately; Level 2 - One off or
                                  Grievance Register or                           repeated    grievance      that
                                  Log Book)                                       requires measured response
                                                                                  and actions/commitments to
                                                                                  resolve complaint; Level 3- any
                                                                                  complaint

                                                                                  (one off or repeated) that
                                                                                  indicates breach of law or
                                                                                  applicable policy/regulation

Development of response •         Grievance assigned to   5-10 Days upon receipt Project Coordinator and Project
                                  appropriate party for   complaint
                                  resolution                                     Officer /Project Assistant and
                           •      Proposal response                              Grievance Committee
                                  with input from PMU     10 - 14 Days
                                  and Grievance           upon receipt
                                  Committee               complaint

Response signed off            Redress action approved 10 - 14 Days upon        Project Coordinator and Project
                               at appropriate levels   receipt complaint
                                                                                Officer /Project Assistant         and
                                                                                Grievance Committee

Implementation         and Redress            action 10 - 14 Days               Project     Coordinator,     Project
communication           of implemented and update upon receipt                  Officer/Project    Assistant      to
response                   of progress on resolution complaint                  implement redress action
                           communicated           to
                           complainant      Redress
                           action    recorded      in                           Project     Coordinator,     Project
                           grievance logbook                                    Officer/Project    Assistant      to
                                                                                communicate       resolution      to
                                                                                complainant



                                                                       57



                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
Annex 7: List of GBV Service Providers in Saint Lucia


GBV Service Providers in St. Lucia


     Service Providers        Service Provided          Address        Telephone                Other

   Attorney General         Case Management       2nd Floor Francis 468-3202
                                                  Compton Building,
                                                  Waterfront,
                                                  Castries

   Office of the Director Case Management                             452-3636     slucps@gmail.com
   of Public Prosecution
                                                                      468-3185

                                                                      468-3017

   Family Court             Case Management       Peynier      Street, 468-3308    familycourt.slu@gmail.com
                                                  Castries

   Criminal Investigations Case Management        Castries            456-3770
   Department
                                                                      456-3817



                                                  Vieux Fort          456-3926

   Vulnerable     Persons Case Management         Vulnerable Persons 456-3908
   Unit                                           Team South
                            Investigates sexual
                            offences    against North
                                                                      456-4050
                            minors,     women
                            and men.                                      4051

                                                                          4052

   St. Lucia     Against Provides     human Ministry of Home 468-3754              police@antitraffickingslu.org
   Human Trafficking     trafficking victims Affairs, Justice and
                         and survivors with National Security
                         access to critical st
                                              1       Floor    Sir
                         support         and
                                              Stanislaus     Bldg.
                         services to get help
                                              Waterfront
                         and stay safe.
                                              Castries


                                                               58



                                                                                                           Official Use Only
  Service Providers        Service Provided          Address            Telephone                 Other

Department of Gender Psychosocial               Ground      Floor
Affairs              Support                    Georgian   Court
                                                                  716-3123          gender.relations@govt.lc
                                                Bldg.       John
                          Livelihood Support    Compton Highway,
                                                Castries

Abuse Hotline             Psychosocial                                 202
                          Support

St. Lucia Crisis Centre   Psychological         107 Chausse Road, 453-1521          stluciacrisis@gmail.com
                          Support               Castries
                                                                  712-7574
                          Livelihood Support

                          Assistance     with
                          basic needs such as
                          food and shelter

Women’s         Support Legal Aid                                      458-4470     WSCCENTER2001@GMAIL.COM
Centre
                          Psychological
                          Support

                          Livelihood Support

                          Assistance     with
                          basic needs such as
                          food and shelter

Raise your Voice St. Psychological              Manoel        Street, 726-0473      raiseyourvoiceslu@gmail.com
Lucia Inc            Support                    Castries              487-2329
                                                                                    https://ryvslu.org/
                          Livelihood Support

Positive    Reactions Psychological             PO      Box        973 724-9991     info@prosafe.org
Over Secrets And Support                        Castries
                                                                                    https://prosaf.org
Fears (PROSAF)


United and Strong         Assistance      for P.O.    BOX          772 450-0976     unitedandstrongstlucia@yahoo.c
                          LGBTI persons       Castries,                             om

                                                                                    www.facebook.com/Unitedandst
                                                                                    rongstlucia/




                                                              59



                                                                                                               Official Use Only
  Service Providers       Service Provided        Address         Telephone              Other

St. Lucia       Planned Sex       education 52 John Compton 452-4335
Parenthood              counselling,        Highway                           slppa758@gmail.com
                                                            Hotline:
Association
                        Sexual          and
                                                            459-7933
                        reproductive
                        health services                     Whatsapp

                                                                 722-1234

OKEU Hospital            Medical     Health Castries             458-6500
                         Services

St. Jude Hospital        Medical     Health Vieux Fort           454- 6041
                         Services

Castries Health Centre   Medical     Health Chaussee        Road 452-4416
                         Services           Castries

Gros Islet Polyclinic    Medical     Health Gros Islet           450-9661
                         Services

Babonneau      Wellness Medical      Health Babonneau
Centre                  Services

National      Mental Psychological           Castries            458-2713
Wellness Centre      Support
                                                                 453-0069




                                                         60



                                                                                                   Official Use Only
Annex 8 The Survivor Centered Approach




                                         61



                                              Official Use Only
62



     Official Use Only
63



     Official Use Only
 64


Official Use Only
