Public Disclosure Authorized
                                       The World Bank
                                       Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                             Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                       (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 03/07/2025 | Report No: ESRSC04820




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Mar 09, 2025                                                                         Page 1 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                   Operation Acronym           Approval Fiscal Year

                     P504998                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)        SURF-In                     2026

                     Operation Name            Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries            Region                      Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     St. Lucia                 St. Lucia                                LATIN AMERICA AND            Urban, Resilience and
                                                                                        CARIBBEAN                    Land

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                 Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     Ministry of Finance,      Department of Economic                   23-Jul-2025                  29-Aug-2025
                     Economic                  Development, Ministry of Finance,
                     Development and           Economic Development and Youth
                     Youth Economy             Economy




Public Disclosure
                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost
                     Review Date

                     05-Mar-2025               20,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     Enhance resilience to flood risk in the key areas of Castries and Anse La Raye.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The proposed Project aims to provide focused interventions to improve the resilience of infrastructure and communities
                     to flood and climate risk in the urban areas of Castries and Anse La Raye. The Project will finance targeted interventions
                     which: (i) enhance flood controls to current and future climate hazards; (ii) strengthen the capacities of institution and
                     communities to manage disaster and climate risk; (iii) improve resilience of infrastructure services; (iv) enable nature-
                     based solution and green investments; and (v) provide a replicable and scalable model of urban resilient upgrades for



                    Mar 09, 2025                                                                                                      Page 2 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)



                     other vulnerable urban centers across Saint Lucia. The Project will also support technical assistance (TA) activities to
                     support improvements to operations and maintenance of infrastructure assets and the sustainability of investments


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The overall objective will be to improve resilience of the dense urban areas to rainfall events. Under the previously
                     approved PPG a catchment flood model for Castries and Anse La Raye will be developed which will be used to identify,
                     analyze, and establish feasible options for proposed interventions (including nature-based solutions, sustainable urban
                     drainage improvements and hard engineering) to reduce flooding of the towns during extreme weather events. The
                     selected interventions are to be constructed as part of this project.
                     Castries is the capital of SLU and is highly urbanized. Its population is 65,656, which is approximately a third of the
                     population of St. Lucia. The upper reaches of the Castries catchment are within the Castries and Dennery Waterworks
                     Reserve and Marquis, which is a forest reserve, and there are several historic areas surrounding the town. The
                     catchment has been extensively developed, and is densely urban in the lower reaches and with sub-urban residential
                     homes with gardens in the higher elevations. As development has crept up the steep hill sides of the catchment, they
                     have been increasingly denuded of forest; this may have contributed to the clogging of town drainage with sediment.
                     Forest is now mainly only in the upper reaches. Approximately 6 km west of Castries, which is a Marine Protected area,
                     is under active management.

                     Anse la Raye is also an important urban center in St. Lucia, with a population of 6,200. Two main rivers converge at Anse
                     La Raye, where they discharge directly into a Marine Management Area West Coast (incl. Anse la Raye/Canaries Local



Public Disclosure
                     Fisheries Management Area and Marigot Bay). There is a protected landscape area to the south of the catchment, and
                     the upper reach is within the Castries and Dennery Waterworks Reserve and Marquis Protected Forest Area. The
                     interventions designed would reduce impacts and disruption during flood events in the towns and improve quality of
                     discharges to the marine environment.




                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The borrower has demonstrated a good capacity to manage projects in accordance with both the safeguards policies
                     and the ESF. The project will be implemented by the Department of Economic Development (DED) under the Ministry of
                     Finance, Economic Development and Youth Economy (MoFEDYE). Implementing agencies for other projects in Saint
                     Lucia have all proved competent and have demonstrated good capacity to management E&S risks and impacts of
                     projects in accordance with national law and regulation as well as with the World Bank's safeguards policies and the
                     ESF. The GoSL’s performance on these projects has been consistently rated by the Bank as satisfactory. The DED has
                     prior experience of implementing projects financed by the World Bank and thus familiar with the requirements of the
                     Bank’s ESF. However, during project preparation a due diligence of the borrower’s capacity and readiness to implement
                     a project of this nature will be conducted to determine the readiness of the implementing agencies of the various
                     components of the project.

                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS


                    Mar 09, 2025                                                                                                        Page 3 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)



                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                          Moderate


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                   Moderate
                     The modelling, pre-feasibility and feasibility studies undertaken as part of the PPG will determine a short list of
                     options that will be implemented during the project. The project will consider nature-based solutions as well as hard
                     engineering solutions to alleviate disruption from flooding within the towns, including consideration of measures to
                     retain water in the upper reaches of the catchment to control the rate of discharge and avoid flash flooding events.
                     Due to the locations of the protected areas in the upper catchment (where interventions to slow discharges could be
                     taken forward) and at the discharge points (including into a Marine Protected Area), the safety implications that
                     construction of drainage infrastructure may pose in heavily populated areas with small roads and heavy traffic, and
                     the health implications that could arise through waterborne disease if flood waters are not controlled, the
                     Environmental Risk Rating is considered Moderate.
                                                                                                                                     Moderate
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risk is assessed as Moderate. The project is expected to strengthen the government ‘s capacity to design
                     and manage flood risks infrastructure in the national capital Castries and Anse La Raye. These are two densely
                     populated areas of the country. The project interventions would have positive impacts by supporting resilient
                     housing, rehabilitation of emergency facilities, construction of river embarkments to reduce the frequency and impact
                     of flooding. The project aims to protect livelihoods and economic activities, particularly in sectors such as small-scale
                     trading, tourism, and services that poorer communities depend on. However, the design and implementation of the
                     project activities in densely populated areas may have impacts on vulnerable communities and can disproportionately



Public Disclosure
                     affect the poor vulnerable populations, could cause damage to property, loss of income and disruption to public
                     services. The project activities may also involve interventions on private lands resulting potentially in small to medium
                     scale temporary or permanent displacements. The project would need to ensure that all relevant stakeholders are
                     effectively engaged, and any proposed solutions are fit for purpose in the local environment. The project would be
                     designed and implement measures that provide for equal access to climate-resilient infrastructure and disaster risk
                     management (DRM) resources for all community members, including women and vulnerable groups. The risks and
                     impacts of the proposed interventions would be assessed during preparation to ensure there is effective participation
                     of stakeholders and minimization of the potential impacts on land and private property. It is expected that the social
                     risks and impacts would be moderate and can be effectively managed through the design and implementation of
                     appropriate social instruments.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                 Relevant

                      E&S risks and issues will be considered when identifying and assessing the feasibility of options (including nature-
                      based solutions, sustainable urban drainage improvements and hard engineering) to reduce flooding of the towns
                      during extreme weather events. The E&S implications will also need to be considered when selecting the final options
                      to be constructed, and any mitigation that has not been incorporated into the design of the works will need to be


                    Mar 09, 2025                                                                                                       Page 4 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)



                      incorporated into the construction works contracts or delivered by the Government during operation. Building on the
                      E&S studies undertaken during the feasibility studies, selected options will be subject to E&S assessment as required
                      to comply with the E&S regulatory framework of St. Lucia and the ESF. The assessments will identify any licenses,
                      permits and consents that the project will require, as well as the mitigation measures to be incorporated in the into
                      the procurement and construction process to comply with requirements.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                    Relevant

                      The project interventions would require extensive stakeholder consultations through meaningful and participatory
                      approaches. Preliminary stakeholders identified and to be consulted during the feasibility studies by the PPG
                      consultant include officials of government institutions, including the Department of Infrastructure, Water Resources
                      Management Agency, National Integrated Programme and Planning Unit, National Emergency Management
                      Organization, Castries City Council and St. Lucia Solid Waste Management Authority. During the feasibility study,
                      stakeholder analysis would be conducted to identify additional stakeholders. To align with the WB Directive on
                      Inclusion of Vulnerable Groups, the project would prepare a SEP that would address the inclusion of women, persons
                      with disabilities, and other vulnerable groups throughout the project's life. The SEP would provide indicators to
                      measure stakeholder engagement and the structure of the GRM. It would be disclosed prior to appraisal.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                          Relevant

                      The project would involve design consultants, government officials at their respective Ministries and departments, a
                      dedicated PIU and contractors to undertake the works. A LMP will be prepared as needed to outline how the terms




Public Disclosure
                      and conditions of employment of the consultants, officials and PIU would comply with ESF requirements, including
                      with respect to their code of conduct. The LMP will include a mechanism for project workers to submit workplace-
                      related grievances in accordance with ESS2. Provisions to ensure occupational health and safety of the workers will
                      be addressed in the LMP to be prepared after the feasibility studies have been completed and the borrower has
                      determined the most viable project design and activities to be financed under the project. The construction works will
                      be procured using the World Bank Standard Procurement Documents which incorporates relevant requirements
                      regarding construction workers' terms and conditions of employment.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                           Relevant

                      The feasibility study will provide an opportunity to review and reduce pollution in protected areas at the stormwater
                      discharge points. The selected interventions should also be designed to be as efficient as possible, to improve their
                      long term resilience and reliance on maintenance or other management inputs.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                           Relevant

                      The project will need to avoid exacerbating water-born health hazards or diseases, and consider implications on
                      community safety during future construction works. Since the scope of the project involves selecting and constructing
                      flood risk infrastructure, an emergency response plan will be developed prior to commencement fo construction to
                      ensure safety of workers and nearby communities. Furthermore, to manage potential risks of the transmission of
                      waterborne diseases and waste disposal the designer is required to undertake environmental and social analysis and
                      consider this with constructability, public safety (including from water-borne diseases), safety in construction.



                    Mar 09, 2025                                                                                                    Page 5 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)



                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                               Relevant

                      This standard is relevant because the future works will take place in locations that are densely populated and highly
                      urbanized locations and may result in physical or economic displacement and loss of livelihoods during project
                      implementation. There are potentially likely to be small to medium scale impacts on private land and property
                      resulting in temporary or permanent loss of property. A full determination of this would be assessed based on the
                      outcome of feasibility studies and the design options that would be produced. Appropriate risk mitigation measures
                      would be determined, including the timing for the preparation of Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) as may be required
                      or relevant risk mitigation instrument for implementation during project implementation. No civil works would
                      commence until a RAP has been prepared and implemented as required under the ESS.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                Relevant
                      Resources

                      There are forest reserves and marine protected areas associated with catchments that will need to be considered
                      during the development and selection of acceptable interventions.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional             Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      There are no known groups of people in the project area in Saint Lucia that meet the criteria as defined under the
                      ESS.




Public Disclosure
                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                     Relevant

                      The project would involve civil works and excavations. Cultural heritage features are present in the catchment areas
                      and the study will need to consider avoiding or minimizing impacts to these when developing and implementing
                      solutions. Chance Find Procedures would be incorporated in the relevant E&S Management isntruments.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                Not Currently Relevant



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                         No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                  No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                       In Part
                       Information will be gathered from relevant ministries, databases and government repositories for use in the study,
                       including data on protected areas, cultural heritage features and water resources, as well as long term development
                       planning proposals and policies. The project will obtain and implement all licenses, permits and consents needed by
                       national law, and will be designed and constructed in accordance with the relevant engineering standards and building
                       codes. Additional measures will be required to supplement the minimum standards achieved through legal and


                    Mar 09, 2025                                                                                                    Page 6 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)



                       regulatory compliance, to ensure the works are delivered in accordance with Good International Industry Practice as
                       required by the Bank's ESF.


                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                No
                       This is not contemplated.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     The TORs for the design consultancy require the modelling and development of proposals to consider the
                     environmental and social risks and impacts, and for the consultant to have an environmental and social expert as part
                     of the design team. The designer is required to undertake environmental and social analysis and consider this with
                     constructability, public safety (including from water-borne diseases), safety in construction, efficiency in long term
                     management requirements, the need for temporary or permanent displacement of people and other relevant factors
                     alongside cost to identify the possible interventions to be undertaken.
                     The environmental and social analysis will identify any mitigation measures that need to be incorporated into the
                     design or construction contract to ensure compliance with the ESF.
                     The TORs acknowledge the presence of protected areas within the catchments, and the designer will consider how to
                     improve the quality of discharges to the protected areas. Stakeholder Engagement will be undertaken as part of the
                     development, selection and construction works, as guided by a Stakeholder Engagement Plan.



Public Disclosure
                     The ESCP will set out the actions to be taken, when they need to be completed by, and who is responsible for
                     undertaking them as to ensure Bank and borrower have a clear understanding of the requirements for managing the
                     environmental and social risks of the project.




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Jared Phillip Mercadante               Title:        Senior Disaster Risk Management
                                                                                                   Specialist

                      Email:                  jmercadante@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Artessa Saldivar-Sali                  Job Title:    Senior Infrastructure Specialist

                      Email:                  asaldivarsali@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT



                    Mar 09, 2025                                                                                                      Page 7 of 8
                              The World Bank
                              Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)



                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                             Jared Phillip Mercadante, Artessa Saldivar-Sali

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                    Michael James Hall

                     ADM Social Specialist:                           Charles Ankisiba




Public Disclosure




                    Mar 09, 2025                                                                                        Page 8 of 8
