Public Disclosure Authorized                                               FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
                                                                                                                           Report No: PADHI00398

                                                   INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

                                                                      PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                                 ON A
                                                                            PROPOSED LOAN


                                                                    IN THE AMOUNT OF $257.8 MILLION


                                                                                    TO THE

                                                                             LEBANESE REPUBLIC




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                                     FOR A

                                                            SECOND GREATER BEIRUT WATER SUPPLY PROJECT

                                                                             DECEMBER 12, 2024




Public Disclosure Authorized    Water Global Practice
                                Middle East And North Africa


                               This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official
                               duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.
                                                      CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

                                              (Exchange Rate Effective Nov 15, 2024)

                                                             Currency Unit =
                                                              89,500 LBP1 = US$1
                                                          US$ 0.00001117= 1 LBP

                                                             FISCAL YEAR
                                                       January 1 - December 31




                           Regional Vice President: Ousmane Dione
                                  Regional Director: Meskerem Brhane
                                   Country Director: Jean-Christophe Carret
                                  Practice Manager: Michael Haney
                              Task Team Leader(s): Elvira Cusiqoyllor Broeks Motta, Sally Zgheib


1
 The official exchange rate was adjusted to 15,000 LBP/US$ in February 2023 from a former 1,507.5 LBP/US$. The exchange rate of 89,500
LBP/US$ reflects the BDL platform exchange rate that was aligned with the US$ banknote exchange rate as of December 2023.
                                 ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


AFD     Agence Française de Développement            LMP      Labor Management Procedures
        Italian Agency for Development and
AICS                                                 LBP      Lebanese Pound
        Cooperation
        Arab Fund for Economic and Social
AFESD                                                LRA      Litani River Authority
        Development
BMLWE   Beirut Mount Lebanon Water Establishment     MENA     Middle East and North Africa
BOD     Biological Oxygen Demand                     MoEW     Ministry of Energy and Water
CCDR    Country Climate and Development Report       M&E      Monitoring and Evaluation
CDR     Council for Development and Reconstruction   NDCs     Nationally Determined Contributions
CE      Citizen Engagement                           NGO      Non-Governmental Organization
CERC    Contingent Emergency Response Component      NPV      Net Present Value
CoM     Council of Ministers                         NRW      Non-Revenue Water
DA      Designated Account                           NWSS     National Water Sector Strategy
DMA     District Metered Areas                       PP       Procurement Plan
DSPOE   Dam Safety Panel of Experts                  PAC      Powder Activated Carbon
EHS     Environment, Health and Safety               PAD      Project Appraisal Document
E&S     Environmental and Social                     PAPs     Project Affected Persons
ERP     Enterprise Resource Planning                 PDO      Project Development Objective
ERR     Economic Rates of Return                     PMU      Project Management Unit
ESCP    Environmental and Social Commitment Plan     POM      Project Operations Manual
ESIA    Environmental and Social Impact Assessment   PPSD     Project Procurement Strategy for Development
EU      European Union                               PV       Photovoltaic
FM      Financial Management                         RPW      Remaining Pipeline Works
FCV     Fragility, Conflict and Violence             RTW      Remaining Tunnel Works
GoL     Government of Lebanon                        RAP      Resettlement Action Plan
GBML    Greater Beirut and Mount Lebanon             SGBWSP   Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project
GBWSP   Greater Beirut Water Supply Project          SEP      Stakeholder Engagement Plan
GHG     Greenhouse Gases                             SEA/SH   Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Harassment
GRM     Grievance Redress Mechanism                  SCADA    Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
GDP     Gross Domestic Product                       STEP     Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement
        International Bank for Reconstruction and
IBRD                                                 TOC      Total Organic Carbon
        Development
ICT     Information and communication technologies   ToRs     Terms of Reference
IDA     International Development Agency             UoF      Utility of the Future
IPF     Investment Project Financing                 WHO      World Health Organization
IsDB    Islamic Development Bank                     WTP      Water Treatment Plant
JRS     Joun Regulation Structure                    WWTP     Wastewater Treatment Plant
The World Bank
Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)



                                                            TABLE OF CONTENTS

DATASHEET ........................................................................................................................... i
I.    STRATEGIC CONTEXT ..................................................................................................... 1
      A. Project Strategic Context .................................................................................................................1
      B. Sectoral and Institutional Context ...................................................................................................1
II.   PROJECT DESCRIPTION .................................................................................................. 6
      A. Project Development Objective .......................................................................................................6
      B. Theory of Change and PDO Indicators .............................................................................................6
      C. Project Beneficiaries ........................................................................................................................9
      D. Project Components ........................................................................................................................9
      E. Role of Partners ..............................................................................................................................13
      F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design....................................................................13
III. PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION ........................................................................................ 14
      A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements ..........................................................................14
      B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation ................................................................................................14
      C. Disbursement Arrangements .........................................................................................................15
IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY .................................................................................. 16
      A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis ..................................................................................16
      B. Fiduciary .........................................................................................................................................22
      C. Environmental, Social and Legal Operational Policies ...................................................................24
V. KEY RISKS .................................................................................................................... 26
ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK ........................................................................................ 29
ANNEX 2. BULK SUPPLY SYSTEM AND NRW REDUCTION AREAS.......................................... 36
      The World Bank
      Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)




@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padbasicinformation#doctemplate
DATASHEET


BASIC INFORMATION


Project
                         Operation Name
Beneficiary(ies)
Lebanon                  Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project
                                                     Environmental and Social Risk
Operation ID             Financing Instrument
                                                     Classification
                         Investment Project
P504170                                              Substantial
                         Financing (IPF)

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padprocessing#doctemplate
Financing & Implementation Modalities

[ ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA)                     [✓] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)
[ ] Series of Projects (SOP)                                   [✓] Fragile State(s)
[ ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs)                        [ ] Small State(s)
[ ] Financial Intermediaries (FI)                              [ ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country
[ ] Project-Based Guarantee                                    [✓] Conflict
[ ] Deferred Drawdown                                          [ ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster
[ ] Alternative Procurement Arrangements (APA)                 [ ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS)


Expected Approval Date                 Expected Closing Date
14-Jan-2025                            31-Dec-2032
Bank/IFC Collaboration
No


Proposed Development Objective(s)
The project development objective is to improve the water supply services in the Greater Beirut and Mount Lebanon
area.

Components

                                                                                                                     i
      The World Bank
      Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)


 Component Name                                                                                      Cost (US$)
 Component 1: Completing remaining bulk water infrastructure                                             148.00
 Component 2: Strengthening treatment processes for improved water
                                                                                                          56.00
 quality
 Component 3: Reforms for improved utility operations                                                     34.00
 Component 4: Land acquisition and resettlement compensation                                              15.00
 Component 5: Project management and capacity building                                                     5.00
 Component 6: Contingent Emergency Response Component                                                      0.00

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padborrower#doctemplate

Organizations

 Borrower:                     Lebanese Republic

 Contact                      Title                      Telephone No.        Email
 Georges Maarawi              Ministry of Finance Acting 9611642762           georgesm@finance.gov.lb
                              Director General
 Implementing Agency:         Council for Development & Reconstruction, Beirut and Mount Lebanon Water
                              Establishment
 Contact                      Title                      Telephone No.        Email
 Ibrahim Chahrour             Acting Head of Funding     (961-1) 980-096      ibrahimc@cdr.gov.lb
                              Division
 Jean Gebran                  Managing Director and      96113866550          jeanygebran@gmail.com
                              Chairman



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padfinancingsummary#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                 No

Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?           No

SUMMARY

  Total Operation Cost                                                                                   257.80

  Total Financing                                                                                        257.80

                                                                                                                  ii
      The World Bank
      Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)


             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                          257.80

 Financing Gap                                                                                            0.00

DETAILS

 World Bank Group Financing
   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                         257.80


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@paddisbursementprojection#doctemplate
Expected Disbursements (US$, Millions)
WB Fiscal
Year             2025         2026       2027      2028         2029        2030       2031    2032      2033

Annual           7.54         30.00     40.00      50.00        55.00      40.00       20.00   10.00     4.00
Cumulative       7.54         37.54     77.54     127.54       182.54      222.54     242.54   252.54   256.54


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padclimatechange#doctemplate
PRACTICE AREA(S)


Practice Area (Lead)                                         Contributing Practice Areas
Water

CLIMATE


Climate Change and Disaster Screening
Yes, it has been screened and the results are discussed in the Operation Document


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padrisk#doctemplate
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK- RATING TOOL (SORT)


Risk Category                                                              Rating
1. Political and Governance                                                ⚫ High
2. Macroeconomic                                                           ⚫ High
3. Sector Strategies and Policies                                          ⚫ Moderate

                                                                                                             iii
      The World Bank
      Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)



4. Technical Design of Project or Program                                   ⚫ Substantial
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability             ⚫ High
6. Fiduciary                                                                ⚫ High
7. Environment and Social                                                   ⚫ Substantial
8. Stakeholders                                                             ⚫ Moderate
9. Other                                                                    ⚫ High
10. Overall                                                                 ⚫ High


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padcompliance#doctemplate
POLICY COMPLIANCE


Policy
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects?
[ ] Yes    [✓] No

Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?
[ ] Yes [✓] No



ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL


Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal
E & S Standards                                                                     Relevance
ESS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and
                                                                                    Relevant
Impacts
ESS 10: Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                           Relevant
ESS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                                                 Relevant
ESS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                  Relevant
ESS 4: Community Health and Safety                                                  Relevant
ESS 5: Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement      Relevant
ESS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural
                                                                                    Relevant
Resources
ESS 7: Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved
                                                                                    Not Currently Relevant
Traditional Local Communities


                                                                                                             iv
      The World Bank
      Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)



ESS 8: Cultural Heritage                                                             Not Currently Relevant
ESS 9: Financial Intermediaries                                                      Not Currently Relevant
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review
Summary (ESRS).

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalcovenants#doctemplate
LEGAL
Legal Covenants
Sections and Description
Schedule 2, Section I.A.2: The Borrower, through MOEW, shall, by not later than one (1) month after the Effective Date
and thereafter throughout the Project implementation period, cause the Project Implementing Entities to maintain
their respective Project Management Units (respectively the “CDR-PMU” and the “BMLWE-PMU”) (collectively the
“PMUs”), with composition, mandate and resources satisfactory to the Bank as detailed in the Project Operations
Manual.
Schedule 2, Section I.B.1(c): The Borrower, through MOEW, shall update the Project Operations Manual (POM) under
terms satisfactory to the Bank to include the rules, guidelines, standard documents and procedures for (i) the principles
of a funds flow mechanism satisfactory to the Bank for the financing of Resettlement Assistance under Part 4 of the
Project; and (ii) the detailed arrangements of said funds flow mechanism satisfactory to the Bank [, to be incorporated
not later than twenty-four (24) months after the Effective Date, or such later date as agreed with the Bank.
Schedule 2, Section I.C.1(b): The terms and conditions of the CDR Subsidiary Agreement approved by the Bank, shall
include, inter alia, the obligation of the CDR to maintain, throughout Project implementation adequate staffing and
personnel at the CDR-PMU and procedures for the implementation of the Project, as further detailed in the Project
Operations Manual, including, inter alia, the Project manager, a procurement specialist, a financial management
specialist, social safeguards specialist, and environmental safeguards specialist not later than one (1) month after the
Effective Date, or such later date as agreed by the Bank, as well as an external auditor in charge of the internal audit of
both Project Implementing Entities not later than three (3) months after the Effective Date, or such later date as agreed
by the Bank.
Schedule 2, Section I.D.1(b): The terms and conditions of the BMLWE Subsidiary Agreement approved by the Bank, shall
include, the terms and conditions to be included in the contractual arrangements between BMLWE and CDR to
facilitate the carrying out of the Project, on terms and conditions acceptable by the Bank (“CDR Cooperation
Agreement”), to be entered by not later than two (2) months after the Effective Date, or such later date to be agreed
with the Bank.
Schedule 2, Section I.D.1(c): The terms and conditions of the BMLWE Subsidiary Agreement approved by the Bank, shall
include, the terms and conditions to be included in the contractual arrangements between BMLWE and the Litani River
Authority (“LRA”), on terms and conditions acceptable by the Bank (“LRA Cooperation Agreement”), to be entered by
not later than two (2) months after the Effective Date, or such later date to be agreed with the Bank, including, inter
alia, the obligation of BMLWE to make avail of, throughout Project implementation, the DSPOE, comprised by qualified
experts in specific technical fields on dam safety, to provide guidance and advice to BMLWE and LRA during
implementation of the Project on relevant technical matters.


                                                                                                                         v
       The World Bank
       Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)


Schedule 2, Section I.D.1(d): The terms and conditions of the BMLWE Subsidiary Agreement approved by the Bank, shall
include, the obligation of the BMLWE to maintain, throughout Project implementation adequate staffing, personnel and
procedures for the implementation of the Project, as further detailed in the Project Operations Manual, including, inter
alia, the Project manager, a procurement specialist, a financial management specialist, social safeguards specialist, and
environmental safeguards specialist not later than one (1) month after the Effective Date, or such later date as agreed
by the Bank.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padconditions#doctemplate
Conditions
Type                          Citation                        Description                   Financing Source
                                                              The CDR Subsidiary
                                                              Agreement has been
Effectiveness                 Article V, Section 5.01 (b)     executed and delivered        IBRD/IDA
                                                              under terms and conditions
                                                              satisfactory to the Bank
                                                              The Borrower has prepared
                                                              and adopted, and caused
                                                              the Project Implementing
Effectiveness                 Article V, Section 5.01 (a)     Entities to prepare and       IBRD/IDA
                                                              adopt, the POM, in form
                                                              and substance satisfactory
                                                              to the Bank
                                                              The BMLWE Subsidiary
                                                              Agreement has been
Effectiveness                 Article V, Section 5.01 (c)     executed and delivered        IBRD/IDA
                                                              under terms and conditions
                                                              satisfactory to the Bank.
                                                              The Borrower shall submit
                                                              a legal opinion from a
                                                              counsel acceptable to the
                                                              Bank, confirming that the
                                                              Loan Agreement has been
                              General Conditions, Article
Effectiveness                                                 duly authorized or ratified   IBRD/IDA
                              9.02 (a)
                                                              by, and executed and
                                                              delivered on its behalf of
                                                              the Borrower and is legally
                                                              binding upon it in
                                                              accordance with its terms
                                                              No withdrawal shall be
                              Schedule 2, Section             made under Category (3),
Disbursement                                                                                IBRD/IDA
                              III.B.1(b)                      unless and until the
                                                              Borrower has updated the

                                                                                                                      vi
     The World Bank
     Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)


                                                            POM to incorporate the
                                                            modalities of a funds flow
                                                            mechanism for the
                                                            financing of Resettlement
                                                            Assistance in form and
                                                            substance satisfactory to
                                                            the Bank
                                                            No withdrawal shall be
                                                            made for Emergency
                                                            Expenditures under
                                                            Category (4), unless and
                                                            until all of the following
                                                            conditions have been met
                                                            in respect of said
                                                            expenditures: (i) (A) the
                                                            Borrower has determined
                                                            that an Eligible Crisis or
                                                            Emergency has occurred,
                            Schedule 2, Section             and has furnished to the
Disbursement                                                                              IBRD/IDA
                            III.B.1(c)                      Bank a request to withdraw
                                                            Loan amounts under
                                                            Category (4); and (B) the
                                                            Bank has agreed with such
                                                            determination, accepted
                                                            said request and notified
                                                            the Borrower thereof; and
                                                            (ii) the Borrower has
                                                            adopted the CERC Manual
                                                            and Emergency Action
                                                            Plan, in form and substance
                                                            acceptable to the Bank.




                                                                                                     vii
           The World Bank
           Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)



    I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT


    A. Project Strategic Context
1.      Lebanon’s ongoing multi-faceted crisis has deepened the urgency of ensuring water security and the
sustainability of water services, both of which are critical for human well-being and economic development. The
country's financial challenges and political instability, aggravated by the conflict in the Middle East that has had
devastating effects in Lebanon including damages to vital infrastructure throughout the country including in the Greater
Beirut and Mount Lebanon (GBML) area, have led to a collapse of basic public services, exacerbating poverty. Multiple
development challenges and unaffordable dollarized maintenance costs have severely obstructed the effective planning,
implementation, and maintenance of water infrastructure and hindered the sustainability of water services. Recognizing
that water plays a pivotal role in Lebanon’s future and economic development, the Government of Lebanon (GoL) is
implementing a water sector reform embodied in its updated National Water Sector Strategy 2024-2035 (NWSS) which
seeks to (i) enhance water security, (ii) improve public service delivery, (iii) support sustainable utilities, and (iv) ensure
good governance and leadership. Achieving this vision requires significant infrastructure investments to secure the
country’s water supply, while enhancing existing systems to deliver top-quality services to all citizens. A key focus of the
NWSS is to drive innovation and investment in digital monitoring, decision-making tools, and processes to strengthen the
water sector’s resilience to climate change. However, success also depends on building sustainable water utilities by
implementing legal, institutional, and financial reforms, alongside improving service management.
2.        The proposed Project will contribute to this vision by improving water supply services in the GBML area and
enhancing the performance of the Beirut Mount Lebanon Water Establishment (BMLWE). The proposed Project is
expected to build on the Bank’s ongoing water engagement, while supporting the implementation of sector reform actions
by the GoL at the level of the BMLWE. It will address critical water security needs by focusing on essential investments to
increase water supply in the most water-deprived areas of GBML, which currently receive less than a quarter of the water
needed to meet demand. In addition, the proposed Project will help the BMLWE tackle severe operational and commercial
inefficiencies, exacerbated by the multiple ongoing crises, thereby contributing to its financial recovery and enhancing the
reliability of public services.

    B. Sectoral and Institutional Context

        (i) Sector Context
3.       Water in Lebanon is paradoxically abundant, yet scarce. Precipitation in Lebanon is among the highest in the
Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region,2 with annual water resources exceeding demand; however, around 70
percent of rainfall occurs between November and March (wet season) and storage of surface water is inadequate, creating
a significant water availability gap from April to October (dry season). Despite an estimated per capita renewable water
availability of 848 cubic meters, climate-change-driven rainfall seasonality is expected to worsen this gap, with projections
indicating a 50 percent reduction in dry season water availability by 2040.3 Climate projections for Lebanon indicate an
increase in temperatures, by up to 2.2°C by 2040 and 4.4°C by the end of the century. Greater rainfall variability is also
expected, which could lead to more intense floods and longer droughts. Factors such as reduced snowpack, increased
evaporation, reliance on karst groundwater, and insufficient storage exacerbate the challenges, leaving populations
vulnerable to drought and putting pressure on both surface and groundwater resources.



2
    Precipitation ranges from 700 to 1,000 mm along the coastline to 1,600 mm in inland mountain areas.
3 Groundwater structures of Lebanon are mostly karstic implying that they do not allow storing water to be carried over to dry season; most of the

water that enters the karstic aquifers rapidly reaches the sea.

                                                                                                                                            Page 1
         The World Bank
         Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)


4.      The institutional setup of the water sector in Lebanon encompasses a range of different institutions and
stakeholders. The main institutional players in the Lebanese water sector include the Ministry of Energy and Water
(MoEW), the Council for Development and Reconstruction (CDR), and the Water Establishments (WEs) and the Litani River
Authority (LRA):
   (a) The MoEW is the primary regulatory agency for the water sector, overseeing resource management, budget-
       financed investments, technical supervision of water establishments, and the establishment of water standards
       and pollution control legislation.
   (b) The CDR, established in 1977, is a financially autonomous public institution accountable to the Council of Ministers
       (CoM) and is responsible for planning, securing financing for, and executing public investment projects,
       coordinating reconstruction efforts in collaboration with line ministries.
   (c) WEs: municipal water is provided by four consolidated WEs, which operate in line with the existing legal framework,
       responsible for managing potable water supply, irrigation, and wastewater services, setting tariffs based on socio-
       economic conditions, ensuring water quality, and relying on their own funds without central budget support.
   (d) The LRA, formed in 1954 to facilitate the integrated development of the Litani River Basin under the MoEW, is
       responsible for the water governance over the entire basin in coordination with all concerned parties.
5.      Insufficient enforcement of the Water Law 221, enacted in May 2000, has hindered the progress towards an
effective governance framework for integrated water resources management, resulting in fragmentation and poor
coordination, though recent actions aim to address these issues. Progress in implementing integrated water resources
management principles is lagging compared to the regional average.4 The Water Law started the reform of the sector by
defining the MoEW’s role in policy, bulk water supply, and regulation; and reducing water sector fragmentation through
the consolidation of 22 water service providers into four WEs. However, without the necessary by-laws for enforcement,
the law has not been implemented, and responsibilities remain fragmented across various ministries. This fragmentation
causes overlaps and a lack of accountability, alongside poor stakeholder coordination and insufficient reliable data for
effective planning and policymaking.5 To address some of these challenges, the following reform actions have been
completed: (i) Approval of the National Water Council’s internal procedures at the level of the Prime Miniter’s office,
which seeks to enhance coordination across sector stakeholders; (ii) finalization of six water decrees for better regulation
of groundwater extraction, licensing, and enforcement, among other aspects; (iii) MoEW’s approval of WEs revised
organigrams for better organizational structure and formal appointment of utility managers.6
6.      Although there have been attempts to enhance financial sustainability through annual water tariff increases,
current rates are still insufficient for the WEs to cover operational costs, and much less capital expenditures.7 In
Lebanon, households pay a yearly lump sum tariff for water for one cubic meter per day, 8 which dropped from about
US$200 to under US$20 due to inflation during the economic crisis.9 After several adjustments, the annual lump sum tariff


4 UNEP. 2021. Progress on Integrated Water Resources Management. Global Indicator 6.5.1 Updates and Acceleration Needs.
5 Responsibilities for water management regulation and enforcement, irrigation, and water supply distribution are spread across the Ministry of

Energy and Water, Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Environment, Ministry of Public Health, and Ministry of Defense who oversee the
municipalities that manage individual water and sanitation schemes.
6
  Per interim since permanent appointment is frozen.
7 MoEW. 2022. Roadmap to Recovery of the Water Sector in Lebanon. URL
8 Although the payment of the yearly tariff entitles each subscriber to dispose of 1 cubic meter per day, the WEs lack the capacity to control the

volume of water withdrawn, which often results in a single subscription to an entire apartment building, or commercial subscribers registered as
household subscribers.
9 Sayrafa exchange rate for 2022 equal to LBP20,000.00 for US$1.00.


                                                                                                                                             Page 2
          The World Bank
          Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)


is now around US$150, and the MoEW has plans to gradually return to pre-crisis levels. Additionally, the collapse of the
energy grid and frequent electricity outages exacerbate the situation, increasing fuel costs and complicating water
production and service delivery. To ensure gradual improvement in the financial sustainability of the WEs, the MoEW is
developing with the support of development partners a phased tariff strategy to be completed in 2025.
7.       Despite the relatively high coverage rate of public water networks (90 percent) in the GBML area, continuity of
supply is extremely low, forcing households to rely on expensive water supplies and impacting the sustainability of the
BMLWE. Water supply in the GBML area is largely insufficient, with the BMLWE relying only on water supply from
groundwater wells or springs. This shortfall in water availability is a critical barrier to ensuring a reliable water supply in
the GBML area and limits BMLWE's ability to expand its subscriber base and increase revenue. Some Greater Beirut
residents receive only ten hours of water per week during the dry season, and many areas lack adequate supply even in
the wet season due to uneven resource distribution and insufficient infrastructure. The public sector's failure to meet
basic water needs has led to an informal market for water trucking, which can consume up to 16 percent of household
income in summer.10 Additionally, there are approximately 100,000 private unlicensed wells. Moreover, the influx of
internally displaced people into Beirut and the existence of significant refugee populations further intensifies the water
deficit, straining resources and complicating management efforts. Concerns about service continuity and water quality
also force many to rely on costly bottled water, adding to their financial burdens and generation of plastic waste.
8.      Nationally, physical and commercial water losses are estimated at around 40 percent, exacerbated by
unregistered users accessing the public network.11 Similarly, BMLWE estimates the non-revenue water (NRW) levels at
around 40 percent in the GBML Area, but the variability in supply and lack of control over unregistered users complicate
accurate measurement. The high NRW levels are primarily due to commercial losses, including unregistered users
accessing water from the public network and commercial subscribers being misclassified as household consumers. While
much of BMLWE’s water distribution network is relatively new, inadequate maintenance is likely to also have led to
physical losses. The reliability of estimates for both commercial and physical losses is uncertain, as BMLWE's customer
records are outdated, there is no customer-level water metering, and the inconsistent supply hampers effective leak
detection. To address these challenges, BMLWE plans to reduce losses by defining zones to update customer records,
establishing District Metered Areas (DMAs), installing household water meters in areas with more reliable supply, and
implementing targeted communication campaigns.
9.      Insufficient wastewater management and poor agricultural practices pose a risk to surface water quality. Over
the past several years, water quality in the Litani River basin has significantly declined. This deterioration is mostly driven
by the discharge of around 40 million cubic meters per year of untreated municipal wastewater from approximately 70
communities,12 but it is further exacerbated by certain agricultural practices. Moreover, as of 2023, over 318,000 Syrian
refugees were registered in the Beqaa Valley,13 often living in informal settlements that lack proper sewage connections
and relying on unsustainable agricultural practices with excessive use of fertilizers. This surge in informal settlements,
coupled with the Government of Lebanon's inability to maintain and operate many of the existing Wastewater Treatment
Plants (WWTPs) in the area,14 has contributed to the deterioration in the water quality of the basin. As a result, and
according to LRA, coliform bacteria levels in the upper basin are 200 times higher than legal limits in the wet season and



10 Alamine. 2022.Water rich and thirsty – Taping Lebanon’s renewable health. Synaps Network. URL
11 Towards a Sustainable Water Sector – Lebanon’s National Water Strategy 2024-2035.
12 Litani River Authority
13   UNHCR. URL
14 As of July 2024, only eight out of the thirteen wastewater treatment plants are working, mostly supported by donor funding.


                                                                                                                                 Page 3
         The World Bank
         Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)


5,000 times higher in summer, while Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) levels exceed legal thresholds by tenfold, and
nitrate and phosphate concentrations are 3 to 5 times higher than permitted.

      (ii) Project Context
10.     The proposed Project is a follow-on operation to the Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (GBWSP, P103063).
In December 2010, the Bank approved this US$200 million investment project (Loan No. 7967) to finance the GBWSP. The
financing plan included US$140 million to be financed by the BMLWE and US$30 million by the GoL. The GBWSP, scheduled
to close in April 2025, aimed to provide an additional 250,000 cubic meters of water per day in the GBML area. Its design
marked the first time water would be sourced from surface water sources, specifically the Awali River, springs, and the
Lake Qaraoun fed by the Litani River. The GBWSP infrastructure includes an inter-basin bulk water conveyance tunnel that
feeds into a gravity-based "source to tap" water supply system to deliver a reliable, year-round supply to the Project area.
The LRA operates all infrastructure along the Litani, including a series of hydropower plants and dams that the bulk water
supply system relies on. 15 A schematic of the proposed inter-basin bulk water supply system is shown in Figure 1 below.
Figure 1. Inter-basin bulk water supply system.




11.     As of November 2024, most activities under the GBWSP have been completed. Key investments funded by the
GBWSP have been finalized, including the excavation of a 24-kilometer bulk water conveyance tunnel, the rehabilitation
of over 400 kilometers of the water supply distribution network in Greater Beirut, and the construction of 23 water
reservoirs with storage capacities ranging from 500 to 1,000 cubic meters. Additional works include network rehabilitation
and the installation of a Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) system. The construction of the water
treatment plant at Wardanieh under a Design-Build-Operate contract is well advanced (78 percent by end-October), but
not completed by the GBWSP's closure due to the effects of the conflict in the Middle East.




15
  Water allocation to Greater Beirut during the dry season is ensured by Presidential Decree No. 14522, issued on May 16, 1970, which allocates 3
cubic meters per second of potable water from Lake Qaraoun to the region from April to October (equivalent to 50 million cubic meters).

                                                                                                                                          Page 4
         The World Bank
         Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)


12.    Although many works have been completed, the devastating series of overlapping crises that Lebanon has
experienced since 2019 have prevented the full implementation of the GBWSP.16 These developments not only threaten
to impede the achievement of the GBWSP’s development objectives but have also increased the need for additional
support within the water sector. Key issues in the Project area arising from Lebanon’s prolonged fragility include:
   (a) The lack of funds from the GoL created a financing gap under the GBWSP. The severe financial crisis in Lebanon
       since 2019, combined with the overall surge in prices, has hindered the Government's capacity to provide its share
       of co-financing for the GBWSP, creating a financing gap that impedes the completion of several activities. These
       activities include the completion of the remaining works of the already excavated bulk water tunnel and the
       construction of the three regional reservoirs originally envisioned under the GBWSP. In addition, the activities
       related to the operation of the SCADA room were discontinued due to frequent power outages and the surge in
       fuel costs, which made it impossible for the BMLWE to maintain the SCADA stations.
   (b) The financial crisis has severely impacted the capacity of the BMLWE, resulting in significant operational
       inefficiencies. In 2020, BMLWE employed 782 people out of an authorized staff strength of 1,120. Since then, the
       workforce has drastically decreased, leading to increased reliance on contractors without full-time contracts,
       leaving the establishment severely understaffed and causing a loss of technical expertise.17 Moreover, frequent
       electricity grid shutdowns and the lack of resources to purchase fuel have further compounded BMLWE’s
       challenges. Under these conditions, BMLWE is in urgent need of modernizing and digitalizing its internal systems
       to improve efficiency in managing assets, monitoring the network, and conducting proper operation and
       maintenance of the infrastructure.
   (c) The deterioration of the water quality in the upper Litani basin will likely impact the operations of the Wardanieh
       WTP. The water quality monitoring plan implemented by BMLWE since 2019 indicates high peaks of ammonia
       during the dry months of the year at the intake of the WTP in Joun reservoir. The concentration of ammonia
       observed during these peaks would impede the plant from treating the raw water to drinking water standards. In
       addition, the water quality monitoring results also show variable levels of Total Organic Carbon (TOC) and Dissolved
       Organic Carbon (DOC), sometimes exceeding the treatable limits. Managing the higher levels of pollution may
       require the installation of a set of add-ons in the plant to enhance the water treatment process. However, the data
       currently available from BMLWE’s monitoring, which relies on monthly sampling, is not sufficient to determine the
       optimal configuration of add-ons, which would require daily monitoring of the raw water quality over an extended
       period of at least 12 months.
   (d) Destruction of infrastructure and disruption of government’s ability to function resulting from an escalation of
       the conflict in the Middle East in Lebanon that started in 2024. This escalation has resulted in the disruption of
       essential services, damages to critical infrastructure, and the displacement of hundreds of thousands of people,
       which are likely to exert additional pressure on the water demand. The works under GBWSP remain suspended,
       affecting the completion of the Wardanieh WTP, and the operations of the BMLWE are severely disrupted, posing
       additional challenges to project implementation.
13.   The proposed Project builds on the ongoing water reform agenda and the progress already achieved under the
GBWSP, while addressing the emerging challenges described above. The proposed Project (hereinafter “the Project” or

16 The influx of Syrian refugees, the financial crisis that started in 2019, the COVID-19 pandemic, the devastating explosion of the Port of Beirut in

August 2020, the food security shock and oil price hike due to the Russia's invasion of Ukraine and, more recently, the conflict in the Middle East.
17 Considering the already prominent gender gap in the BMLWE, the number of women in technical positions is acutely low after the workforce

decrease.

                                                                                                                                               Page 5
         The World Bank
         Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)


“SGBWSP”) will finance the completion of the water supply infrastructure, ensuring the achievement of the objective of
bringing additional water supply to extended areas of GBML. In addition, the Project will support the necessary add-ons
to the Wardanieh WTP to manage increased levels of pollution expected at different times of the year. A schematic of the
supply system and the remaining infrastructure to be completed under the SGBWSP is available in Figure 2. The SGBWSP
will also support institutional strengthening to improve the operational and commercial performance of the BMLWE in
line with the MoEW vision for the recovery of the sector outlined in the NWSS 2024-2035 and the conclusions of analytics
funded by the Bank and other donors.18
Figure 2. Detailed water supply system and status of ongoing works




 II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION
 A. Project Development Objective
 14.    The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve the water supply services in the Greater Beirut and
 Mount Lebanon area.
 B. Theory of Change and PDO Indicators
 15.     Improve the water supply services in the GBML areas. Even though BMLWE’s water distribution network
 covers approximately 90 percent of the households in the GBML area, the utility is able to meet only 24 percent of the
 domestic and non-domestic water demand in the Project area due to insufficient surface water resource availability.
 As a result, households meet their water needs by purchasing expensive water from private suppliers: bottled water for
 drinking, and water from unregulated water tankers that deliver water of unknown quality mostly for other domestic
 purposes. The displacement of people from southern Lebanon to Beirut, driven by the conflict in the Middle East, is

18 Country Climate and Development Report (CCDR), World Bank’s Utility of the Future (UoF) Program: 100-day action plan, and AFD’s Digital

Transformation Roadmap and Action Plan.

                                                                                                                                         Page 6
              The World Bank
              Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)


 expected to further strain BMLWE's capacity to meet the growing demand. The Project seeks to address these
 challenges and improve the water supply services in the GBML area by (i) completing the gravity bulk water
 infrastructure that will transfer additional 250,000m3/day surface water to meet on average 70 percent of the demand
 (Components 1 and 4); (ii) ensure that delivered water quality meets World Health Organization (WHO) drinking water
 standards (Component 2 activities). In addition, these activities will result in a lower reliance on expensive water tankers
 and lower Greenhouse Gases (GHG) emissions. The PDO indicators to measure these two aspects are the following:
          •    PDO indicator 1 (Corporate scorecard indicator): People provided with safely managed water (Number of
               people), target of 1.8 million;
          •    PDO indicator 2: Volume of additional potable water distributed in the Project area meeting WHO drinking
               water quality standards (Cubic meters/year), target of 91 million cubic meters per year.

16.      In addition to the insufficient water supply, the BMLWE faces many persistent challenges that affect its operational
and commercial performance, and its ability to sustain high-quality services. Addressing these issues are at the core of
the MoEW’s water reform agenda towards improving the sustainability of the sector. The BMLWE suffers from high NRW,
mostly due to illegal connections, which affects both the efficiency of the service delivery and its ability to recover
revenues. At the same time, subscription and collection rates are low due to lower willigness to pay for services that are
unreliable, an outdated customer data base, inneficient billing and collection processes, and insufficient communication
with citizens. Further, BMLWE’s operational efficiency is being hindered by an inactive SCADA system and an outdated
fixed asset inventory, that does not allow it to make decisions based on real-time information, as well as a weakened HR
capacity due to a limited permanent staff force. To address these issues and enhance BMLWE’s performance, the Project
will support key activities aligned with the water reform agenda, including: (i) reducing NRW in targeted zones, including
updating its customer database, the installation of macro meters, and household meters where conditions allow; (ii)
improving BMLWE’s Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) infrastructure, particularly digitalizing billing and
collection processes; (iii) improving asset management by updating the fixed asset inventory; (iv) rehabilitating the SCADA
system and enhancing its resilience by installing photovoltaic (PV) systems as alternative energy sources at key stations;
(v) implementing a strategic communication plan to inform the public about BMLWE’s activities and encourage higher
subscription and collection rates; and (vi) establishing an apprenticenship and certification program, with a focus on recent
female graduates or final-year students, to support BMLWE operations and train them in key technical areas. The PDO
indicators to measure the results of these activities are the following:
      •       PDO indicator 3: Non-Revenue Water (NRW) reduction in the Project target zones (Percentage), target
              reduction of 15 percent;
      •       PDO indicator 4: Increased collection rate in the Project area (Percentage), target increase of 10 percent.

17.           The results chain is detailed in Figure 3 below.




                                                                                                                            Page 7
        The World Bank
        Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)


Figure 3. Project’s results chain




                                                               Page 8
          The World Bank
          Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)


C. Project Beneficiaries
18.      The Project’s direct beneficiaries are estimated at 1.8 million people who will benefit from a substantial
improvement in the water supply service. These include the residents in the Beirut Southern Suburbs (Zone A), Damour-
Kfashima (Zone C), and Tallet El Khayat (Zone TA) service areas, who will receive an additional 250,000 cubic meters of
water per day. The additional supply will make it possible to increase the percentage of demand covered during the dry
season from 24 percent to over 70 percent. In addition, around 650,000 residents of the Greater Beirut Area and Coastal
Metn will also benefit from an improved network in the zones for NRW reduction. Additionally, the interventions
envisaged to enhance the operational and commercial efficiency of the BMLWE are expected to benefit all its subscribers
indirectly.
Table 1. Distribution of additional volumes expected from the proposed Project among the zones in the Project area.
                                                           Population          Supply                             Improved
      Service                                                                                Demand met                           Demand met
                         Communities served                 (2035, no.        (Current,                            supply
       Area                                                                                    (Current, %)                          (2035, %)
                                                             people)          m3/day)                              (m3/day)
                  Part of Furn Ech Chebbak (Ain El
 Beirut           Remmeneh), Chiah, Part of Ghobeiry ,
                  Haret Hreik, Borj El Brajneh, Wadi
 Southern
                  Chahrour Oulia, Wadi Chahrour             1,110,818          30,000            10.5%             194,000             78%
 Suburbs          Soufla, Boutchai, Merdechi, Qobbe,
 (Zone A)         Oumara, Ambroussiyeh, Tahwitet EL-
                  Ghadir
                  Qobbe, Oumara, Ambroussiyeh,
 Damour-
                  Kfarshima, Naameh, Damour Upper,
 Kfashima                                                    225,611           14,400             27%              50,400              74%
                  Aramoun Lower, Qobbe, Damour
 (Zone C)         (Lower level).
                  Hamra, Ain El Mraysseh, Sanayeh,
 Tallet el
                  Bachoura (Abdallah Khaled), Centre
 Khayat                                                      322,226           60,224             61%              86,224              72%
                  Ville, Hout, Ras Nabaa, Jnah, Malaab,
 (Zone TA)        Dahye, Spiness, Msaitbe, Tallet.
 TOTAL                                                      1,754,752         104,624             24%              330,624             70%

 D. Project Components

19.    Component 1: Completing remaining bulk water infrastructure (US$148 million total cost, 100% IBRD). This
component will finance investments to complete the remaining bulk water infrastructure started and significantly
advanced under the GBWSP19 to ensure water is conveyed to the existing water supply distribution network serving the
GBML area, including the required construction supervision services for all the works. It will also finance rehabilitation
works of bulk water infrastructure that may have been potentially damaged by the conflict in the Middle East.20 The
component will have the following subcomponents:
      (a) Subcomponent 1.1 – Remaining Tunnel and ancillary works (US$80 million): This subcomponent will finance the
          remaining works to complete the bulk water tunnels started and significantly advanced under the GBWSP. These
          include, among other: (i) the lining of 4 km of the bulk water tunnel conveying raw water from the intake point to
          the Wardanieh WTP; (ii) the lining of 20 km of the bulk water tunnel conveying treated water from the Wardanieh



19 None of the envisaged infrastructure under component 1 poses a risk for deforestation or other decrease in carbon sinks in the long-term.
20
     These will be determined after a damage assessment on the ground is performed, when conditions allow.
                                                                                                                                               Page 9
         The World Bank
         Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)


        WTP to the twin transmission pipelines; (iii) the Joun Regulation Structure (JRS) to control the raw water flow to
        the WTP; (iv) an inverted syphon; and (v) a surge shaft.
   (b) Subcomponent 1.2 – Remaining Pipeline Works (US$18 million):21 This subcomponent will finance the works to
       complete the installation of the twin transmission pipelines conveying the treated water from the end of the bulk
       water tunnel at Khalde to the regional reservoirs. It will include, among other: (i) excavation and installation of
       remaining pipeline (about 1660 m of twin pipes), (ii) hydrostatic testing of newly installed pipelines, (iii)
       construction of piles and thrust blocks and, (iv) final testing and commissioning of the system.
   (c) Subcomponent 1.3 – Regional reservoirs and transmission pipeline (US$50 million): This subcomponent will
       finance the construction of the three regional reservoirs and an interconnecting pipeline. The reservoirs (Hadath
       125, Hadath 90 and Hazmieh 9022) will increase BMLWE’s storage capacity by about 120,000m3, and increase the
       overall resilience and efficiency of the distribution system by allowing the BMLWE to regulate the flow of the
       stream depending on the fluctuations in water demand.23
20.      Component 2: Strengthening treatment processes for improved water quality (US$56 million total cost, 100%
IBRD). This component will finance the completion of the construction works of the original design of the Wardanieh
WTP24 that could not be completed under the GBWSP, and adjustments (add-ons) to the Wardanieh WTP treatment
processes through an adaptive management approach. The adoption of the adaptive management approach aims to
balance the need to find the optimal configuration of add-ons to enhance the resilience of the Wardanieh WTP to variable
raw water quality while maintaining operational costs within the financial capacity of the BMLWE. Following this approach,
the component will finance “no regrets” investments which include, among other: (i) the establishment of daily raw water
quality monitoring and an early warning system, to be installed as soon as the Project becomes effective;25 and, (ii) the
addition of a Powder Activated Carbon (PAC) system including powder storage, feeder, and dosing system. 26 Once water
is available at the Wardanieh WTP (after completion of the raw bulk water tunnel), this subcomponent will finance: (iii)
the operation of the Wardanieh WTP in an adaptative management mode, making it possible to respond to the
fluctuations in raw water quality and the response of the current configuration to different pollution loads, and to identify
and manage potential treatment challenges; and (iv) based on the results of (i) and (iii), the design and installation of the
optimal configuration of add-ons to ensure that the plant’s effluent meets WHO standards throughout the year. This
component will also finance the required construction supervision services for the needed works. In addition, this
component will finance activities to improve water quality management at the BMWLE, including the rehabilitation and
upgrade of BMLWE’s laboratory at the Dbayeh through the expansion of existing facilities and the purchase of sufficient
equipment, laboratory tools and chemicals, and the reinforcement of chlorination practices to ensure residual chlorine in
BMWLE’s distribution network. To address the impact of the potential damages in the distribution network due to the
conflict in the Middle East, including in the Greater Beirut and Mount Lebanon area, this component will also finance

21 The works are contingent on the successful expropriation of 6 plots of land totaling about 1037 square meters.
22 The construction of Hadath 90 and Hazmieh 90 reservoirs requires expropriation of land, covered under the RAP addendum, to be financed by

the Loan Proceeds.
23 The expropriation decree for these reservoirs had already been issued under the GBWSP, however, the process, including compensations, was only

completed for the reservoir Hadath 125 (37,800m3).
24 The Wardanieh Water Treatment Plant is a state-of-the-art facility designed (and currently under implementation) by a reputable international

contractor with expertise in energy-efficient practices and adherence to international best standards.
25 The BMWLE has been carrying out raw water quality monitoring with variable frequency since 2019. Most have been taken once or twice per

month. Since May 2024, the BMLWE has renewed efforts, conducting sampling twice per week when possible. The project will complement these
efforts by bringing the needed financing to establish an accurate water quality baseline based on daily water quality monitoring.
26 The Joun Regulation Structure has been identified as a potential location for the installation of the PAC system. This would allow for at least 2-

hours of contact time for the removal of medium range organic pollutants, and in certain conditions, also of ammonium.

                                                                                                                                            Page 10
         The World Bank
         Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)


repairs and rehabilitation of key infrastructure as needed in the distribution network served by the Wardanieh WTP (area
A and C).
21.      Component 3: Reforms for improved utility operations (US$34 million total cost, 100% IBRD). This component
will finance activities aimed at improving the operational, financial and customer orientation performance of the BMLWE,
in alignment with the vision for the recovery of the sector in Lebanon. These activities are divided in three sub-
components:
   (a) Subcomponent 3.1 - NRW reduction in selected zones (US$24 million): Under this subcomponent, the Project will
       finance NRW reduction interventions, covering both physical and commercial losses, in four zones in the GBML
       area, namely Babdaa Suburbs, Coastal Metn, Tallet EL Khayat and Bourj Abu Hadar. 27 The activities to be financed
       in each zone include: (i) a census to update BMLWE’s customer cadaster, identifying illegal connections and
       reducing commercial losses; (ii) installation of service connections to main distribution branches; (iii) update of the
       hydraulic model in the zone; (iv) establishment of District Metered Areas (DMAs) and macro-metering; (v)
       installation of a minimum of 40,000 household smart meters, and preparatory works for future installation of smart
       meters according to water supply reliability; and (vi) water pressure monitoring, leak detection and network
       rehabilitation interventions, as needed. This subcomponent also includes engineering and construction supervision
       services for the NRW reduction works.
   (b) Subcomponent 3.2 – Digitalization of BMLWE’s operational and commercial management systems (US$8
       million): This subcomponent will include activities to reinforce, upgrade and modernize several processes that are
       key for the BMLWE’s efficient and resilient operation and to enhance the utility’s responsiveness to customers. It
       will include financing for: (i) the reinforcement of BMLWE’s ICT infrastructure; (ii) the reactivation of the SCADA,
       including integration of existing DMAs to the system and interventions to increase its resilience to power outages
       through the installation of solar panels;28 (iii) conducting a fixed asset inventory to be integrated in the BMLWE’s
       Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) software; (v) digitalization of customer management and internal processes,29
       including an update of BMLWE’s customer cadaster in the Project area; and (vi) yearly implementation of the
       BMLWE’s Entity Audit.
   (c) Subcomponent 3.3 – Improved communications (US$2 million): This subcomponent will finance: (i) the
       development and implementation of the BMLWE’s Communications Strategy focused on citizen orientation, aimed
       at helping the BMLWE address complaints, improve customers' willingness to pay, reduce commercial losses, and
       boost subscriptions; and (ii) the implementation of semi-annual public awareness campaigns to raise public and
       stakeholder awareness of BMLWE operations, as well as of critical water-related issues such as water quality, water
       conservation, and reduction of non-revenue water (NRW). Additionally, this subcomponent will focus on capacity
       building for BMLWE to institutionalize a more effective communication framework centered around citizen
       engagement. This will be achieved through various training programs, study tours, and other capacity-building
       initiatives aimed at fostering a citizen-centered water establishment.




27 The NRW interventions are expected to contribute to manage the water demand in these areas.
28 The SCADA system has been working for 4 years before site control cabinets and central supervision had to be progressively deactivated due to

lack of electricity. The situation of the country did not allow for a steady energy supply for the headquarters of BMLWE and water production and
distribution infrastructures.
29 Migration of billing and collection system to the improved BMLWE’s ERP software, integration of ERP data with GIS systems, digitalization of

paper processes, and supporting the digitalization of the call center.

                                                                                                                                          Page 11
         The World Bank
         Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)


22.     Component 4: Land Acquisition and Resettlement Compensation (US$15 million total cost, 100% IBRD): This
component will include land acquisition and resettlement compensation to displaced people for: (i) the reservoirs Hadath
90 and Hazmieh 90 to be constructed under subcomponent 1.3;30 (ii) a section of the twin transmission pipelines under
subcomponent 1.2; (iii) the Joun Regulation Structure (JRS) to control the raw water flow to the WTP under subcomponent
1.1, and (iv) the land for the outflow of the Wardanieh WTP. The implementation of this component will follow the
provisions of the resettlement action plan (RAP) and its addendum.
23.      Component 5: Project management and capacity building (US$4.8 million total cost, 100% IBRD financing). This
subcomponent will finance the operation of the Project Management Units (PMU), further described in section III. It will
also include assistance to ensure MoEW oversight and coordination over Project activities. It will also finance knowledge
exchange activities with other water establishments as well as from international experience. In addition, this component
aims to address gaps in female representation in technical positions through focused training and capacity-building
activities for women, enhancing their skills for technical positions. For this purpose, this component will support an unpaid
apprenticeship program that will target female participants to facilitate exposure to professional opportunities within
BMLWE. The program will not be exclusive to women but will aim to have more than 50 percent of female participation.
The BMLWE will benefit from the work of young and well-trained apprentices, while the new graduates will be certified
on utility-related market-relevant technical skills (like NRW reduction, SCADA management, asset management, etc.) and
gain on-the-job experience that will enhance their competitiveness for work across the water sector. It will also include a
regular assessment of the program and propose measures to strengthen BMLWE’s institutional capacity to sustain such
programs and provide job intermediation support to program graduates beyond its duration. Such measures may include
collaboration with local engineering institutes and associations to launch joint apprenticeships programs based on pre-
identified skills that are in high demand, and/or establish a roster of consultants or experts for future work across the
sector. Trust-funded grant resources are anticipated in addition to the IBRD financing to support the capacity building
actions in this component.
24.      Component 6: Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC). This component will have zero funding
allocation at the onset and will only be triggered in emergency circumstances.
Table 2. Project financing
                                                                                                                          Total Financing
 Project Components
                                                                                                                           (US$ million)
                                                                                                  Financing Source          IBRD 100%
 1      COMPONENT 1: COMPLETING REMAINING BULK WATER INFRASTRUCTURE                                                              148
 1.1       Subcomponent 1.1: Remaining tunnel and ancillaries works (RTW)                                                        80
 1.2       Subcomponent 1.2: Remaining pipeline works (RPW)                                                                      18
 1.3       Subcomponent 1.3: Regional reservoirs and transmission                                                                50
 2      COMPONENT 2: STRENGTHENING TREATMENT PROCESSES FOR IMPROVED WATER QUALITY                                                56
 3      COMPONENT 3: REFORMS FOR IMPROVED UTILITY OPERATIONS                                                                     34
 3.1       Subcomponent 3.1: Non-revenue water reduction                                                                         24
 3.2       Subcomponent 3.2: Digitalization of BMLWE management systems                                                           8
 3.3       Subcomponent 3.3 Improved communications                                                                               2


30 The expropriation decree for the three reservoirs under sub-component 1.3 had already been issued under the GBWSP, however, the process,

including compensations, was only completed for the reservoir Hadath 125 (37,800m3). The expropriation for the other two reservoirs was not
completed as the GoL did not have the funds to cover all expropriation costs due to the country’s financial crisis.

                                                                                                                                       Page 12
       The World Bank
       Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)


 4     COMPONENT 4: LAND ACQUISITION AND RESETTLEMENT COMPENSATION                                             15
 5     COMPONENT 5: PROJECT MANAGEMENT AND CAPACITY BUILDING                                                   4.8
 6     COMPONENT 6: CONTINGENT EMERGENCY RESPONSE COMPONENT                                                     0
                                        TOTAL                                                                 257.8


 E. Role of Partners
25.      The Project is aligned with the ongoing coordinated donors support provided under the GBWSP and in related
endeavors in support of water sector development, and continuous coordination will enhance the synergies across
related interventions. The Project will continue the coordination with development partners, including the Agence
Française de Développement (AFD), the European Union (EU), the Italian Agency for Development and Cooperation (AICS),
GiZ, USAID, the Islamic Development Bank (IsDB), the Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development (AFESD), the UN
agencies, and NGOs. The AICS is assisting the GoL in improving water quality in the upper Litani Basin by financing the
construction of new wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) and a sewage collection network in the Anjar area. The AFESD
has financed wastewater projects in the North and Central Litani Basin (North Beqaa and East Zahle). Similarly, USAID and
the EU are supporting the operation and maintenance of existing WWTPs, which are essential for maintaining water
quality at the intake of the proposed supply system under the Project. Many of the activities planned under component 3
of the Project are in line with these reform actions and build on prior work undertaken by various donors active in the
sector.

 F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design
26.      Previous Bank-financed projects in Lebanon have demonstrated that the implementation environment is
challenging, requiring flexibility to achieve objectives. The high macroeconomic, governance and political risks inherent
to Lebanon can lead to unexpected delays and complications in project implementation. At the same time, perseverance
and creativity and a strong on-the-ground presence in Lebanon are effective in overcoming complex implementation
challenges. For instance, delays were caused by the BMLWE’s inability to cover its share of the costs of the Wardanieh
WTP under the GBWSP, which led the Bank team to propose a reallocation of funds across disbursement categories from
CDR to the BMWLE and a revision of financing parameters to allow for 100 percent financing from IBRD proceeds to ensure
the completion of the WTP. This showcased the importance of strong partnership between implementing agencies. Finally,
the current government-imposed restrictions on international transfers in US$ during the financial crisis led to funds being
held in project Designated Accounts that were unavailable to implementing agencies. The Project addresses these aspects
in its design by: i) ensuring strong government ownership and partnership, including support from the MoEW, BMLWE,
and the CDR, all of whom are involved in the technical implementation of the Project; (ii) the introduction of only three
disbursement categories to allow flexible reallocation of funds based on progress and challenges on the ground; (iii) the
possibility to use direct payments by both implementing partners; (iv) a high level of readiness, with the remaining tunnel
works contract at an advanced stage of procurement; (v) a 7-year implementation period which is realistic given the
challenges of the implementation environment.
27.      Global experience in the water sector shows the need to accompany infrastructure investments with reform
activities to improve water service provision and improve its sustainability. A review of previous Bank-financed projects
in different regions showed that the water sector often suffered from a disconnect between investment in infrastructure
and investment in the efficiency of service provision, leading to an increased risk of substandard and unsustainable service
provision. The design of the Project balances the need to complete much needed infrastructure to bring potable water to
GBML, where the supply is insufficient and the population is growing, with several interventions to improve the

                                                                                                                      Page 13
       The World Bank
       Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)


operational and financial performance of the BMWLE to increase its capacity to maintain these investments in the future.
These reform activities have been prioritized following recommendations from the NWSS 2024-2035.
28.     Experience shows that managing water quality issues affecting water sources requires coordination and actions
on several fronts. Dealing with water quality in the Upper Litani Basin involves several issues including: (i) contamination
coming from agricultural runoff and industrial discharges; (ii) inadequate solid waste and wastewater management leading
to pollution; (iii) limited infrastructure for monitoring and treatment; and (iv) the impacts of climate change on water flow
and quality. Addressing these challenges requires integrated watershed management, stringent regulatory enforcement,
improved agricultural practices, and investment in advanced water treatment technologies. The Project aims to tackle
these issues by ensuring coordination with partners and other Bank projects to prioritize pollution control investments in
the Upper Litani Basin. Additionally, it seeks to build downstream resilience through enhanced water quality monitoring
and optimizing the Wardanieh WTP treatment processes, using an adaptive management approach to handle the inherent
uncertainties in water quality control; and ensuring efficiency in the sector through reducing the non-revenue water.

 III. PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION

 A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
29.     Institutional arrangements. The MoEW will have overall responsibility for executing the Project. The Ministry will
delegate the implementation of Components 1 and 4 to CDR, and the implementation of Components 2 and 3 to BMLWE.
Component 5 will be delegated to both CDR and BMLWE. The MoEW will also facilitate the development and signing of a
Cooperation Agreement between the Litani River Authority and the BMLWE specifying the operational arrangements to
ensure the water allocation to the Wardanieh WTP, including roles and responsibilities of each party, agreed flows to be
allocated, compensation arrangements and mitigation risks in case large scale-irrigation projects come online.
30.      Implementation arrangements. Project implementation will capitalize on the experience developed by the
existing PMU arrangements under the GBWSP. CDR and BMLWE are currently implementing the GBWSP under the
guidance of the MoEW and have developed capacity to implement Bank-financed projects. Both PMUs at CDR and BMLWE
will be headed by a Project Coordinator, and will be responsible for the day-to-day management, procurement
management and monitoring and reporting on the Project. Each PMU will be reinforced to include a procurement officer,
financial management officer and an engineer. Further, both PMUs will share an environmental, health and safety
specialist and a social specialist to follow up on the implementation and monitoring of the environmental and social
requirements. In addition, the BMLWE will include an additional engineer to serve as focal point and coordinator for the
implementation of Component 3 reform activities, and the social specialist will also follow up and coordinate on the
communication and gender activities. The PMUs may also contract specific expertise for Project technical activities if
justified and agreed by the Bank.
31.    The detailed Project implementation arrangements will be described in the Project Operations Manual (POM).
The preparation of a POM acceptable to the Bank will be an effectiveness condition.

 B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation
32.      A Project monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system is integrated into the design of the SGBWSP. The PMUs will
be responsible for: (i) regularly gathering data to monitor the Project's performance indicators and progress toward its
objectives, using input from construction supervision teams; (ii) creating progress reports on civil works and institutional
activities, and promptly identifying any bottlenecks; and (iii) preparing quarterly progress reports. Regarding infrastructure
works, the contractor will be responsible for monitoring and reporting the data on works-specific intermediate indicators


                                                                                                                      Page 14
       The World Bank
       Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)


(such as the kilometers of water pipes constructed, or number of household meters installed, etc). Meanwhile, the
construction supervision firm will be responsible for the verification of the data provided. The PMU engineers, hired under
the PMU, will oversee the data collection, analysis, evaluation, and reporting, working closely with the PMU. These
engineers will compile consolidated monthly reports to track civil works progress and compliance with environmental and
social standards. The social specialist will also closely work with the PMUs on reporting on gender and citizen engagement
issues. The M&E framework will be an integral part of the POM. A detailed review of the Project's implementation will
take place at the midterm review to assess progress, potential for scaling up, and any necessary adjustments.
 C. Disbursement Arrangements
 33.      The proceeds of the Loan will be disbursed in accordance with the Bank's disbursements guidelines for
 projects and as outlined in the Disbursement and Financial Information Letter (DFIL). Transaction based disbursement
 will be used under this Project. The Project will have three Designated Accounts (DAs). DA-A under CDR for category 1,
 DA-B under BMLWE for category 2, and DA-C under CDR for category 3. Advances will be made to the DAs in US$ opened
 at the Central Bank in the name of the Project under CDR and BMLWE. DA-A will have an advance ceiling of
 US$6,150,000 million and DA-B will have an advance ceiling of US$1,500,000, DA-C will have an advance ceiling of
 US$700,000. Disbursement will be made based on Statement of Expenditures (SOE), and the format and content of the
 SOE will be added in the DFIL. Interim financial reports will be used for financial management reporting purposes. It is
 to note that the Lebanese portfolio has a lapsed loan since June 2024 related to the Greater Beirut Transport Project
 (P160224). Because of this, CDR and BMLWE will only be able to open their respective DAs once the lapsed loan is
 settled and provided there are no other lapsed loans. CDR and BMLWE will be able to use the direct payment and
 reimbursement method for all contracts until the lapsed loan is resolved. The loan proceeds will be divided as per the
 following categories of expenditures:
 Table 3. Expenditure categories
                                                             Amount of the Loan             Percentage of Expenditures to be
  Category
                                                             Allocated (expressed in US$)   Financed (inclusive of taxes)
  1) Works, goods, consulting services and non-consulting
  services, training, workshops, and operating costs under           149,855,500                          100%
  component 1 and component 5 (CDR) of the Project
  2) Works, goods, consulting services, non-consulting
  services, training, workshops, and operating costs under
                                                                      92,300,000                          100%
  components 2, 3 and component 5(BMLWE) of the
  Project
  3) Land Acquisition and Resettlement Compensation
                                                                      15,000,000                          100%
  under component 4 of theProject
  Front-End-Fee                                                        644,500
            Total                                                    257,800,000                          100%


 34.      Authorized Signatories. Authorized signatories will be nominated by the CDR and BMLWE to sign the
 Withdrawal Applications (WA). Names and corresponding specimen of their signatures will be submitted to the Bank
 prior to the receipt of the first WA (advance to DA). Each WA will be approved and signed by the authorized signatories.




                                                                                                                        Page 15
         The World Bank
         Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)



 IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY


  A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis

      (i) Technical assessment
35.     The Bank has reviewed and confirmed that the proposed investments continue to reflect government priorities,
are aligned with strategic sector principles, and remain technically sound. The detailed technical and economic
assessment of the infrastructure components carried out at the time of appraisal of the GBWSP are still relevant. The
GBML area continues to suffer from insufficient public water supply, not only during the dry season, but also during the
wet season. Current public water supply meets only 24 percent of the water demand of the population. The Project will
augment the water supply in the GBML area by completing the infrastructure under the GBWSP, enhancing the resilience
of potable water treatment process, and introducing several institutional strengthening activities to improve the
performance of the BMLWE. Moreover, in response to the potential damages caused by the conflict in the Middle East,
the Project includes a provision for conducting repairs of key Project infrastructure based on the results of a damages
assessment to be carried out when the situation allows.
36.      An updated water balance and a review of water allocation arrangements confirmed sufficient water
availability for potable water use. Overall, the water system is fed from four sources of water: Ain Zarqa spring, Jezzine
springs, Lake Qaraoun, and the Awali river. During the wet season (November to March), the system can be fed through
inflows from the four water sources, although the Awali alone can satisfy the demand of the Wardanieh WTP with an
average flow of around 6 cubic meters per second, and the contribution of Lake Qaroun can be reserved for extreme
cases. During the dry season (April to October), inflows from the springs and Lake Qaraoun become essential because the
average flow of the Awali drops to around 1.6 cubic meters per second.31 Also the springs’ water yield and Lake Qaraoun’s
contribution decline in the successive dry months, but the required demand will still be met making use of lake storage
volume to compensate for the lack of water during the three to four late months of the dry season. During the dry season,
sufficient water allocation is ensured though Presidential Decree No. 14522 of May 16, 1970, which allocates 3 cubic
meters per second (or 50 million cubic meters) to potable water use from Lake Qaraoun.
37.      The technical assessment confirmed that an adaptive management approach to mitigate the risks of variable
raw water quality intake at the Wardanieh WTP is the soundest technical and financial solution. A technical assessment
was conducted to evaluate potential configurations of add-ons, along with their associated CAPEX and OPEX costs. This
assessment followed a comprehensive approach, considering upstream conditions, planned water quality interventions,
and the state of the water supply distribution network. The conclusion emphasized the need for an adaptive management
approach to help the BMLWE find the most cost-effective solutions to address water quality uncertainties throughout the
year. The Project includes financing "no regrets" investments, which can be implemented even before water is fully
available. One such investment is the introduction of a PAC system upstream. This would help remove medium-range
organic pollutants like natural organic matter, cyanotoxins, and volatile aromatic compounds, improving treatment
efficiency. Additionally, online raw water quality monitoring would provide daily data on trends and peaks, helping
optimize treatment. The WTP will operate in adaptive mode, utilizing laboratory-scale testing to determine optimal
dosages of PAC, ferric chloride, lime, and polymer under various conditions. Based on these assessments, the best
configuration of add-ons can be designed and installed, while enhanced chlorination practices in the distribution network


31 This flow from the Awali river may be lower depending on the intensity of the dry season. The assessment found a 20% probability of three

successive dry months, 10% probability of four-successive dry months and 5% probability of five successive dry-months.

                                                                                                                                         Page 16
         The World Bank
         Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)


will ensure water quality. This approach enables BMLWE to continuously monitor and adjust strategies in real time,
improving water management resilience.
38.      The design of the Project makes it possible to flexibly operate the system with one, two or three regional
reservoirs, depending on the progress of the land expropriation and compensation process. The original design of the
GBWSP included the construction of the three regional reservoirs to increase the storage capacity available to the BMLWE,
allowing for more efficient operational response to fluctuations in water demand. However, given the financial constraints
of the BMLWE and the incomplete expropriation process of two of the reservoirs (Hazmieh 90 and Hadath 90), the BMLWE
evaluated several scenarios to allow it to operate the system with only the Hadath 125 reservoir for which the
expropriation process has been completed. In case the expropriation process under the Project is lengthy, the BMLWE
would supply certain areas by connecting the transmission pipelines to the Hadath 125 reservoir only, bypassing the two
remaining regional reservoirs. The regulating reservoirs can be built in the future, progressively improving the level of
service in the Project area.
39.      The NRW reduction activities build on lessons learned from the implementation of a NRW reduction pilot under
the GBWSP. The NRW pilot in the Achrafieh area allowed the BMLWE to build its capacity on NRW reduction, while
showing how the implementation of district metered areas (DMAs), improved customer metering and active leakage
control can directly improve the efficiency of its operations. The Project will scale up these interventions, focusing on
BMLWE’s priority areas where NRW is technically feasible due to higher continuity of water supply, and where there is a
high level of commercial losses.32 These include the Baabda suburbs and the Coastal Metn areas, where a comparison of
subscribers, population estimates, and water volumes served suggests a high concentration of illegal connections. The
likely high number of unsubscribed users in these areas makes them a priority for BMLWE, which has already prepared
design documents and draft bidding documents for NRW reduction. Tallet El Khayat and Bourj Abu Haidar, also priority
intervention areas, show a much higher subscription rate. However, given the volume of water consumed, it is likely that
these areas host many large consumers who are subscribed as individual household units. The NRW reduction activities
planned under the Project will address these two distinct forms of commercial losses, ultimately improving BMLWE's
revenue streams and contributing to its financial sustainability.
40.      The proposed BMLWE’s institutional strengthening activities were selected based on the priority sector reform
actions and a gap analysis identified through several comprehensive assessments. All of the proposed institutional
strengthening activities are fully aligned with the sector reform priorities outlined in the NWSS 2024-2035. In addition,
the BMLWE has benefited from the support of the Bank’s Utility of the Future Program. Through the initial participatory
diagnostic, a 100-day action plan was prepared where high-impact activities were identified. Further, the AFD supported
the BMLWE in the development of a comprehensive Digital Transformation Roadmap and Action Plan which identified a
series of high priority actions. The activities under the Project are aligned with the recommendations identified therein.
41.      A Human Resources (HR) survey was conducted at the BMLWE supported by the Bank Equal Aqua platform to
assess gender gaps at the utility and to propose tailored interventions based on the existing gaps and needs. The findings
revealed that while female representation at BMLWE exceeds the MENA average, it is still below the global level. Women
are significantly underrepresented in technical roles, with only 14.3 percent in engineering positions within the BMLWE.
While the utility offers technical training to employees, women aspiring to take up technical roles within the utility are
unable to participate in these trainings due to the current hiring and promotion freeze in the public sector imposed by the
GoL. As such, systematic opportunities for professional development are essential to enhance women’s involvement in
and skill enhancement for future roles within the utility once the freeze is lifted; and across the water sector at large

32 Physical losses are also prevalent, but at a lower proportion.


                                                                                                                   Page 17
        The World Bank
        Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)


including in the private sector, while the freeze is still in place. The Project therefore aims to provide focused training and
capacity-building activities for women, which will enhance their skills and employability for technical positions across the
water sector. Specifically, under Component 5, the Project will facilitate an apprenticeship and certification program in
collaboration with local universities. This one-year apprenticeship program will be available for recent graduates and final-
year students, providing young female graduates from diverse backgrounds with exposure to professional opportunities
within BMLWE. Successful apprentices will receive certifications upon program completion, endorsed by partnering
universities, along with training that enhances their employability. The apprenticeship program is set to recruit 10
apprentices annually for a total of 60 apprentices, ensuring that 50 percent are female. Furthermore, the Project will
strengthen BMLWE's institutional capacity to sustain such programs beyond its duration and will assist in reviewing HR
policies to recommend improvements that promote women's participation in the sector. Proposed Indicator: Number of
female apprentices that receive certifications in water related technical fields.
42.      The Project will have a strong citizen engagement (CE) focus as part of all its components. It will support
implementing agencies to ensure that beneficiary communities within project areas are consulted from the onset and that
all elements of the Project are planned and designed through participatory processes as outlined in the Stakeholder
Engagement Plan (SEP). The CE activities will center around measures that encourage two-way interaction between
citizens and service providers. While improving existing communications and outreach downwards towards citizens and
water-users is certainly important, the Project will also consider avenues in which citizens are able to channel their voice
upwards and become directly involved in decisions related to the provision of services. These include participatory
planning, decision-making, appraisal and M&E, consultations, and grievance redressal mechanisms. In addition, the
Project will put in place meaningful consultation and feedback mechanisms, such as satisfaction surveys and a Grievance
Redress Mechanism (GRM) on water supply service provision, that will be elaborated as part of preparation in the SEP.
The Project will communicate widely and repeatedly on the Project and its potential impacts’, on how to access and use
the GRM, and will continuously monitor its effectiveness. The Project will aim to institutionalize feedback mechanism as
part of strengthening customer responsiveness of targeted utilities. Moreover, the Project will tailor various
communication and other materials to the local needs as per the activities foreseen under sub-component 3.3 and will
utilize digitalization efforts under component 3.2 to ensure a more responsive utility to citizen’s needs. Proposed
indicators: (i) Number of semi-annual public awareness campaigns conducted; and (ii) Percentage of resolved cases
through the digitalized call center.
     (ii) Paris Alignment
43.      The Project will contribute to the goals of the Paris Agreement on both mitigation and adaptation. All the
activities under the Project subcomponents are within the Detailed Universally Aligned List of Activities (UAL). The climate
change mitigation activities under the Project include all interventions in Components 1 and 2, which will finance the
completion of a gravity-fed bulk water supply system. This new system will replace water tankers with public distribution
networks and reduce reliance on groundwater pumping by using gravity-fed surface water. Additionally, the activities
under Subcomponent 3.1, which aim to reduce Non-Revenue Water (NRW) by 15 percentage points, will also help mitigate
GHG emissions by decreasing the volume of water that is pumped and transported but lost before reaching consumers.
As a result, the Project is expected to directly reduce net annual GHG emissions by 5,656 tCO2 equivalent per year, or
141,412 tCO2 equivalent over the economic life of the Project.
44.     The Project is also expected to enhance Lebanon’s adaptive capacity to climate shocks, such as droughts and
floods, by increasing the resilience and reliability of the water supply. The additional water volumes supplied to the
Greater Beirut Area year-round will significantly improve its resilience to drought and the seasonal precipitation variability
exacerbated by climate change. Moreover, efforts to reduce commercial losses under Subcomponents 3.1 and 3.2 will
                                                                                                                       Page 18
         The World Bank
         Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)


positively impact demand management. These will be complemented by public awareness campaigns under
Subcomponent 3.3, which will focus on conventional and non-conventional water sources, water conservation, and water
quality standards.
45.    Relevant climate risks in Lebanon that are likely to impact the delivery of activities under this Project include
extreme heat, water scarcity, and river floods. All infrastructure financed by the Project will incorporate design measures
to ensure resilience to climate shocks, particularly floods, extreme temperatures, and droughts, building on the design
elements outlined in the Resilient Water Infrastructure Design Brief.
     (iii) Economic and Financial Analysis
46.     Economic Analysis. The economic analysis compares estimated economic benefits of the Project with its economic
costs. Net benefits and costs were estimated over the period 2025-2049. The cost-benefit approach was used to evaluate
the benefits of the Project and the analysis is based on the following main assumptions:
      • The Net Present Value (NPV) is calculated with a discount rate of 6 percent and with a 25-year horizon. 33
      • Water tariffs will increase to 178 US$/yr from the current 147 US$/yr to cover the additional operational costs
      associated with the Project.
      • Subscribers will increase by 35,100 which is 157,950 individuals as a result of improved service and NRW reduction
      activities.
      • The shadow price of carbon was included in the economic analysis consistent with the Projection in the Bank’s
      Guidance Note on Shadow Price of Carbon in Economic Analysis (2017).
      • Costs and benefits are expressed in constant prices as of 2024 and are exclusive of taxes.
47.      Conceptual approach. The economic benefits were evaluated by comparing “with Project” and “without Project”
scenarios and their impacts on the revenues and costs of water supply in the country. The deterioration of the water
quality in the upper Litani basin and the financing gap under the GBWSP create the scenario in which the SGBWSP is
needed to finance the completion of the water supply infrastructure. With this in mind, the economic analysis considers
the economic costs and benefits associated with the Wardanieh WTP under both the GBWSP and the SGBWSP as the
majority of the overall works were completed under GBWSP without Wardanieh WTP becoming operational while the
benefits can only be realized upon completion of the Wardanieh WTP under SGBWSP.
48.     Economic benefits of the SGBWSP. The main economic benefits include: (a) increased consumer surplus through
a reduced reliance on water tankers; (b) increased water revenues as a result of additional water supplied by the Project;
(c) reduced GHG emissions as a result of reduced reliance on water tankers; and (d) increased revenues as a result of NRW
reductions.
49.      Conceptual approach to evaluation of economic benefits. Currently, the water supply by BMLWE meets only 24
percent of the demand in the Project area. Consumers meet the balance of their need for water primarily from private
water tankers, at an exorbitant cost. Estimates of the cost of water from tankers range from US$4/m3 to US$6/m3 while
BMLWE charges US$0.5/m3 for water supplied by piped connection. The Wardanieh WTP has the capacity to deliver
250,000m3 per day which translates into 91 MCM per year before losses. Current estimates of NRW are 40 percent
meaning that the Wardanieh WTP will deliver at least approximately 60 MCM of water annually (more if loss-reduction
efforts are successful). This increased supply is expected to displace the reliance on expensive tanker water, especially in
the dry season when the hours of water supplied by BLMWE are lowest. The substitution of expensive tanker water for

33 Estimated as two times the real per capital long-term GDP growth consistent with the World Bank Guidance on Discounting Costs and Benefits in

Economic Analysis of World Bank Projects (May 9, 2016).

                                                                                                                                        Page 19
        The World Bank
        Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)


cheaper water supplied by BLMWE will result in a significant consumer surplus for subscribers. A reduction in water
tankers will reduce overall GHG emissions reductions as tankers rely on diesel. Given the current levels of operational
efficiency, the Project is expected to strengthen the water sector’s financial sustainability in the long term due to increased
water sales and a reduction in commercial losses. More details are provided in the Project files.
50.     Other Benefits. In addition to direct economic benefits, many other potential benefits are not counted in the cost-
benefit analysis because they are difficult to estimate due to data limitations or because it is challenging to quantify their
value because they might not be financial or economic in nature. Specifically, the analysis does not account for the
potential impact of improved water and sanitation services on reducing morbidity and mortality from waterborne
diseases, as there is insufficient information about the quality of water from tankers. The shift in consumption of water
from water tankers with unregulated water quality to water provided by BMLWE is expected to reduce morbidity and
mortality for consumers in the Project area, reducing public health costs and resulting in a positive public health benefit.
This gap affects the ability to assess the full benefits of moving from water of unknown quality to safe drinking water.
51.     Economic costs. The main capital costs include: (a) bulk water infrastructure under GBWSP and SGBWSP including
tunnels, pipelines, and regional reservoirs; (b) completion of Wardanieh WTP under GBWSP and SGBWSP; and (c)
investments in NRW reduction. In addition to the capital costs, the costs associated with operating the Wardanieh WTP
and supply network are considered along with the cost of purchasing bulk water from the LRA for treatment at the
Wardanieh WTP.
52.      Wardanieh WTP design options. The raw water quality that will feed into the Wardanieh WTP is variable, thus
add-ons to the WTP design to enhance its capacity to treat the raw water to the drinking water quality standards will likely
be needed. In order to improve the data needed to make a decision on the optimal design of the add-ons, an adaptive
management approach is proposed which includes the financing of “no regrets” investments that can be implemented
immediately. These include the implementation of an online raw water quality monitoring system and early warning
system upstream of the WTP which will allow for the collection of data, and delivery of water if it meets the drinking water
quality standards. It is expected that the plant will be operated for two years in adaptive mode, allowing for Laboratory-
Scale Testing, and based on the results of the raw water quality monitoring optimal add-ons configuration can be designed
and installed.
53.      Scenario Costs. Under all scenarios the purchase of bulk water from the LRA, and the costs associated with the
Wardanieh WTP realized under GBWSP are included. The “no regrets” investments have an additional capital expenditure
of US$3 million while the operational costs are US$1 million annually and are captured under the “Adaptive Management,
no add-ons necessary” scenario. Under this scenario, the two years of testing during operation of the plant would confirm
that raw water can be treated by the current design with the “no regrets” investments with minimal downtime. The
“Adaptive Management, add-ons necessary” scenario is the case in which the raw water quality is confirmed by two years
of testing to be above the capacity of the current design to treat raw water to the drinking water quality standards meaning
add-ons would be necessary to ensure the plant can operate with minimal downtime.
54.     Contingency. Given that the optimal design of add-ons will be known only once daily raw water quality monitoring
data are available, as well as after the current WTP processes are tested, a contingency for the needed investments was
estimated. The contingency is estimated as the capital expenditure associated with keeping operating costs of the WTP
equal or above the estimated revenues generated by the sale of the treated water. The contingency is US$25 million based
on operating costs of US$11.5 million per year.
   (a) Results. A cost benefit analysis was carried out with costs estimated at economic prices. The economic analysis of
       the adaptive management plan yielded a positive economic NPV of US$781 million and ERR of 15.4 percent under

                                                                                                                       Page 20
           The World Bank
           Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)


          the add-ons necessary scenario. In the case where add-ons are not deemed necessary after two years of operating
          the plant the economic NPV is US$992 million with an ERR of 20.0 percent. All the alternatives considered yielded
          positive economic returns though some alternatives had much larger financial implications. Consumer surplus in
          the form of additional water supplied by BMLWE displacing expensive tanker water that households currently rely
          on is the largest benefit of the Project and is the key driver of the positive economic return.
Table 4. Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and Net Present Value (NPV)
 Scenario                                                          ERR (%)                             NPV @ 6% (US$, millions)
 Adaptive Management, no add-ons necessary                                                     20.0                                   992
 Adaptive Management, add-ons necessary                                                        15.4                                   781

55.      Sensitivity analysis. The multi-pronged crisis that began in 2019 erased 15 years of economic growth, leading to
the severe devaluation of the Lebanese pound and the strong political crisis since October 2022. The conflict in the Middle
East has worsened the situation, raising the risk of prolonged economic instability. Due to the increased risk of inflation
and further devaluations of the Lebanese pound, a sensitivity analysis of the discount rate was completed to understand
the potential effect on the Project. A sensitivity analysis of the discount rate, increased to 15 percent to account for
inflation and low economic growth, showed a significant reduction in Project benefits, though both scenarios still return
positive economic outcomes.
56.     A GHG analysis was carried out on the Project’s emissions reduction due to the reduction in water tankers. The
reduction in water tanker usage will lead to reductions in GHG emissions of 5,656 tCO2 equivalent (tCO2e) per year, or
141,412 tCO2e. over the economic life of the Project. The NPV of the Project includes US$7.3-US$14.7M from GHG
emissions avoided using the recommended high and low values for the shadow price of carbon (see annex 3).
57.     Conceptual approach to financial analysis. The financial impact of Project activities is assessed by the Financial
NPV derived from the economic cost benefit analysis to conclude whether the Project is financially sustainable. In order
for the Project to be financially sustainable revenues and cost savings must exceed capital expenditures and operations
and maintenance costs. Financial calculations consider the financial revenues and costs in the with/without project
scenarios from the economic analysis, excluding non-cash generating benefits (consumer surplus, GHG emissions).
58.      Financial benefits. The financial benefits the Project were measured in financial terms as the increase of revenue
for BMWLE. Additional revenues are expected to be generated through increased water sales equal to the capacity of the
Wardanieh WTP minus NRW, and the increase in water sales through the reduction in commercial and physical losses as
a result of the Project. Consistent with the economic analysis, BMLWE is expected to increase the tariff to account for
increased system wide O&M costs and the purchase of bulk water from LRA. The tariff is expected to increase to 178
US$/yr (equivalent to US$0.49/m3) from the current 165 US$/yr (equivalent to US$0.45/m3) for 1 m3 of water per day.34
Additional revenues were then compared against the additional O&M costs as a result of the Project to determine the
cost recovery level. Values above 100 indicate that yearly additional revenues exceed the additional yearly O&M costs.
Table 5. Cost Recovery and Net Present Value (NPV)
 Scenario                                                           Cost Recovery (%)                   NPV @ 6% (US$, millions)
 Adaptive Management, no add-ons necessary                                                       217                                  -423
 Adaptive Management, add-ons necessary                                                          100                                  -504




34
     The tariff is expressed US$/yr as volumetric billing is not possible due to the low service and lack of meters at the household level.
                                                                                                                                    Page 21
       The World Bank
       Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)


59.      Results. The financial analysis of the adaptive management plan yielded a negative financial NPV of US$-423
million and with a cost recovery ratio of 217 percent under the no add-ons necessary scenario. In the case where add-ons
are deemed necessary after two years of operating the plant the financial NPV is US$-504 million with a cost recovery
ratio of 100 percent. The increase in revenues is expected to be larger than the increase in operating costs but are not
expected to recoup the capital expenditures of the Project as shown by the cost recovery ratios.
60.     Financial Viability. The Project's financial viability depends on the financial health of BMLWE. To address this, the
MoEW has launched an ambitious reform plan aimed at improving the financial and commercial framework of the water
sector, with the goal of achieving equilibrium and financial recovery. The reforms focus on increasing subscribers,
improving collection rates, and raising average tariffs to recover all operating costs for water and wastewater by 2028. To
achieve these goals, tariffs are expected to increase starting in 2025 to recover all O&M costs. While these reforms will
not be enough to recoup the capital costs of the Project, they are important in ensuring the financial viability of BMLWE.
Despite the challenges, the Project supports BMLWE in implementing these reforms, particularly through Component 3,
which strengthens its capacity and increases the likelihood of success.

 B. Fiduciary

     (i) Financial Management
61.     Financial Management (FM) Risk. The Bank financial management team assessed the two implementing agencies
and the FM risk, part of the fiduciary risk, is rated as High. Refer to “Section V. Risks” for detailed description.
62.     Budgeting. A yearly Project budget and disbursement plan will be developed by each agency to include their part
of the Project. CDR will send the budget to the BMLWE, and the latter will consolidate the budget plan and will submit it
to the Bank by no later December 20 of each year. The consolidated budget plan will be in line with the procurement plan
and implementing schedule. Any significant variation in the budget will be justified.
63.     Accounting and Reporting. CDR has an accounting software for Bank-supported projects. BMLWE has an ERP
system which is agency-specific and does not comply with Bank requirements. The system will be customized to include a
separate module to record the project transactions and produce the periodical financial reports. The Project will produce
quarterly interim unaudited financial reports (IFRs) and annual project financial statements in compliance with
International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) cash basis of accounting to be submitted by each agency. The
quarterly IFRs will be submitted by each agency to the Bank within 45 days after the end of the concerned quarter.
64.     Internal Controls. CDR has adequate internal controls in place for preparation and approval of transactions and
segregation of duties related to Bank-supported projects. BMLWE has internal bylaws governing internal controls. The
Project will be implemented by BMLWE separately based on Bank rules and regulations. These will be detailed in the POM.
The POM will be prepared with inputs from both BMLWE and CDR and will be submitted to the Bank by effectiveness. The
POM will include a detailed FM chapter.
65.     Flow of Funds. The funds will be transferred from the Bank to the DA in USD opened under each agency at the
Central Bank in the name of the Project. Each entity will use the funds to pay for eligible expenditures under the Project.
The direct payment method will be available for both entities to use. Advances to DA will only be available for use once
the lapsed loan is resolved. For the expropriation category, payments can be made from the DA or alternatively, CDR
could open an Operational Account in local currency to deposit the funds from the DA to pay the beneficiaries under terms
to be further confirmed and acceptable to the Bank. Based on actual payment made to the Project Affected Persons
(PAPs), CDR will submit payment receipts confirming that the PAPs have received the funds to the Bank, which will then
replenish or transfer funds for the next batch of PAPs. If payments are not made within the agreed timeline, amounts
                                                                                                                     Page 22
        The World Bank
        Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)


must be refunded to the Bank or repurposed for other PAPs that have not yet claimed their compensation. Funds remain
available at the Bank throughout Project implementation for all notified PAPs. In the case of outstanding compensations
for the resettlement at Project Closing Date, any remaining funds which have not yet been claimed by PAPs shall be
refunded to the Bank.
66.     External Audit. An external auditor acceptable to the Bank will be hired by BMLWE and CDR each to audit their
part of the Project financial statements. The audit will be carried out in accordance with International Standards on
Auditing. The audit report and PFSs, along with the management letter for each agency, will be submitted to the Bank no
later than six months after the end of each fiscal year. The external auditor is expected to be recruited by each agency
within three months of Project effectiveness. The Project will also include the entity audit of the BMLWE which will be
required on a yearly basis. The entity audit will need to be submitted within 9 months after the end of each fiscal year.
     (ii) Procurement
67.     Procurement Risk Rating. The procurement risk rating is high due to several contributing factors that create a
challenging environment. Refer to “Section V. Risks” for detailed description.
68.      Applicable Procurement Regulations. Procurement will be carried out in accordance with the Bank Procurement
Regulations for Investment Project Financing Borrowers dated September 2023 or whichever is the latest available version
(Procurement Regulations). The provisions of the Borrower’s Procurement Plan for the Project (Procurement Plan)
provided for under Section IV of the Procurement Regulations will apply, as the same may be updated from time to time
in agreement with the Bank. The Borrower will also ensure that the Project is carried out in accordance with the provisions
of the ‘Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and Corruption in Projects Financed by IBRD Loans and IDA Credits
and Grants’, dated October 15, 2006, and revised in January 2011 and as of July 1, 2016 (Anti‐Corruption Guidelines). In
addition, the Project will require bidders/primary suppliers of solar PV panels (and other material, as applicable) to provide
two declarations: a Forced Labor Performance Declaration (which covers past performance), and a Forced Labor
Declaration (which covers future commitments to prevent, monitor and report on any forced labor, cascading the
requirements to their own sub-contractors and suppliers). The Borrower will include enhanced language on forced labor
in the procurement contracts as per Bank’s Standard Procurement Documents.
69.     Key Procurement under the Project. The main contracts planned for financing by the Project include those for
the bulk water infrastructure. The procurement process of the RTW is at an advanced stage of procurement. The ongoing
contracts for the RPW and the Wardanieh WTP, financed under the current GBWSP, are progressing at an advanced rate.
Draft bidding documents for the three regional reservoirs have been prepared and are being updated by the CDR. Other
works contracts, consultancy services, and information systems are also expected to be financed by the Project.
70.    Project Procurement Strategy for Development (PPSD) and Procurement Plan (PP). The procurement strategy is
aimed to broaden the social and employment benefits of the Project while ensuring the quality of the Project’s execution.
The Borrower has developed a draft PPSD and draft PP that will be updated as needed during Project’s implementation.
Both documents will be uploaded in the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP).35 Any contract not
uploaded in STEP, with award notification not being uploaded prior to signing of contracts, will not be eligible for financing.
71.      Procurement Capacity Assessment. Based on the findings of the assessment, the following measures will be in
place: (i) the Project will follow the Bank procurement regulations including complaints mechanism and settlement of
disputes, and will use the Bank Standard Procurement Documents (SPDs); (ii) both implementing agencies, CDR and

35
  STEP is the Bank’s online procurement planning and tracking tool to prepare, clear, and update Procurement Plans and conduct
procurement transactions as referred to in Section V, article 5.9 of the Procurement Regulations.
                                                                                                                         Page 23
       The World Bank
       Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)


BMLWE have established a PMU headed by a project manager under the GBWSP, and both will continue in each
implementing entity, while the PMU team is composed of experienced staff and hired consultants; (iii) the advertisement
and contracting conditions must ensure regional and international market outreach; and (iv) both agencies will expedite
the internal administrative processes. Additionally, the Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS) might be
extended to the Borrower upon their request, pursuant to the Procurement Policy and Procurement Directive. The Bank
may extend its support to assist the Borrower to deliver effective procurement processes going beyond the regular
implementation support, in situations of capacity constraints.
72.      Advance procurement. To speed up the implementation, advance procurement process may be used. These
activities include (a) preparation of ToRs, (b) Preparation of expression of interest, (c) identification of qualified
consultants, and (d) launching bidding when applicable up to award of contracts.

 C. Environmental, Social and Legal Operational Policies

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalpolicy#doctemplate
 Legal Operational Policies                                                            Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                           No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                     No




73.      According to the “Technical Note for Screening and Risk Classification” under Action 5 of the ESF streamlining
(date d March 2024), the current contextual situation related to conflict and insecurity in the country involves primarily
political and governance risks which are covered under the Project SORT ratings and therefore will not be duplicated under
the ESRC. Importantly, no works will commence until the conflict has ended and sites are safe for contractors and workers
to resume works. These contextual risks are not foreseen to exacerbate the Project’s E&S risks and impacts and will not
affect the delivery of the E&S mitigation measures and overall E&S performance.

74.      The activities of the proposed Project may result in substantial environmental risks associated with construction
and operations activities. Although construction risks are significant in nature, they are limited to the construction sites,
are temporary and can be avoided or mitigated with proper implementation of Environmental, Health and Safety (EHS)
mitigation measures following the risk management hierarchy, and with strong ESHS site monitoring and supervision.
Operational ESHS risks are mainly associated with the construction of the Wardanieh WTP and potentially the add-ons
(depending on what is decided following the adaptive management approach described above), remaining tunnel works,
remaining pipeline works and the regional reservoirs. During operation, key risks include upstream water shortage
associated with abstraction of large quantities of fresh water from Joun reservoir, handling and disposal of sludge, use
and storage of chemicals, and exposure of operators to fugitive chemicals, air emissions and noise. Accidents or abnormal
operational conditions may pose significant environmental and health and safety risks to workers and the public. Such
risks are substantial yet can be managed by proper design, good operational practices including continuous monitoring,
operational arrangements for ensuring a yearly water allocation of 3 cubic meters per second to the Wardanieh WTP
without affecting upstream uses, adherence to EHS requirements and preparation and implementation of emergency
response plans. Due to the conflict in the Middle East, there is an exacerbated risk of presence of unexploded ordnance
(UXOs) nearby worksites. Before commencement of any civil works, all worksites should be inspected by a competent
                                                                                                                     Page 24
       The World Bank
       Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)


agency for presence of UXOs and ensuring their removal (if any). The worksites should be officially declared free of UXOs
and safe working conditions should be assured before allowing Project workers to go to/from the worksites.

75.      The social risks and impacts associated with the construction and operation phases are moderate. This is due to
the temporary, predictable and/or reversible nature of these impacts, the limited degree of social conflict, harm or risks
to human security, the medium probability of serious adverse effects to human worker or community health and safety,
and because the Project activities are medium in magnitude and/or in spatial extent. The risk of Sexual Exploitation and
Abuse/Sexual Harassment (SEA/SH) associated with labor influx is expected to be low as workers are recommended to be
hired from surrounding local communities and will have close supervision oversight, similar to the arrangement under the
first GBWSP. Moreover, no SEA/SH cases were reported and/or registered during the GWBSP implementation. The
potential risk of ineffective communication and consultation with affected communities will be addressed through
inclusive stakeholder engagement throughout the Project cycle. Temporary traffic disruptions and nuisances are
anticipated during remaining tunnel and pipeline works which will be well communicated to affected communities and
stakeholders and via the establishment and operationalization of a robust and widely disseminated Project grievance.
Furthermore, it is not foreseen that contractors will need special security arrangements due to the current situation other
than a potential increase in the number of unarmed security guards at the Project sites while noting that no works will be
resumed until the conflict in the Middle East in Lebanon has ended and sites are safe for contractors and workers to
return. Additional plots which will be expropriated under the SGBWSP using counterpart funds will be monitored in line
with ESS5 principles and the RAP Addendum which has been prepared and disclosed on the client’s website at project
appraisal.

76.     The Project will be implemented under the ESF where the following ESS apply: ESS1, ESS2, ESS3, ESS4, ESS5,
ESS6 and ESS10. As such, the PMUs of CDR and BMLWE conducted an ESF Gap Assessment of the existing ESIA and
prepared an ESIA Addendum which determined the E&S management plans necessary to meet the applicable ESF
requirements. The PMUs, with the support of a qualified environmental and social consultancy firm have prepared,
consulted and disclosed the ESIA Addendum, Stakeholders Engagement Plan (SEP), Environmental and Social Commitment
Plan (ESCP), the Labor Management Procedures (LMP) and RAP Addendum in October 2024.
77.      The Project will rely on the performance of existing dams. As part of the E&S assessment, it was determined that
the Project will be relying on the performance of Qaraoun Dam and Joun Reservoir Dam. The Project requires the Lake
Qaraoun Dam to be assessed by a Dam Safety Panel of Experts (DSPOE) to be availed by the BMLWE. If applicable and to
the extent possible, the Project will use the same DSPOE as the Lebanon Renewable Energy and System Reinforcement
Project (Loan No. IBRD 9731-LB) recently approved by the Board but not yet effective.36. A Tier 1 dam safety assessment
was conducted for these dams. This assessment included independent dam safety inspection and assessment as per
requirements of the World Bank’s ESF. It included review of dam safety inspection and period safety review report; review
of available design reports; review of recent O&M records and instrumentation monitoring; review of criteria and
methodology for estimation of the design flood, flood routing, etc. to determine spillway sizing, field inspection, and other.
Sufficient financial resources and expertise were secured to conduct Tier 2 assessment for Joun Reservoir Dam and
implement the outcomes and interventions of all dams. The SGBWSP PMUs will have close coordination with LRA to ensure
that the information on the progress in implementation of the relevant dam safety measures are shared and will ensure
participation in relevant technical meetings as needed.

36
  Lebanon Renewable Energy and System Reinforcement Project (P180501) – PAD:
https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/099091124181525582/pdf/BOSIB1c260299b0c71a0c11b95eb42d17a7.pdf
                                                                                                                      Page 25
       The World Bank
       Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)


78.      Both PMUs have strong familiarity with the Bank’s safeguard policies and limited familiarity with the ESF. During
Project implementation, both PMUs will need to strengthen their E&S monitoring, supervision and reporting capacity.
Therefore, E&S site supervision will be conducted as part of the engineering supervision contracts with clear scope on the
E&S supervision requirements and dedication of key personnel to carry out E&S site supervision. Additionally, before
commencement of Project activities, both PMUs will hire E&S specialists to have the overall Project oversight of
satisfactory implementation of the ESCP provisions, provide updates as needed in the quarterly progress reports and
ensure satisfactory operation and monitoring of the Project grievance mechanism. Additionally, the HEIS might be
extended to the implementation entities upon request, pursuant to the ESF streamlining Action 4. The Bank may extend
its support to the Borrower to meet the relevant E&S standards, beyond the regular implementation support, in situations
of capacity constraints.
79.     Grievance Redress. Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a project
supported by the World Bank may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance mechanisms or the Bank’s
Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to address
project-related concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the Bank’s
independent Accountability Mechanism (AM). The AM houses the Inspection Panel, which determines whether harm
occurred, or could occur, as a result of Bank non-compliance with its policies and procedures, and the Dispute Resolution
Service, which provides communities and borrowers with the opportunity to address complaints through dispute
resolution. Complaints may be submitted to the AM at any time after concerns have been brought directly to the attention
of Bank Management and after Management has been given an opportunity to respond. For information on how to submit
complaints to the Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS), visit http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For information on how
to submit complaints to the Bank’s Accountability Mechanism, visit https://accountability.worldbank.org.


 V. KEY RISKS

80.     The overall Project risk is High.
81.      Political and Governance risk (High). Since the escalation in Lebanon of the conflict in the Middle East in 2024,
the implementation pace of the country portfolio has been impacted. Notwithstanding the conflict in the Middle East, the
World Bank is committed to remaining engaged in Lebanon and continuing its support to the Lebanese people and
government. Further, the high governance and political risks have been inherent to Lebanon due to the fragmented
governance system and related political uncertainty. Since October 30, 2022, Lebanon’s Parliament has not selected a
new President, and the current Government continues to serve in caretaker capacity. The protracted financial and
economic crisis has impacted the implementation of the ongoing GBWSP in the past, causing implementation delays due
to the Government’s inability to finance the contracts, constraints in processing and financing land expropriation, and
delays in procurement caused by challenges in securing the funds. Considering the conflict in the Middle East, the signing
of the Loan Agreement (upon approval by the Bank) and Parliamentary ratification may be delayed, thereby impacting
Project implementation. However, the Project has strong government ownership, including from the MoEW, BMLWE, and
CDR, which will be involved in the technical implementation of the Project and have demonstrated a strong commitment
to completing the GBWSP. Mitigation measures include close follow-up with Government and continued dialogue with
the Borrower at every level, and planning the Project implementation timing to account for a potential prolonged period
between approval and effectiveness.



                                                                                                                  Page 26
82.      Macroeconomic risks (High). Lebanon's macroeconomic risks remain high due to the conflict in the Middle East
and the prolonged economic and financial crisis. Since 2019, the country has experienced a severe economic contraction
of nearly 35 percent, erasing 15 years of growth. The Lebanese pound has lost over 98 percent of its value, leading to
triple-digit inflation through 2023. The banking system's collapse has resulted in a dollarized cash-based economy,
estimated at US$9.81 billion or 45.7 percent of GDP in 2022. The conflict has further shocked the economy, with negative
impacts on growth continuing into 2024. Project implementation is hindered by rising construction costs, reducing bidder
interest and increasing public procurement risks. However, since July 2023, the Lebanese pound stabilized at 89,500
LBP/US$, slowing inflation. By 2024, inflation dropped to double digits for the first time since March 2020. Despite this,
inflation surges remain a risk due to the conflict in the Middle East. To mitigate cost increases, contingencies are included
in major contracts, which are denominated in U.S. dollars or euros to manage currency crisis effects.
83.     Technical Design of Project (Substantial). The design of the Project is appraised as fundamentally sound, with a
gravity-based supply system that avoids the high energy costs of pumping and adds to the overall sustainability of the
Project’s design. The feasibility of constructing Hadath 90 and Hazmieh 90 reservoirs depends on the successful
expropriation of the land, which proved challenging in previous operations in the water sector in Lebanon; the
disbursement condition related to adoption of an acceptable compensation payment mechanism to be further detailed
in the POM aims to mitigate this risk. Another risk is that monthly monitoring of the water quality at the intake at Joun
reservoir indicates high peaks of ammonia during the dry season beyond the current planned treatment capacity of the
plant. The Project proposes the design and construction of a set of add-ons to increase the plant’s capacity to cope with
the increased levels of pollution, with daily monitoring of the raw water quality at Joun reservoir and operation of the
plant in adaptative management mode for a period of at least twelve months. However, there is a risk that the daily
monitoring of the water quality will show higher levels of pollution than expected, requiring a higher level of investment
to ensure adequate treatment capacity. The main mitigation measures to address these risks include: (i) the design of the
supply system allowing for its operation on one, two or three regional reservoirs; (ii) an adequate provision of funds for
adjustments in the treatment, allowing for flexibility in the design; (iii) daily monitoring of the raw water quality; (iv)
coordination with other stakeholders (mainly LRA and other IFIs in Lebanon) and other World Bank operations that are
aiming to reduce the pollution at source.
84.      Institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability is High. The PMUs in BMLWE and CDR have extensive
experience with large-scale World Bank projects. However, the current challenging context has significantly impacted both
agencies, as they must allocate their limited human and financial resources to respond to the emergency situation and
maintain service continuity. If the crisis continues throughout the Project’s implementation, it could severely threaten the
institutional capacity of both agencies, further straining their limited resources and reducing their ability to absorb Project
demands effectively. The main mitigation measures for this risk include: (i) reinforcing both PMUs with adequate staff,
such as adding an additional engineer to the BMLWE PMU; (ii) continuous capacity building and engagement of BMLWE
staff through Project activities; and (iii) ongoing support and supervision from the World Bank.
85.      Fiduciary risk is High due to high procurement and substantial FM risks. The procurement risk rating is high due
to several contributing factors: (i) the overall situation combined with broader macroeconomic risks, creates a challenging
environment; (ii) limited availability of civil servants due to the economic situation resulting in a general decline in public
service delivery; (iii) deterioration of the local currency; (iv) lengthy procurement transactions add to the lack of
confidence in the public sector; (v) dysfunctional banking sector and limited access to guarantees or loans for liquidity, if
needed, cause significant challenges to contractors. The risk is heightened in three ongoing contracts for the current
GBWSP which are expected to be financed by the Project. The government is unable to finance two ongoing contracts -
the RPW and the Wardanieh WTP contracts - in the period between the closing of the ongoing GBWSP and the declaration
of effectiveness of the Project.
86.     The FM risk rating is high due to several factors. These include the widespread perception of corruption in the
country, currency devaluation, and lack of trust. High employee turnover in the public sector due to economic conditions
                                                                                                                       Page 27
also pose challenges. The Project’s infrastructure components require strict monitoring to ensure alignment between
physical and financial progress. Additionally, the Project’s involvement of two agencies increases coordination complexity,
especially in data and reporting. Further risks include an unresolved lapsed loan in Lebanon’s portfolio, which affects the
usage of designated accounts (DAs) for Project funding. Although the agencies involved have prior (ongoing) experience
with Bank-funded projects, they face resource limitations. Moreover, the Entity audit of the BMLWE for 2022 revealed
several financial management deficiencies. The country's Court of Accounts lacks the human resources to audit the
project, reducing assurances over funds usage. To mitigate these risks, several measures will be implemented, including
hiring dedicated financial officers, establishing segregated DAs in US$ to preserve fund value, establishing direct payments
for both CDR and BMLWE, and using existing accounting systems. Financial reporting will be enhanced through quarterly
interim reports and external audits. As part of the financial management reforms and operational enhancement of the
BMLWE (Component 3), a consultancy firm will be recruited to undertake an audit of fixed assets owned by BMLWE and
support the BMLWE in the adjustment of the opening and closing balances of its accounts. In addition, the ERP system will
be customized to include a module on fixed assets registration. The Project will also prepare an operations manual with
financial management guidelines and establish a separate funds flow mechanism for resettlement compensation under
terms satisfactory to the Bank.

87.   Environment and Social Risk (Substantial). With Environmental Risk rated as Substantial, and Social Risk as
Moderate. See Section IV-C. Environmental and Social above.
88.      Stakeholders risk (Moderate). The LRA manages the sluices at the upstream hydropower plants from which water
will be diverted to the Wardanieh WTP through the bulk water tunnel. The provision of 3 cubic meters per second during
the dry season (50 million cubic meters for 6 months) is protected by Decree No. 14522 of 1970. However, the plant is
expected to operate year-round, and there is no legally binding document guaranteeing additional water allocation during
the wet season. Even though water is abundant during the wet season, as confirmed by the water balance conducted
during preparation, the lack of a legal basis for water allocation poses a risk to the plant's operation if the LRA decides to
allocate the water for other purposes. To mitigate this risk, the negotiated loan agreement includes a legal covenant to
ensure the signing of a Cooperation Agreement between the LRA and the BMLWE. This Cooperation Agreement will define
the water allocation, operational procedures, and compensation mechanisms to ensure the plant's year-round operation.
89.      Security (High). With the escalation of the conflict in the Middle East in 2024, essential services have been severely
disrupted, critical infrastructure damaged, and hundreds of thousands of people displaced, leading to a humanitarian
crisis. As of November, there are no reports of damage to the infrastructure under the GBWSP. However, work remains
suspended, and the operations of the BMLWE are severely disrupted, creating further challenges for Project
implementation. As mitigation measures, frequent Security Risk Assessments will be conducted, including an assessment
of the evolving security environment to identify specific risks and establish security levels based on the intensity of the
conflict. Based on the security assessments, the POM will include protocols to limit movements to essential operations
and establish "no-go" zones based on threat assessments, as well as evacuation plans with clear triggers for action. As an
additional mitigation measure, the Project includes a CERC component to allow for a flexible response to arising
emergencies.




                                                                                                                       Page 28
        The World Bank
        Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project(P504170)


ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padannexresultframework#doctemplate
PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes

   Baseline                                                                                Closing Period
   Improve water supply services in the Greater Beirut and Mount Lebanon areas
   Non-Revenue Water (NRW) reduction in the Project target zones (Percentage)
   Nov/2024                                                                                Nov/2031
   0                                                                                       15
   People provided with safely managed water (Number of people) CRI
   Nov/2024                                                                                Nov/2031
   0                                                                                       1,800,000
     ➢People provided with safely managed water - Female (Number of people)    CRI

   Nov/2024                                                                                Nov/2031
   0                                                                                       919,800
     ➢People provided with safely managed water - Youth (Number of people) CRI
   Nov/2024                                                                                Nov/2031
   0                                                                                       300,600
   Increased collection rate in the Project area (Percentage)
   Nov/2024                                                                                Nov/2031
   0                                                                                       10
   Volume of additional potable water distributed in the project area meeting the water quality standards (Cubic meters/year)
   Nov/2024                                                                                Nov/2031
   0                                                                                       91,250,000


Intermediate Indicators by Components

   Baseline                                                                               Closing Period
   Component 1: Completing remaining bulk water infrastructure
   Length of bulk water tunnel lined (Kilometers)




                                                                                                                                Page 29
     The World Bank
     Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project(P504170)


Nov/2024                                                                                May/2027
0                                                                                       24
Length of twin transmission pipelines installed and tested (Kilometers)
Nov/2024                                                                                Nov/2025
8.70                                                                                    10
Storage capacity installed in the distribution system (Cubic Meter(m3))
Nov/2024                                                                                Nov/2031
0                                                                                       120,000
Component 2: Strengthening treatment processes for improved water quality
Wardanieh WTP addons designed, installed and operational (Yes/No)
Nov/2024                                                                                Nov/2029
No                                                                                      Yes
Water quality early warning system installed and operational (Yes/No)
Nov/2024                                                                                Nov/2025
No                                                                                      Yes
Component 3: Reforms for improved utility operations
Number of customer meters installed (Number)
Nov/2024                                                                                Nov/2031
0                                                                                       40,000
Increase in subscribers in NRW reduction zones (Number)
Nov/2024                                                                                Nov/2031
55,000                                                                                  63,000
Asset management and customer systems improved and digitalized (Yes/No)
Dec/2024                                                                                Nov/2027
No                                                                                      Yes
SCADA system rehabilitated and operational (Yes/No)
Nov/2024                                                                                Nov/2026
No                                                                                      Yes
Number of semi-annual public awareness campaigns conducted. (Number)
Nov/2024                                                                                Nov/2027
0                                                                                       8
Percentage of cases that have been resolved and responded to through the digitalized call center (Percentage)
                                                                                        Nov/2031




                                                                                                                Page 30
     The World Bank
     Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project(P504170)


                                                                                           90
Component 4: Land acquisition and resettlement compensation
Component 5: Project management and capacity building
Number of female apprentices that receive certifications in water related technical fields (Number)
Nov/2024                                                                                   Nov/2031
0                                                                                          30
Component 6: Contingent Emergency Response Component




                                                                                                      Page 31
        The World Bank
        Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)



Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes
Improve water supply services in the Greater Beirut and Mount Lebanon areas
People provided with safely managed water (Number of people) CRI
                         This indicator measures the number of people that will benefit from access to safely managed water as a result of the
                         Project. It includes people already connected to the public BMLWE water supply network that will receive additional
Description              water from the Wardanieh WTP. As a result they will experience an increment in the hours of supply where water of
                         good quality is available, while reducing their reliance on more expensive and less regulated water supply from water
                         tankers. The number includes the population of zones A, C and TA as defined in the Project files.
Frequency                Annual
Data source              BMLWE annual reports, Population data in the areas benefitting from water supply from the Wardanieh WTP
Methodology for Data     Regular reporting from BMLWE will become relevant once the Wardanieh WTP is operational and the bulk water supply
Collection               infrastructure is completed.
Responsibility for Data
                          BMLWE
Collection
People provided with safely managed water - Female (Number of people) CRI
                          This sub-indicator measures the number of female residents in the areas A, C and TA as defined in the Project files
                         benefitting from additional water from the Wardanieh WTP. Accordining to the Lebanon Follow-up Labour Force Survey
Description
                         January 2022, 51.1 percent of the total population is female. This percentage is used as a proxy to calculate the number
                         of female beneficiaries in the area.
Frequency                Annual
Data source              BMLWE annual reports, Population data in the areas benefitting from water supply from the Wardanieh WTP
Methodology for Data     Regular reporting from BMLWE will become relevant once the Wardanieh WTP is operational and the bulk water supply
Collection               infrastructure is completed.
Responsibility for Data
                          BMLWE
Collection
People provided with safely managed water - Youth (Number of people) CRI
                         This sub-indicator measures the number of youth (ages 15-24) in the areas A, C and TA as defined in the Project files
                         benefitting from additional water from the Wardanieh WTP. According to the Lebanon Follow-up Labour Force Survey
Description
                         January 2022, 16.7 percent of the total population is in the youth age group. This percentage is used as a proxy to
                         calculate the number of youth beneficiaries in the area.
Frequency                Annual
Data source              BMLWE annual reports, Population data in the areas benefitting from water supply from the Wardanieh WTP
Methodology for Data     Regular reporting from BMLWE will become relevant once the Wardanieh WTP is operational and the bulk water supply
Collection               infrastructure is completed.
Responsibility for Data
                          BMLWE
Collection
Volume of additional potable water distributed in the project area meeting the water quality standards (Cubic meters/year)
                         This indicator measures the amount of additional water supplied in areas A, C and TA of Beirut, as defined in the Project
Description              files. It assumes that the Wardanieh WTP operates at maximum capacity of 250,000m3/day throughout the year meeting
                         WHO drinking water quality standards.
Frequency                 Annual
Data source              Wardanieh WTP operation reports
                          Regular reporting from the Wardanieh WTP operator and BMLWE will become relevant once the Wardanieh WTP is
Methodology for Data
                         operational and the bulk water supply infrastructure is completed. Supplied water is measured by bulk water supply
Collection
                         meters, and water quality is measured at the outlet of the WTP.
Responsibility for Data
                          BMLWE
Collection
Non-Revenue Water (NRW) reduction in the Project target zones (Percentage)
                         This indicator measures the decrease in NRW reduction in the targeted zones. NRW is defined as the difference between
Description
                         the amount of water that is produced for consumption/use, and the amount of water that is actually billed to customers.


                                                                                                                                         Page 32
        The World Bank
        Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)


                           It includes both physical losses (through leaks) and apparent losses (for example through theft or metering
                           inaccuracies).The decrease will result from updating the updates in the costumer cadaster, the sectorization of the
                           network into hydraulicly isolated zones (District Metered Areas, DMAs), leakage detection and repair. The NRW
                           reduction baseline will be established after the implementation of DMAs.
Frequency                  Semi-annual
Data source                BMLWE annual reports
Methodology for Data
                           BMLWE performance data
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                            BMLWE
Collection
Increased collection rate in the Project area (Percentage)
                           This indicator measures the increase in the collection rate in the Project area. Collection rate is defined as the percentage
                           of the total amount billed to clients that is actually collected. The increase will mostly result from people being more
Description                willing to pay their bills as a result of increase reliability in service provision, the modernization and digitalization of
                           BMLWE commercial systems, the NRW reduction activities and the communication campaigns to be implemented. The
                           baseline will be established during the first year of project implementation.
Frequency                  Semi-annual
Data source                BMLWE annual reports
Methodology for Data
                           BMLWE performance data
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                            BMLWE
Collection

Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: Intermediate Results Indicators by Components
Component 1: Completing remaining bulk water infrastructure
Length of bulk water tunnel lined (Kilometers)
                           This indicator measures the progress in the lining of the already excavated bulk water tunnel. The baseline is zero and
Description
                           the target is 24km.
Frequency                  Semi-annual
Data source                CDR progress reports
Methodology for Data
                           Contract implementation progress reports and certificate of construction completion
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                            CDR
Collection
Length of twin transmission pipelines installed and tested (Kilometers)
                           This indicator measures the progress in the installation and testing of the remaining 1.6km of the twin transmission
Description
                           pipelines.
Frequency                  Semi-Annual
Data source                CDR progress reports
Methodology for Data
                           Contract implementation progress reports and certificate of construction completion.
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                           CDR
Collection
Storage capacity installed in the distribution system (Cubic Meter(m3))
                           This indicator measures the progress in the construction of the regional reservoirs Hadath 125 (37,800m3), Hadath 90
Description
                           (54,600m3) and Hazmieh 90 (29,400m3).
Frequency                  Semi-annual
Data source                CDR progress reports
Methodology for Data
                           Contract implementation progress reports and certificate of construction completion.
Collection


                                                                                                                                               Page 33
        The World Bank
        Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)


Responsibility for Data
                           CDR
Collection
Component 2: Strengthening treatment processes for improved water quality
Wardanieh WTP addons designed, installed and operational (Yes/No)
                           This indicator measures progress on the adaptive management approach for the design of the optimal configuration of
                           add-ons at the Wardanieh WTP. For this indicator to be achieved, testing of treatment processes has taken place, the
Description
                           results of both raw water quality and treated water quality informs the design of the optimal add-ons configuration, their
                           installation and the overall WTP operation.
Frequency                   Semi-Annual
Data source                 Wardanieh WTP O&M reports
Methodology for Data       Wardanieh WTP updated O&M manual, water treatment process testing results, Certificate of Construction Completion
Collection                 and Certificate of Operational Acceptance.
Responsibility for Data
                            BMLWE
Collection
Water quality early warning system installed and operational (Yes/No)
                           This indicator measures progress on the design, installation and operation of the upstream raw water quality monitoring
Description
                           and early warning system.
Frequency                   Semi-Annual
Data source                BMLWE progress reports
Methodology for Data       BMLWE water quality monitoring protocol, Wardanieh WTP O&M reports, Certificate of Construction Completion and
Collection                 Certificate of OperationalA cceptance.
Responsibility for Data
                            BMLWE
Collection
Component 3: Reforms for improved utility operations
Number of customer meters installed (Number)
                            This indicator measures progress in the installation of customer meters in the Coastal Mtn NRW zone, where conditions
Description
                           allow for their installation.
Frequency                   Semi-Annual
Data source                BMLWE progress reports
Methodology for Data       Contract implementation progress reports, Certificate of Construction Completion and Certificate of Operational
Collection                 Acceptance.
Responsibility for Data
                            BMLWE
Collection
Increase in subscribers in NRW reduction zones (Number)
                           This indicator measures progress in the BMLWE’s ability to increase its subscriber base in the NRW reduction zones, in
Description                part as a result of the customer cadaster update, abilitation of service connections and the communication campaign
                           implemented under the Project.
Frequency                  Semi-Annual
Data source                BMLWE progress reports
Methodology for Data
                           BMLWE’s performance data
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                           BMLWE
Collection
Asset management and customer systems improved and digitalized (Yes/No)
                           This indicator measures progress in the implementation of the improvements to asset management and customer
                           systems. This indicator is achieved when BMLWE’s fixed asset inventory is completed and a new ERP module has been
Description
                           added as well as when the ICT improvement, billing and collection improvement and communication modules have been
                           implemented as per BMLWE’s Digital Transformation Roadmap.
Frequency                  Semi-Annual
Data source                BMLWE progress reports



                                                                                                                                            Page 34
        The World Bank
        Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)


Methodology for Data
                          Consultant’s progress reports, Certificate of Operational Acceptance.
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                          BMLWE
Collection
SCADA system rehabilitated and operational (Yes/No)
                          This indicator measures progress in the rehabilitation of the SCADA system, including the replacement of damaged
Description               equipment as well as the installation of PV systems in selected stations. For this indicator to be achieved the SCADA
                          system needs to be operational and under use by the BMLWE.
Frequency                 Semi-Annual
Data source               BMLWE’s progress reports
Methodology for Data
                          Consultant’s progress reports, Certificate of Operational Acceptance.
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                           BMLWE
Collection
Number of semi-annual public awareness campaigns conducted. (Number)
                          This indicator measures the number of public awareness campaigns carried out by the BMLWE, in line with BMLWE’s
Description
                          communication strategy.
Frequency                 Semi-Annual
Data source               BMLWE’s progress reports
Methodology for Data
                          Public awareness campaign reports
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                           BMLWE
Collection
Percentage of cases that have been resolved and responded to through the digitalized call center (Percentage)
Description                This indicator measures the number of cases that have been registered and responded to by BMLWE’s call center.
Frequency                  Semi-Annual
Data source                BMLWE’s progress reports
Methodology for Data
                           BMLWE’s call center records
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                           BMLWE
Collection
Component 5: Project Management and capacity building
Number of female apprentices that receive certifications in water related technical fields (Number)
                          This indicator measures the number of female apprentices that have been certified by the BMLWE on-the-job training
Description               received for utility-related technical skills, which can include on NRW reduction, asset management, SCADA operation
                          and maintenance, GIS, contract management, etc.
Frequency                  Semi-Annual
Data source                BMLWE’s progress reports
Methodology for Data
                          Certification records, apprenticeship program reports.
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                           BMLWE
Collection




                                                                                                                                          Page 35
      The World Bank
      Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)


ANNEX 2. BULK SUPPLY SYSTEM AND NRW REDUCTION AREAS




                                                             Page 36
The World Bank
Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (P504170)




                                                       Page 37
