Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Appraisal Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                             Appraisal Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                       (ESRS Appraisal Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                         Date Prepared/Updated: 07/21/2025 | Report No: ESRSA04376




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Jul 22, 2025                                                                          Page 1 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                    Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P504998                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)         SURF-In                      2026

                     Operation Name            Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries             Region                        Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     St. Lucia                 St. Lucia                                 LATIN AMERICA AND             Urban, Resilience and
                                                                                         CARIBBEAN                     Land

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                  Estimated Appraisal Date      Estimated Board Date

                     Ministry of Finance,      Department of Economic                    28-Jul-2025                   02-Oct-2025
                     Economic                  Development, Ministry of Finance,
                     Development and           Economic Development and Youth
                     Youth Economy             Economy




Public Disclosure
                     Total Project Cost


                     30,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     To enhance institutional capacities and infrastructure resilience to flood risk in the target areas of Castries and Anse La
                     Raye.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The project aims enhance institutional capacities and infrastructure resilience to flood risk in the target areas of Castries
                     and Anse La Raye through three components. These components are: (a) Institutional and System Strengthening:
                     infrastructure planning, design, management and preparedness; (b) Enhancing resilience and sustainability of critical
                     infrastructure; and (c) Project Management. Component 1 will support the development of detailed engineering designs
                     and construction supervision for selected flood mitigation investments within the Castries and Anse La Raye areas, while

                    Jul 22, 2025                                                                                                       Page 2 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)



                     also strengthening the Government of Saint Lucia’s capacity to prepare for and manage the impacts of natural hazards
                     and climate change. Component 2 will support the implementation of prioritized activities designed under component
                     1, which will support an integrated river basin approach toward urban flood risk management and reduction.


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings
                     The overall objective will be to improve resilience of the dense urban areas to rainfall events. Under the previously
                     approved PPG a catchment flood model for Castries and Anse La Raye will be developed which will be used to identify,
                     analyze, and establish feasible options for proposed interventions (including nature-based solutions, sustainable urban
                     drainage improvements and hard engineering) to reduce flooding of the towns during extreme weather events. The
                     selected interventions are to be constructed as part of this project.

                     Castries is the capital of SLU and is highly urbanized. Its population is 65,656, which is approximately a third of the
                     population of St. Lucia. The upper reaches of the Castries catchment are within the Castries and Dennery Waterworks
                     Reserve and Marquis, which is a forest reserve, and there are several historic areas surrounding the town. The
                     catchment has been extensively developed, and is densely urban in the lower reaches and with sub-urban residential
                     homes with gardens in the higher elevations. As development has crept up the steep hill sides of the catchment, they
                     have been increasingly denuded of forest; this may have contributed to the clogging of town drainage with sediment.
                     Forest is now mainly only in the upper reaches. Approximately 6 km west of Castries, which is a Marine Protected area,
                     is under active management.




Public Disclosure
                     Anse la Raye is also an important urban center in St. Lucia, with a population of 6,200. Two main rivers converge at Anse
                     La Raye, where they discharge directly into a Marine Management Area West Coast (incl. Anse la Raye/Canaries Local
                     Fisheries Management Area and Marigot Bay). There is a protected landscape area to the south of the catchment, and
                     the upper reach is within the Castries and Dennery Waterworks Reserve and Marquis Protected Forest Area. The
                     interventions designed would reduce impacts and disruption during flood events in the towns and improve quality of
                     discharges to the marine environment.




                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The borrower has demonstrated a good capacity to manage projects in accordance with both the safeguards policies
                     and the ESF. The project will be implemented by the Ministry of Finance, through its Department for Economic
                     Development and Youth Economy (MoF), which has a record of accomplishment of successfully implementing World
                     Bank investment projects. With over 30 years of experience implementing World Bank-financed disaster risk
                     management projects, Department of Economic Development and Youth Economy (DoED), has a strong track record of
                     successful execution across sectors, with a focus on DRM-related initiatives. These projects include the Emergency
                     Recovery and Disaster Management Project (DMP) (1998-2005), Disaster Management II (DMP II 2004-2012), the
                     Hurricane Thomas Recovery Project (2011-2014), the Disaster Vulnerability Reduction Project (DVRP 2014-2023), and
                     the recently approved Saint Lucia Disaster Risk Management Cat DDO (2025). GoSL’s performance on World Bank
                     financed projects has consistently been rated as satisfactory. The Ministry of Finance will continue to lead the
                     implementation of this project through its DoED.

                    Jul 22, 2025                                                                                                    Page 3 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)




                     The DoED would be supported by a Project Coordination Unit (PCU). The PCU will be headed by a dedicated project
                     coordinator and supported by dedicated technical specialists, including an environmental and social specialist. The PCU
                     will ensure compliance with ESF requirements, coordinate with relevant agencies, and oversee monitoring and
                     reporting. Project implementation will be closely coordinated with technical counterparts and other government
                     agencies for their technical inputs, including the Castries City Council, Department of Infrastructure, the Ministry of
                     Housing and Local Government, the Ministry of Agriculture and its Forestry Division, the Water Resources Management
                     Agency, National Integrated Programme and Planning Unit, and Saint Lucia Meteorological Services. The organizational
                     structure of the project team, along with the duties and responsibilities of all the team members will be provided in the
                     Project Operations Manual (POM).


                     II. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL (ES) RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                           Moderate


                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                    Moderate
                     The modelling, pre-feasibility and feasibility studies undertaken as part of the PPG will determine a short list of
                     options that will be implemented during the project. The project will consider nature-based solutions as well as hard
                     engineering solutions to alleviate disruption from flooding within the towns, including consideration of measures to
                     retain water in the upper reaches of the catchment to control the rate of discharge and avoid flash flooding events.



Public Disclosure
                     The PPG is identifying areas where the flood risk is most extreme and where the implementation of flood mitigation
                     strategies would have the highest impact on flood risk reduction. The project will finance detailed engineering designs
                     for the selected flood reduction investments and construction supervision for the works contracts to be carried out
                     under Component 2. Designs will be guided by universal design standards and use inclusive design approaches to
                     address the needs of vulnerable populations, including women, the elderly, and persons with disabilities.
                     Infrastructure investments are expected to include solutions such as the rehabilitation of urban drainage (for
                     example, new, enhanced or rehabilitated water retention areas, pumping stations, flood walls and channel widening,
                     dredging or removal of obstacles), slope stabilization, river embankment protection, and sea defense. Green
                     infrastructure solutions are expected to include solutions such as the establishment of green corridors, river and
                     stream renaturation, improvements to upstream small scale catchment areas and storm water retention systems, and
                     the establishment of bioretention and sediment areas within green spaces and long public corridors. Due to the
                     locations of the protected areas in the upper catchment (where interventions to slow discharges could be taken
                     forward) and at the discharge points (including into a Marine Protected Area), the safety implications that
                     construction of drainage infrastructure may pose in heavily populated areas with small roads and heavy traffic, and
                     the health implications that could arise through waterborne disease if flood waters are not controlled, the
                     Environmental Risk Rating is considered Moderate.
                                                                                                                                      Moderate
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The project's social risk classification is Moderate, reflecting the nature and scale of the interventions, which include
                     both green and gray infrastructure in urban and peri-urban settings. The project will reduce flood risks in the urban
                     centers of Castries and Anse La Raye and the river basins. These are two densely populated areas of the country with


                    Jul 22, 2025                                                                                                       Page 4 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)



                     populations of over 65,614 and 5,841 people, respectively. This project is expected to positively impact the way that
                     communities and institutions respond, prepare, and plan for future disasters. Project beneficiaries will include the
                     communities of Castries and Anse La Raye that are expected to directly benefit and government institutions from
                     capacity development and transfer of skills in the efficient management of flood risks. The project will protect
                     livelihoods and economic activities, particularly in sectors such as small-scale trading, tourism, and services that
                     poorer communities depend on. While the project is expected to generate significant positive impacts, such as
                     reduced flood risk and resilient management systems, improved public safety, and enhanced urban livability, it also
                     presents potential risks related to: construction in densely populated communities, temporary disruption to traffic
                     and other community activities, potential risks to the occupational health and safety to workers, potential land
                     acquisition or restriction of land use in upstream areas and impacts on cultural heritage and biodiversity in the river
                     basins. The project will adopt a range of mitigation measures including integration of nature-based Solutions (NBS) to
                     minimize environmental impacts and enhance socio-economic benefits, use of inclusive and universal design
                     standards to address the needs of vulnerable groups and capacity building for implementing agencies and local
                     stakeholders and strengthening of early warning systems and community-based disaster preparedness. The NBS
                     solutions are expected to improve the urban environment and livability, particularly through upgrading public spaces,
                     integrating green and open areas, and enhancing experiences for tourism and recreation. These may include
                     opportunities to fabricate new development with regeneration that boost economic activities and bring long-term
                     benefits, creating more sustainable, vibrant, and investor-friendly communities. However, such interventions would
                     have implications for current land uses in upstream areas. Besides their primary flood management function, such
                     interventions will also provide socio-economic and health benefits to the community. It is expected that the social
                     risks and impacts would remain moderate and can be effectively managed through the design and implementation of




Public Disclosure
                     appropriate social instruments to be developed based on the final design options for implementation.


                     B. Environment and Social Standards (ESS) that Apply to the Activities Being Considered

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                Relevant

                      E&S risks and issues will be considered when identifying and assessing the feasibility of options (including nature-
                      based solutions, sustainable urban drainage improvements and hard engineering) to reduce flooding of the towns
                      during extreme weather events. The E&S implications will also need to be considered when selecting the final options
                      to be constructed, and any mitigation that has not been incorporated into the design of the works will need to be
                      incorporated into the construction works contracts or delivered by the Government during operation. Building on the
                      E&S studies undertaken during the feasibility studies, selected options will be subject to E&S assessment as
                      appropriate to comply with the E&S regulatory framework of St. Lucia and the ESF. The assessments will identify any
                      licenses, permits and consents that the project will require, as well as the mitigation measures to be incorporated in
                      the procurement and construction process to comply with requirements, and may be presented as ESMPs, ESCOPs or
                      ESIAs as appropriate to the scale of the potential impacts. The assessments will draw on the Bank’s EHS Guidelines to
                      determine good international industry practices to be adopted and will be reviewed by the Bank before being
                      disclosed prior to the start of any corresponding works. The process for determining the extent of the E&S
                      assessment needed for each option will be described in the POM.



                    Jul 22, 2025                                                                                                    Page 5 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)



                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                     Relevant

                      The project interventions would require extensive stakeholder consultations through meaningful and participatory
                      approaches. Preliminary stakeholders identified and consulted during the pre-feasibility and feasibility studies by the
                      PPG consultant include officials of government institutions, including the Department of Infrastructure, Water
                      Resources Management Agency, National Integrated Programme and Planning Unit, National Emergency
                      Management Organization, Castries City Council and St. Lucia Solid Waste Management Authority.. The prioritization
                      of flood mitigation investment will consider economic, social and environmental factors, including flood hazard,
                      damage reduction, costs, benefits, cost-benefit ratios, environmental and social impacts. This process requires
                      extensive consultations with a range of stakeholders through participatory processes, such as workshops and
                      roundtables, to ensure that community needs are incorporated and investments are inclusive and equitable. The
                      introduction of NBS will also be validated with local communities to confirm needs and process of land acquisition
                      and /or restrictions and maintenance planning with local authorities. The project would need to ensure that all
                      relevant stakeholders are effectively engaged, and any proposed solutions are fit for purpose in the local
                      environment. The project would be designed and implement measures that provide for equal access to climate-
                      resilient infrastructure and disaster risk management (DRM) resources for all community members, including women
                      and vulnerable groups. It would adopt an integrated approach to ensure active participation of identified
                      stakeholders to ensure successful flood risk management in the two cities. The process of effective public
                      engagement and stakeholder coordination started during the pre-feasibility and feasibility phases under the PPG and
                      would be sustained. The project will coordinate with local authorities such as the City Council of Castries and
                      community stakeholders on community engagement and preparedness action planning, effectively incorporating
                      community feedback and voices into disaster response strategies. A review of national legislations participatory for



Public Disclosure
                      public engagement in projects revealed that while there are sufficient requirements under the respective national
                      laws for stakeholder consultations, it would be prudent to have stakeholder consultations managed by the project
                      PIU to be established within the Ministry of Finance (MoF). To align with the WB Directive on Inclusion of Vulnerable
                      Groups, the project prepared , consulted and disclosed a SEP prior to appraisal. Ongoing consultations with different
                      stakeholders in the project area includes women, persons with disabilities, and other vulnerable groups and the
                      government implementing agencies. The SEP describes the plan for ongoing engagements and dissemination of
                      project information. It also describes the project’s arrangement for recoding and resolving complaints and grievances
                      (including SEA/SH ) that may be raised throughout the during the project. The SEP is a living document that would be
                      updated from time to time as relevant and is expected to be updated within sixty days of the project's effective date.
                      This would allow for a more detailed assessment of the approach to consultations and public disclosure of
                      information within the initial period of project implementation.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                           Relevant

                      The project involves design consultants who are undertaking feasibility studies that would inform design options and
                      flood risk interventions that would be implemented. Other workers would comprise: government officials at their
                      respective Ministries and departments; a dedicated PIU with designated technical staff; contractors and
                      subcontractors who would undertake the construction works; and possibly primary suppliers depending upon the
                      construction materials that are required. A review of the national labor laws and regulations shows the existence of
                      elaborate provisions that regulate the use of the different types of labour envisioned under the project. However,
                      there is no clarity on how these laws are effectively enforced and monitored. Given that the project would involve
                      different types of workers, at different project stages/locations, and that multiple institutions would be involved in

                    Jul 22, 2025                                                                                                     Page 6 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)



                      the implementation, a Labour Management Procedure (LMP) will be prepared to describe how the terms and
                      conditions of employment of the consultants, officials and PIU would comply with ESF requirements, including with
                      respect to their code of conduct. The LMP will include a mechanism for project workers to submit workplace-related
                      grievances in accordance with ESS2. Provisions to ensure occupational health and safety of the construction workers
                      will be identified in the E&S assessments to be prepared after the feasibility studies have been completed and the
                      borrower has determined the most viable project design and activities to be financed under the project. The
                      construction works will be procured using the World Bank Standard Procurement Documents which incorporates
                      relevant requirements regarding construction workers' terms and conditions of employment. The LMP will indicate
                      the actions and measures required to ensure the effective protection of all workers through the enforcement and
                      monitoring of the provisions of national labour regulations as relevant and consistent with the requirements of ESS 2.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                           Relevant

                      The feasibility study will provide an opportunity to review and reduce pollution in protected areas at the stormwater
                      discharge points. The selected interventions should also be designed to be as efficient as possible, to improve their
                      long term resilience and reliance on maintenance or other management inputs. Risks mitigation measures for
                      protection of potential impact on protected areas would be reassed during project implementation but prior to
                      commencement of civil works.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                           Relevant

                      The project will need to avoid exacerbating water-born health hazards or diseases, and consider implications on




Public Disclosure
                      community safety during the construction works. To manage potential risks of the transmission of waterborne
                      diseases and waste disposal the designer is required to undertake environmental and social analysis and consider this
                      with constructability, public safety (including from water-borne diseases), and safety in construction in coming up
                      with the design solution. Since the scope of the project involves constructing flood risk infrastructure in busy town
                      centers, careful traffic management will be required, as well as an emergency response plan to ensure safety of
                      workers and nearby communities, in establishing the works sites.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                               Relevant

                      This standard is relevant because the project interventions and future works will take place in locations that are
                      densely populated, and highly urbanized and may result in private land acquisition or land use restriction resulting
                      result in physical or economic displacements and loss of livelihoods during project implementation. The scale of
                      impacts resulting form the above would depend on the preferred investment option that would be selected and
                      based on the preliminary assessment of impacts this could be in small to medium scale impacts on private land and
                      property resulting in temporary or permanent loss of property. A full determination of this would be assessed based
                      on the outcome of feasibility studies and the design options that would be produced. Appropriate risk mitigation
                      measures would be determined once the nature of interventions have been determined, including the timing for the
                      preparation of Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) ,as may be if required or relevant risk mitigation instrument for
                      implementation during project implementation. No civil works would commence until a RAP has been prepared and
                      implemented as required under the ESS. The requiremenst and timeframe for a RAP or livelihood isntrument is
                      incorporated in the ESCP.




                    Jul 22, 2025                                                                                                   Page 7 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)



                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                  Relevant
                      Resources

                      There are forest reserves and marine protected areas associated within the catchments that will need to be
                      considered during the development and selection of acceptable interventions. The designer is required to undertake
                      environmental and social analysis and consider biodiversity along with other factors, including public health (including
                      from water-borne diseases), and safety in construction in coming up with the design solution.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional              Not Currently Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      There are no known groups of people in the project area in Saint Lucia that meet the criteria as defined under the
                      ESS.

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                       Relevant

                      The project would involve civil works and excavations. Cultural heritage features are present in the catchment areas
                      and the study will need to consider avoiding or minimizing impacts to these when developing and implementing
                      solutions. The designer is required to undertake environmental and social analysis to identify features of cultural
                      heritage features and consider the implications alongside other factors, including biodiversity, public health and
                      safety in coming up with recommended design solutions. Contractors undertaking the works will be required to
                      implement Chance Find Procedures.




Public Disclosure
                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                 Not Currently Relevant

                      No FIs are involved in this project



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                         No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                                  No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                        In Part
                       Information will be gathered from relevant ministries, databases, and government repositories for use in the study,
                       including data on protected areas, cultural heritage features and water resources, as well as long term development
                       planning proposals and policies. The project will obtain and implement all licenses, permits and consents needed by
                       national law, and will be designed and constructed in accordance with the relevant engineering standards and building
                       codes. Preliminary assessment of the national labour regulations reveals some gaps in enforcement and monitoring,
                       even though many requirements align with ESS2. Additional measures will be required to supplement the minimum
                       standards achieved through legal and regulatory compliance (including robust measures to enforce and monitor
                       workplace safety and to deliver the works in accordance with Good International Industry Practice) to meet
                       requirements of the ESSs.


                    Jul 22, 2025                                                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)




                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                                 No
                       This is not contemplated.

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by implementation?
                     As part of the PPG, the TORs for the design consultancy require the modelling and development of options to consider
                     the environmental and social risks and impacts, and for the consultant to have an environmental and social expert as
                     part of the design team. The designer is required to undertake environmental and social analysis and consider this with
                     constructability, public safety (including from water-borne diseases), safety in construction, biodiversity, cultural
                     heritage, efficiency in long term management requirements, the need for temporary or permanent displacement of
                     people and other relevant factors alongside cost to identify the possible interventions to be undertaken. The TORs
                     acknowledge the presence of protected areas within the catchments, and the designer will consider how to improve
                     the quality of discharges to the protected areas.

                     The Baseline Scoping Report for Options Analysis provides details of the baseline environmental features,
                     permitting/consenting requirements and land ownership information to assist in the selection of options to take
                     forward to implementation under the project. Options that are taken forward will be subject to E&S assessment as
                     necessary to meet national and ESF requirements, and the assessment will identify any mitigation measures that are to



Public Disclosure
                     be incorporated into the detailed design and/or works contracts.

                     Stakeholder Engagement will be undertaken as part of the development, selection and construction works, as guided
                     by a Stakeholder Engagement Plan, and Labour Management Procedures will set out what measures are needed to
                     ensure workers terms and conditions of employment are aligned with Bank requirements.

                     The ESCP sets out the actions to be taken, when they need to be completed by, and who is responsible for undertaking
                     them as to ensure Bank and borrower have a clear understanding of the requirements for managing the environmental
                     and social risks of the project.




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Jared Phillip Mercadante               Title:        Senior Disaster Risk Management
                                                                                                   Specialist

                      Email:                  jmercadante@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Artessa Saldivar-Sali                  Job Title:    Senior Infrastructure Specialist


                    Jul 22, 2025                                                                                                      Page 9 of 10
                               The World Bank
                               Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)



                      Email:                  asaldivarsali@worldbank.org



                     IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                              Jared Phillip Mercadante, Artessa Saldivar-Sali

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                     Michael James Hall

                     ADM Social Specialist:                            Charles Ankisiba




Public Disclosure




                    Jul 22, 2025                                                                                         Page 10 of 10
