Public Disclosure Authorized
                                          The World Bank
                                          Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)



                                      @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                        Project Information Document (PID)

Public Disclosure Authorized



            _For Official Use Only_
                                                        Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 24-Jul-2025 | Report No: PIDIA01391




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
                          BASIC INFORMATION


                          A. Basic Project Data

                          Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                         Operation ID                    Operation Name
                                                         LATIN AMERICA AND                                              Saint Lucia Urban Resilient
                          St. Lucia                                                     P504998
                                                         CARIBBEAN                                                      Flood Investment Project
                          Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date       Estimated Approval Date         Practice Area (Lead)
                          Investment Project
                                                         28-Jul-2025                    02-Oct-2025                     Urban, Resilience and Land
                          Financing (IPF)
                          Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                                                         Department of Economic
                          Ministry of Finance,           Development, Ministry
                          Economic Development           of Finance, Economic
                          and Youth Economy              Development and Youth




_For Official Use Only_
                                                         Economy

                          Proposed Development Objective(s)
                          The Project Development Objectives are: (i) to enhance resilience to floods in selected localities, and (ii) to strengthen
                          the Government’s capacity for managing climate-related risks.

                          Components
                          Institutional and system strengthening for flood resilience and preparedness
                          Enhancement of critical flood-risk reduction infrastructure
                          Project management and supervision

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                          Maximizing Finance for Development

                          Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                     No
                          Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?               No

                          SUMMARY
                            Total Operation Cost                                                                                               30.00

                            Total Financing                                                                                                    30.00
                                        of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                      30.00


                                                                                                                                                 Page 1



                                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
                                    The World Bank
                                    Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)



                                 Financing Gap                                                                                                                    0.00

                               DETAILS
                                 World Bank Group Financing
                                  International Development Association (IDA)                                                                                   30.00
                                     IDA Credit                                                                                                                 30.00




                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
                          Environmental And Social Risk Classification
                          Moderate


                               Decision




_For Official Use Only_
                               Other Decision (as needed)




                               B. Introduction and Context

                               Country Context

                          1.       Saint Lucia is a small island state in the Lesser Antilles island chain between Saint Vincent to the south and
                          Martinique to the north and has an estimated population of 180,000 (2022).1 The island has an area of 617 km2 with
                          nearly half of its population concentrated in the coastal zones of the north and south, such as the capital city Castries, and
                          Gros Islet. The island is volcanic in origin, composed of a north-south oriented mountainous interior. Saint Lucia faces
                          significant flood risk due to its steep terrain, high rainfall, and dense coastal settlements, which make the island vulnerable
                          to riverine and flash flooding. Climate change exacerbates these risks by increasing the intensity and frequency of extreme
                          weather events, which is threatening lives, infrastructure, livelihoods, and economic stability.
                          2.
                                  Saint Lucia is in the Caribbean Hurricane Belt and is highly exposed to hydrometeorological and geological
                          hazards, including hurricanes, storm surges, sea level rise, and high volcanic and seismic activity. Between 1980 and 2015,
                          Saint Lucia was affected by at least six major hurricanes and tropical storms, including Hurricane Tomas in 2010 which
                          caused damages of around 45 percent of Saint Lucia’s gross domestic product (GDP). Saint Lucia has an Annual Average



                          1 Government of Saint Lucia. 2022. Population and Housing Census. https://stats.gov.lc/wp-content/uploads/2024/08/StLucia-Provisional-Census-

                          Report-2022-Release-1Rev1.pdf

                                                                                                                                                                    Page 2



                                                                                                                                                           Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)


                          Loss (from hurricanes alone) of approximately US$9.5 million, or 0.4 percent of its 2023 GDP.2 Flash floods from heavy
                          rainfall are the most dominant source of flooding, exacerbated by the high tides and storm surges, which impede gravity
                          drainage in the coastal zone. Historically, extreme flooding events took place in 1980 (Hurricane Allen), 1994 (Tropical
                          Storm Debby), 2010 (Hurricane Tomas), and 2013 (Christmas Eve Trough). The 2013 Christmas Eve Trough triggered
                          several landslides and resulted in total damage and loss of US$99.88 million, equivalent to 8.3 percent of GDP, with
                          infrastructural damages of US$71.9 million and flash floods affecting over 20,000 persons, or 11 percent of the total
                          population.3Error! Bookmark not defined.

                          3.       Disaster damages and vulnerabilities are particularly pronounced in the low-lying coastal zones, where nearly
                          60 percent of the population lives. These areas have high population density, key tourism attractions, and concentrated
                          economic activities, making them attractive for settlement and high-value assets. At the same time, the availability of job
                          opportunities in the informal and service sectors has also drawn many low-income communities to these zones. Critical
                          infrastructure assets like airports, seaports, fuel storage facilities and major road networks are predominantly located
                          along the coast or on low-lying reclaimed coastal land, along with natural flood management solutions such as mangroves
                          or wetland areas serving as effective barriers to inundation events.4 Almost 80 percent of the country’s economic assets
                          are exposed to one of the four hazards of sea-level rise, storm surge, flash floods, or landslides.5 Research has also
                          suggested that without significant improvements in coastal resilience, Saint Lucia could lose up to US$20 million annually
                          by 2025 and US$70 million by 2100, under a global high emissions scenario.6




_For Official Use Only_
                           Sectoral and Institutional Context

                          4.       The Government of Saint Lucia (GoSL) has developed national strategies and policies to promote more climate
                          resilient development planning. The regulatory framework is guided by three main policies: the Disaster Management
                          Act of Saint Lucia 2006, the National Emergency Management Plan, and the National Comprehensive Disaster
                          Management Strategy (NCDMS). The Disaster Management Act aimed to improve the mitigation of, preparedness for,
                          response to, and recovery from emergencies and disasters and established the National Emergency Management
                          Organization (NEMO). In 2018, the Cabinet approved a National Disaster Risk Financing Strategy to systematically assess
                          and quantify the economic and fiscal impact associated with disasters.

                          5.      Saint Lucia’s disaster risk management (DRM) strategies and regulatory framework are aligned with
                          international standards. ‘Adaptation for environmental sustainability, climate change and disaster vulnerability
                          reduction’ is recognized as one of the Strategic Development Pillars of the country’s Sustainable Development Goals
                          (SDGs). Saint Lucia updated its Nationally Determined Contribution in February 2025 (NDC 3.0)7 to reflect an increased
                          ambition in mitigation, adaptation, and reduction of loss and damage from climate-related disasters.


                          2 Disaster Risk Profiles - Saint Lucia (English). Washington, D.C.: World Bank

                          Group. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/471581493284709842
                          3 World Bank. 2021. Introduction to Multi-Hazard Risk Assessment in the Caribbean. Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group.

                          https://documentsinternal.worldbank.org/search/33064826
                          4 UNOPS (United Nations Office for Project Services). 2020. Saint Lucia: National infrastructure assessment.

                          https://content.unops.org/publications/Saint-Lucia-National-Infrastructure-Assessment.pdf
                          5 UNOPS. 2020. Saint Lucia: National infrastructure assessment. https://content.unops.org/publications/Saint-Lucia-National-Infrastructure-

                          Assessment.pdf
                          6 Bueno, Ramón, Cornelia Herzfeld, Elizabeth A. Stanton, and Frank Ackerman. 2008. Stockholm Environment Institute—US Center & Global

                          Development and Environment Institute, Tufts University. The Caribbean and Climate Change: The Costs of Inaction.
                          7 Government of Saint Lucia. 2025. Saint Lucia’s Third Nationally Determined Contribution. https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/2025-

                          02/Saint%20Lucias%20Third%20Nationally%20Determined%20Contribution.pdf

                                                                                                                                                                Page 3



                                                                                                                                                       Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)


                          6.       The country has advanced its disaster resilience agenda through a series of donor-supported initiatives and
                          partnerships. The Saint Lucia Disaster Vulnerability Reduction Project (DVRP, P127226) reduced vulnerability to natural
                          hazards and climate change impacts by supporting investments in risk assessment, financing and infrastructure sectors.
                          The Air Transport Connectivity Project (P170860) enhanced air transport resilience to natural disasters. Notably, the Saint
                          Lucia Disaster Risk Management Cat DDO (P181432) was approved on April 10, 2025, providing the GoSL with immediate
                          liquidity following a natural catastrophe including natural disasters and public health emergencies. Other sector-specific
                          and flood risk-focused initiatives include the following: Building Resilience for Adaptation to Climate Change and Climate
                          Variability in Agriculture by the Caribbean Development Bank (CDB); Increasing the Resilience of the Education System to
                          Climate Change Impacts in the Eastern Caribbean by UN-Habitat; and Anse La Raye Mangrove Restoration and Flood
                          Mitigation by the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility Segregated Portfolio Company (CCRIF SPC) and
                          Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) Commission.

                          7.       The project will focus on the urban centers of Castries and Anse La Raye and the river basins in which they are
                          located. The capital city, Castries, hosts 65,614 people (36 percent of the country's 2022 population), and is heavily
                          urbanized, with an economy driven by tourism, cargo, construction, manufacturing, commerce and retail, and public
                          services. The city is highly vulnerable to fluvial and pluvial flooding, as it is built on a floodplain and on reclaimed land.
                          Flooding is particularly severe in the low-lying Central Business District between the King George V Gardens (designated
                          as a retention pond) and the coast, and is expected to worsen with climate change. Flooding is exacerbated by clogged




_For Official Use Only_
                          drains filled with sediment and debris, blocked trash screens, limited discharge capacities of culverts and malfunctioning
                          pump systems, which severely restrict water discharge, particularly at high tide. With a smaller population of 5,841 (2022)
                          and poverty rate of 44.9 percent, Anse La Raye is a fishing village 16 km south of the capital and one of the most vulnerable
                          communities in Saint Lucia.8 It is located between two rivers flowing into the bay – the Petite Rivière to the north and the
                          Grande Rivière to the south. The pluvial and fluvial flood hazards in this area are high, mainly along the Petite Rivière, due
                          to insufficient conveyance capacity towards the mouths of both rivers in the village, caused by flow-obstructing culverts,
                          road crossings and accretion in the river outfall to the sea. Anse La Raye was among the hardest-hit areas during the 2013
                          Christmas Eve Trough and the 2014 November Rainfall.

                          8.       Efforts are ongoing to strengthen flood resilience in the two project areas. Castries Vision 2030 aims for
                          transformation into a resilient, livable, and economically vibrant city by the incorporation of green infrastructure,
                          upgrading of storm-water drainage systems, and implementation of sustainable land use and water management
                          practices, including redevelopment of public space. The Community-Based Disaster Risk Reduction Programs led by NEMO
                          installed physical infrastructure and empowered local communities to identify and manage disaster risks; reduce response
                          time; and thus lower their vulnerability to flash floods, landslides, and other hazards. In addition, Anse La Raye has been
                          exploring various nature-based solutions (NBS),9 including mangrove restoration and tree plantations, as well as riverbank
                          stabilization through protective walls and educational programs to raise awareness and build local capacity, with support
                          from CCRIF SPC, OECS Commission, the Government of New Zealand, Division of Forests and Land Resources
                          Development, and the Anse La Raye Disaster Committee.



                          8 Government of Saint Lucia and the World Bank. 2014. Joint Rapid Damage and Needs Assessment for Saint Lucia Flood Event of December 24–25,

                          2013. https://www.gfdrr.org/en/publication/saint-lucia-joint-rapid-damage-and-needs-
                          assessment#:~:text=On%20December%2024%20and%2025,southern%20portion%20of%20the%20island
                          9 NBS is an umbrella term referring to “actions to protect, sustainably manage, and restore natural or modified ecosystems that address societal

                          challenges effectively and adaptively, simultaneously providing human well-being and biodiversity benefits.”

                                                                                                                                                                     Page 4



                                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)


                          9.       Disaster resilience is integral to advancing sustainability and social equity. The country has been actively
                          involving women, ethnic minorities, Indigenous people, and people with disabilities in DRM and climate change adaptation
                          programs and public financial management. Furthermore, the country’s progress on poverty reduction and shared
                          prosperity has been steadily advancing, despite economic shocks due to extreme weather events. According to the most
                          recent poverty estimates from 2016, Saint Lucia’s poverty rate declined by 3.8 percent compared to 2006, reaching 25
                          percent, with the most significant decrease observed in rural areas where poverty dropped by nearly 10 percent to 32.9
                          percent.10 While the unemployment rate fluctuated between 15 and 20 percent over the past decade, a significant
                          proportion of Saint Lucia’s population is still in vulnerable employment: 16.7 percent of women and 28.1 percent of men.
                          This is particularly true for those in informal work arrangements or without social protection, leaving them vulnerable to
                          external shocks.

                           C. Proposed Development Objective(s)


                           Development Objective(s) (From PAD)
                           10.     The Project Development Objectives (PDO) are (i) to enhance resilience to floods in selected localities, and (ii)
                           to strengthen the Government’s capacity for managing climate-related risks.




_For Official Use Only_
                            Key Results

                           11.      The PDO will be measured by the following key results:
                                 (a) People benefiting from climate resilient infrastructure (disaggregated by gender and youth) [number] – World
                                     Bank Group Scorecard indicator
                                 (b) Climate and disaster risk-informed strategies and designs available to the government for investments in
                                     infrastructure (number).


                            D. Project Description


                           12.      The PDO will be achieved through three components.
                           Component 1: Institutional and system strengthening for flood resilience and preparedness (US$5 million equivalent)
                           13.     This component will finance the detailed engineering designs and construction supervision for selected flood
                           mitigation investments within the Castries and Anse La Raye areas, while also strengthening the GoSL’s capacity to
                           prepare for and manage the impacts of climate change and natural hazards. This component will focus on technical
                           assistance and capacity-building to support the integration of DRM in infrastructure planning, design, financing, O&M,
                           and institutional strengthening and coordination. Improvements to existing infrastructure practices will support efforts
                           to prolong the design life and resilience of infrastructure investments. The component will also support investments in
                           equipment and systems that will strengthen O&M processes, improve asset management and strengthen early warning
                           system (EWS) capacity, functionality, and community-based coordination and preparedness.




                                                                                                                                                 Page 5



                                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)


                           Sub-component 1.1: Enhancing Flood Infrastructure Planning, Design, and Construction Supervision
                           14.      This sub-component will finance the detailed engineering designs for selected flood reduction investments,
                           and construction supervision. Technical pre-feasibility and feasibility studies are being carried out under a Recipient-
                           executed Global Facility for Disaster Reduction (GFDRR) Project Preparation Grant (PPG), mobilized under the GFDRR’s
                           EU Resilient Caribbean Program Single-Donor Trust Fund (EUReCA), to guide this project’s investments in Castries and
                           Anse La Raye. Under the PPG, a hydrological and hydraulic modeling framework is being developed for the two target
                           areas using a basin-wide approach, leveraging the availability of the new, high-resolution terrain model developed
                           under the DVRP. The hydraulic models, representing the current state of the drainage system, will be used to assess
                           and map flood risk for a range of current and future climate scenarios, whilst testing a range of cost-effective and
                           environmentally and socially sustainable flood mitigation and urban drainage interventions, including both NBS and
                           Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems (SUDS). Activities under the PPG are helping to identify areas with the highest
                           flood risk and where the implementation of flood mitigation strategies would result in the highest reduction of flood
                           risk. On this basis, the project will finance preliminary and detailed engineering designs for the selected flood reduction
                           investments and construction supervision for the civil works to be carried out under Component 2. Designs will be
                           guided by universal design standards and use inclusive design approaches to address the needs of vulnerable
                           populations, including women, the elderly, and persons with disabilities.
                           15.     NBS principles will be integrated into the design of physical interventions. In and around cities, such solutions




_For Official Use Only_
                           are normally termed SUDS and can include small scale bioswales and green corridors along streets and urban parks.
                           Coastal NBS include mangroves, coral reefs, salt marshes and sandy shores. Upstream NBS include afforestation, the
                           creation of retention through terraces, flow attenuation features, and bio-retention ponds, as well as stream
                           renaturation along the whole channel and tributaries to limit bank erosion. To reduce flood risk using NBS, it is often
                           effective to implement measures upstream of the hazard, to slow and retain water before it reaches the downstream
                           urban areas. This is particularly important for Saint Lucia where steep terrain in the interior of the island can allow
                           rainwater to quickly reach the river, creating a flood peak with rapid conveyance downstream, where flash flooding
                           occurs in the floodplain. Therefore, relevant interventions financed by this project are expected to include both
                           upstream NBS such as storm-water retention systems, and downstream SUDS such as the creation of open green and
                           multi-purpose spaces, bioretention areas and green corridors.
                           16.      The project will leverage the multifunctional characteristics of NBS and offer additional benefits for
                           biodiversity, local economic development, and community well-being such as carbon storage and sequestration,
                           biodiversity restoration, recreational opportunities, and improved food security. The World Bank NBS opportunity scan
                           identified pluvial flood risk, heat stress reduction, and landslide reduction as key benefits of NBS solutions in the target
                           areas. The NBS are expected to improve the urban environment and livability, particularly through upgrading public
                           spaces, integrating green and open areas, and enhancing experiences for tourism and recreation. This may include
                           opportunities to integrate new development with regeneration that boosts economic activities and brings long-term
                           benefits, creating more sustainable, vibrant, and investor-friendly communities. Inclusiveness and safety, particularly
                           for women and girls, will be addressed through improved lighting, controlled vegetation to preserve visibility, and other
                           design features.11
                           17.     Flood mitigation infrastructure investment options will be assessed and prioritized based on cost-benefit and
                           multi-criteria analyses. The prioritization of flood mitigation investment will consider economic, social and
                           environmental factors, including costs, benefits in terms of hazard and/or damage reduction, cost-benefit ratios, and

                          11
                             Trohanis,Zoe Elena; Jongman,Brenden; Escobar Saenz,Mirtha Liliana.
                          Integrating Gender and Social Inclusion in Nature-Based Solutions: Guidance Note (English). Washington, D.C. : World Bank
                          Group. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/099060123165042304

                                                                                                                                                              Page 6



                                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)


                           environmental and social (E&S) impacts. This process will include extensive consultations with a range of stakeholders
                           through participatory processes, such as workshops and roundtables, to ensure that community needs are
                           incorporated, and investments are inclusive and equitable. The introduction of NBS will also be validated with local
                           communities to confirm needs, the process of land acquisition, and maintenance planning with local authorities.
                           18.     The project is also envisioned as a scalable initiative in other priority areas that are vulnerable to flood
                           hazards. Flood risk management is a challenge for low lying towns and urban areas across Saint Lucia, including Vieux
                           Fort, Laborie, and Dennery, which are characterized by sandy beaches. To expand flood resilience in Saint Lucia, the
                           project may also finance the development of additional risk assessments and feasibility studies for other priority areas
                           for phased implementation by the GoSL, with potential support from the World Bank or other development partners.

                           Sub-component 1.2: Strengthening Local Flood Preparedness through better Operations and Maintenance
                           19.     This sub-component will finance consulting services and goods to support the upgrading of O&M procedures
                           and equipment for the drainage systems in the project areas. While drainage infrastructure is regularly maintained by
                           the Department of Infrastructure and the local governments of Castries and Anse La Raye, the effectiveness of existing
                           protocols could be significantly strengthened to enhance water management system maintenance, planning, and
                           operational performance. The project will support the review of existing protocols, institutional arrangements, O&M
                           plans, existing equipment, and provide technical assistance and goods required to enhance flood management capacity
                           for current and future risk. Priority interventions will be guided by the outcomes of the PPG assessment, and may




_For Official Use Only_
                           include improvements to asset management systems and standard operating procedures that guide annual and
                           emergency infrastructure repairs.

                           Sub-component 1.3: Strengthening Flood Early Warning Systems
                           20.      This sub-component will finance consulting services and goods to strengthen flood EWS, particularly for
                           Castries and Anse La Raye. Informed by evidence and anchored in the NCDMS, a national multi-hazard EWS policy and
                           adaptation guide was developed in 2019. In the same year, the SLMS and the WRMA began implementing a Saint Lucia
                           Flash Flood Guidance System (SLFFGS), which became operational in 2021, aimed at real-time computation of flood risk
                           for small watercourses. The system uses gridded global satellite-based precipitation estimates, real-time automatic
                           weather station data, and gridded Meteo-France forecast data to help predict severe weather. The system was
                           enhanced in 2023 to include LiDAR and RADAR12 data; however, the system is not yet used to inform flash flood
                           response. Under the PPG, the performance of the SLFFGS will be conducted, and recommendations made for
                           improvements. Selected interventions are expected to be financed by this sub-component.
                           21.      Community-based flood-EWS for Castries and Anse La Raye will also be improved. Castries flood risk
                           management is supported by a network for monitoring rainfall and stream flows within the growing urban area.13 In
                           Anse La Raye, an EWS has also been established, with NEMO supporting community outreach and awareness-raising
                           initiatives. Nevertheless, these community-based local flood-EWS are no longer functioning well and require
                           rehabilitation. Previous studies have indicated that essential immediate data for issuing accurate warnings is missing
                           and sufficient knowledge of the country’s hydrology is lacking. This sub-component will therefore seek to assess
                           community-based EWS needs, identify gaps and enhance the current EWS infrastructure by procuring and installing
                           suitable instrumentation such as automatic water level monitors, automatic weather stations, and tipping-bucket rain
                           gauges while assessing communications infrastructure needs and protocols. Participatory approaches will be adopted


                          12
                            LIDAR = Light Detection and Ranging, RADAR = Radio Detection and Ranging
                          13
                            Government of Australia. Early Warning System and Hydrological Monitoring for Water Management and Disaster Risk Reduction Project.
                          https://www.sven-homscheid.com/portfolio-item/flood-early-warning-stlucia/?utm_source=chatgpt.com

                                                                                                                                                                  Page 7



                                                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)


                           for information gathering, validation, dissemination, and capacity building, particularly to ensure that ‘last-mile’
                           warnings are not only understandable, but also actionable by the community (especially vulnerable groups). This will
                           foster local ownership and accessibility particularly among the vulnerable groups such as women and people with
                           disabilities.14 The aim is to set up more accurate and live information that could feed into the EWS already in place and
                           strengthen flood preparedness in the project areas.

                           Component 2. Enhancement of critical flood-risk reduction infrastructure (US$22 million equivalent).
                           22.      This component will finance the construction of prioritized infrastructure investments that will increase the
                           resilience of communities to flood and climate change-induced hazards in Castries and Anse La Raye. The component
                           will support the implementation of prioritized activities designed under Component 1, which will support an integrated
                           river basin approach toward urban flood risk management and reduction. The identification of key infrastructure
                           investments is being ongoing under the PPG. Given the vulnerability of Saint Lucia to climate change and natural
                           hazards, the design and construction of all infrastructure supported by this component will be assessed against future
                           climate patterns and include opportunities to integrate mitigation and adaptation measures. For example, construction
                           of drainage and stabilization infrastructure will investigate the use of higher-quality, more disaster-resilient materials
                           that incorporate climate change considerations.15
                           23.      Prioritized investment activities are likely to include both gray infrastructure solutions and NBS. Gray
                           infrastructure investments are expected to include solutions such as the rehabilitation of urban drainage (for example




_For Official Use Only_
                           new, enhanced, or rehabilitated water retention areas; pumping stations; flood walls and channel widening; dredging
                           or removal of obstacles; and increasing access to drainage systems), slope stabilization, river embankment protection,
                           and sea defense. Nature-based solutions are expected to include the establishment of green corridors, river and stream
                           renaturation, improvements to upstream small scale catchment areas and storm water retention systems, and the
                           establishment of bioretention and sediment areas within green spaces and long public corridors.
                           24.      For Castries, redevelopment of the Constitution and King George V Parks and solutions for drainage
                           downstream in the market area, which is the lowest point and where both the downtown area and the King George
                           area naturally drain, have been proposed as possible project interventions. As a natural low point, gravity-based
                           drainage is impeded at high tides, and flood risk management interventions will likely require a combination of NBS and
                           gray-infrastructure investments such as repair or replacement of pumping stations to discharge water in certain areas.
                           Upstream interventions to manage sediment and waste entering the urban drainage system are envisioned, as the
                           current drainage system is heavily silted, limiting drainage capacity in heavy rainfall events. Potential solutions such as
                           sediment traps and permeable check dams could help slow runoff and reduce clogging. Flood risk reduction, including
                           riverine flooding, could also be improved by floodplain recovery and detention areas along waterways, and by designing
                           multifunctional civic/recreation spaces and linear parks downstream, where space is available. In this regard, the project
                           may finance coastal protection (e.g., seawalls, NBS), street lighting, public facilities like toilets, and amenities such as
                           seating. However, such interventions must consider current land use and the limited availability of public land in
                           upstream areas.


                          14
                             Yore, Rebekah; Fearnley, Carina; Fordham, Maureen; Kelman, Ilan. Designing Inclusive, Accessible Early Warning Systems: Good Practices and
                          Entry Points (English). Washington, D.C. : World Bank Group. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/099050123155016375
                          15
                             The use of more resilient materials and construction techniques is economically beneficial and provides savings in total ownership costs cost over
                          the life of the building —including annual maintenance costs, energy costs, and hazard costs—were generally lower. These economic benefits stem
                          from the reduced hazard loss from using more resilient materials and construction methods, as well as from reduced energy use and CO2 emissions
                          from improving the building’s insulation and using greener concrete options with less embedded CO2. Bailey, J., Carvajal, P., García Fernández, J.,
                          Gischler, C., Henriquez, C., & Minoja, L. 2021. Building a more Resilient and Low-Carbon Caribbean - Report 1: Climate Resiliency and Building
                          Materials in the Caribbean. https://doi.org/10.18235/0003842

                                                                                                                                                                          Page 8



                                                                                                                                                                Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)


                           25.      In Anse La Raye, possible NBS and gray solutions, integrated at the urban, riverine and coastal scale, could
                           include improvements in the river discharge through managing the sand barriers at the coast and stabilizing its outfalls
                           with abutments, by creating more retention areas upstream and in the coastal town itself, and improving the drainage
                           system in town with sluice gates upstream and pumps downstream. Historically, the town’s sports field served as a
                           flood retention area, which could be restored to create more retention space for potential flood waters. A previous
                           raising of the sports field rendered the central town drain largely ineffective, leading to stagnant water and associated
                           public health risks due to discharges from open sewers and limited flushing caused by backwater from the river mouth.
                           Installing a pumping station at the downstream end of the drain, along with a sluice gate upstream, could enable
                           controlled flushing and help restore drainage function. Besides their primary flood management function, such
                           interventions will also provide socio-economic and health benefits to the community.

                           Component 3: Project management and supervision (US$3 million equivalent).
                           26.      This component will finance consulting services, goods, and equipment for the Project Coordination Unit (PCU)
                           to effectively manage key functions, including planning, coordination, financial management (FM), procurement, citizen
                           engagement and E&S throughout the implementation period. Specifically, this component will enable the PCU to
                           provide technical and operational support for: (i) project management and coordination, including financial
                           management and disbursement, audits, procurement, contract administration, E&S risk and impact management,
                           grievance mechanisms, communications, training, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and reporting and evaluation; (ii)




_For Official Use Only_
                           carrying out citizen engagement and social awareness activities; and (iii) incremental project operating costs. The PCU,
                           through the Department of Economic Development and Youth Economy (DoED), will also be responsible for reporting
                           project progress to the Project Steering Committee (PSC).



                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate
                           Legal Operational Policies                                                           Triggered?
                           Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                          No
                           Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                    No


                          Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts


                          27.      A hydrologic model prepared under the PPG will analyze the causes of flooding at Castries and Anse La Raye, and
                          will collate the information (including E&S analysis) needed to identify options for potential investments in resilient
                          infrastructure. Such options may include NBS for attenuation of storm-water runoff and to protect and enhance the urban
                          environments during extreme weather events.

                          28.     As the specific nature of the potential investments is yet to be determined, a 'baseline scoping report for options
                          analysis' has been prepared at appraisal to aid in the comparison and selection of resilient infrastructure options and
                          management services to be delivered under the project. The 'baseline scoping report for options analysis' collates the E&S
                          information needed to compare the options and assist in deciding which options to proceed with. The report identifies
                          and describes the E&S features in the modelled areas and immediate surrounds; provides information relating to national
                          planning and permitting requirements; and identifies land ownership using readily available information sources. The


                                                                                                                                                 Page 9



                                                                                                                                         Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)


                          report collates the data needed for the efficient selection of appropriate options to take forward under the main project,
                          not only ensuring the selection of the options is made on a justified and robust basis but also ensuring that realistic
                          timeframes are integrated into the program for the works.

                          29.     A Stakeholder Engagement Plan has been prepared, consulted and disclosed prior to appraisal. An Environmental
                          and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), which will be part of the legal agreement for the project and set out the Government
                          of Saint Lucia’s commitments to delivering the project in accordance with the World Bank’s Environmental and Social
                          Framework (ESF) and national requirements has been discussed and disclosed before project appraisal. The ESCP sets out
                          the E&S instruments and documentation that would need to be developed during project implementation and the
                          corresponding timeframes.

                          30.     Constructing the selected options may require works in protected areas, in congested urban areas with high traffic
                          and many pedestrians, or in more rural communities, and may require land to be acquired or used. The works could impact
                          areas protected for their historic and biodiversity importance directly or indirectly, and the safety and health of the
                          workers who will undertake the construction as well as members of the community living and working in the vicinity will
                          need to be protected.

                          31.    The E&S risk rating is considered Moderate, and ESS1, ESS2, ESS3, ESS4, ESS5, ESS6, ESS8, and ESS10 are
                          considered relevant at this stage.




_For Official Use Only_
                           E. Implementation

                           Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

                          32.     The project will be implemented by the Ministry of Finance, Economic Development and Youth Economy (MoF),
                          which has a track record of successfully implementing World Bank investment projects. Over 30 years the MoF, through
                          its DoED, has successfully executed projects across sectors, with a focus on DRM-related initiatives. These projects include
                          the Emergency Recovery and Disaster Management Project (DMP) (P070430, 1998-2005), Disaster Management II
                          (P086469, DMP II 2004-2012), the Hurricane Tomas Recovery Project (P125205, 2011-2014), DVRP (P127226, 2014-2023),
                          and the recently approved Saint Lucia Disaster Risk Management Cat DDO (P181432, 2025). The GoSL’s performance on
                          these projects has consistently been rated satisfactory by the World Bank. The MoF will continue to lead the
                          implementation of this project through its DoED.

                          33.      Project oversight will be managed by a PCU within the DoED. The PCU will be headed by a dedicated project
                          coordinator and supported by technical, E&S, FM, procurement, and M&E specialists. Reporting directly to the Permanent
                          Secretary of Economic Development and Youth Economy, the project coordinator will lead project implementation and
                          supervise the PCU in planning, organizing, and executing the project’s daily administrative, technical, and fiduciary
                          activities. The PCU will also coordinate with technical counterparts to ensure their inputs are effectively integrated across
                          key project activities. The organizational structure of the project team, along with the duties and responsibilities of all the
                          team members, will be provided in the Project Operations Manual (POM).

                          34.      An interim PCU has been established to support preparation and expedite implementation upon project
                          effectiveness. The interim PCU has been staffed with an interim project coordinator and FM, procurement, and an E&S
                          specialist (who has experience from supporting four other WB projects in SLU), and hired with funding from the PPG. The


                                                                                                                                                   Page 10



                                                                                                                                            Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)


                          PPG is also being used to initiate the procurement process for all remaining PCU staff including an engineer, an FM officer,
                          and a procurement analyst.

                          35.     Given the multi-sectoral nature of the project, an intergovernmental PSC will be established, comprising
                          permanent secretaries of relevant ministries. Project implementation will be closely coordinated with other government
                          agencies for their technical inputs, including the Castries City Council, Department of Infrastructure, MoH, MoA and its
                          Forestry Division, WRMA, NIPPU, National Emergency Management Organization, and SLMS. The PSC will consist of the
                          heads of respective Ministries, agencies and departments or their designated representatives and be maintained
                          throughout project implementation. The PSC will be the principal coordinating body for the project; however, it will not
                          be a decision-making body. The PSC will be chaired by the Permanent Secretary of the DoED. This committee will provide
                          oversight for project implementation as well as central policy guidance, as required periodically. The frequency of the PSC
                          meetings will be determined in the POM. Memorandums of Understanding are not required across government ministries.

                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
                           CONTACT POINT

                           World Bank
                             Jared Phillip Mercadante




_For Official Use Only_
                             Senior Disaster Risk Management Specialist

                             Artessa Saldivar-Sali
                             Senior Infrastructure Specialist

                           Borrower/Client/Recipient
                            Ministry of Finance, Economic Development and Youth Economy
                            Philip Pierre
                            Prime MInister
                            opm@govt.lc

                           Implementing Agencies
                            Department of Economic Development, Ministry of Finance, Economic Development and Youth Economy
                            Paul Hilaire
                            Permanent Secretary
                            paul.hilaire@govt.lc

                           FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

                           The World Bank
                           1818 H Street, NW
                           Washington, D.C. 20433
                           Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                           Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate

                                                                                                                                                 Page 11



                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Saint Lucia Urban Resilient Flood Investment Project (P504998)


                          APPROVAL


                          Task Team Leader(s):                     Jared Phillip Mercadante, Artessa Saldivar-Sali

                          Approved By

                          Practice Manager/Manager:

                          Country Director:                        Alexander Agosti                         24-Jul-2025




_For Official Use Only_




                                                                                                                                 Page 12



                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
