Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                               The World Bank
                                                                               Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project(P504170)



                                                                        @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure _For
                  Authorized          Public Disclosure Authorized




                       Official Use Only_
                                                                                             Project Information Document (PID)

                                                                                           Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 06-Feb-2024 | Report No: PIDDC00324




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                     Feb 06, 2024                                                                                       Page 1 of 11
                                    The World Bank
                                    Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project(P504170)


                             @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
                             BASIC INFORMATION


                             A. Basic Project Data
                             Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                  Operation Name
                             Lebanon                        P504170                       Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project
                             Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date      Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
                             MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH          30-May-2024                   08-Aug-2024                   Water
                             AFRICA
                             Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                   Implementing Agency
                             Investment Project             Lebanese Republic             Council for Development &
                             Financing (IPF)                                              Reconstruction, Beirut and
                                                                                          Mount Lebanon Water




_For Official Use Only_
                                                                                          Establishment

                            Proposed Development Objective(s)
                             The project development objective is to increase the provision of potable water to the residents in the project area
                             within the Greater Beirut region, including those in the low-income neighborhoods of Southern Beirut, and to
                             strengthen the capacity of the Beirut Mount Lebanon Water Establishment in utility operations.

                             @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
                             PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                             Maximizing Finance for Development

                             Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                    No
                             Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?              No

                             SUMMARY
                               Total Operation Cost                                                                                            150.00

                               Total Financing                                                                                                 150.00
                                          of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                 150.00
                               Financing Gap                                                                                                      0.00

                             DETAILS
                               World Bank Group Financing
                                  International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                               150.00

                          Feb 06, 2024                                                                                                         Page 2 of 11
                                    The World Bank
                                    Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project(P504170)




                             @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
                           Environmental and Social Risk Classification                      Concept Review Decision
                           Substantial




                            Other Decision (as needed)

                            B. Introduction and Context

                            Country Context

                           1.        Lebanon has been grappling with a multifaceted crisis since 2019, wiping out 15 years of economic growth. The




_For Official Use Only_
                           country, with a population of 6.77 million, harbors the highest per capita concentration of refugees globally, notably
                           hosting 1.5 million displaced Syrians. The economic and financial downturn, compounded by the COVID-19 pandemic, the
                           Beirut explosion, and external shocks like the war in Ukraine, led to a drastic drop in nominal GDP from nearly US$52
                           billion in 2019 to an estimated US$18.2 billion in 2023. The national currency lost over 98% of its value, causing triple-digit
                           inflation since July 2020, with year-on-year inflation averaging 150% in 2021 and escalating to 171.2% in 2022.


                           2.       Lebanon faces a deepening crisis in 2024 due to the prolonged political vacuum, institutional instability, and
                           the unprecedented socioeconomic and financial crisis lasting over four years. Military confrontation at the southern
                           Lebanese border with Israel has been intensifying and widening along the entire southern border, leading to internal
                           displacement of more than 80,000 people as of January 2024. The ongoing conflict's potential spillover from Gaza adds to
                           the challenges, disrupting local economies, increasing demand for rental apartments, and impacting GDP growth
                           negatively. The adverse shocks have driven a significant portion of the population into poverty and vulnerability to food
                           insecurity, with estimates suggesting that 19% of the population (1.05 million people) are already facing acute food
                           insecurity, and this figure is expected to rise without intervention. Additionally, the crisis has caused staff attrition and
                           absenteeism in the public sector, severely hindering key government functions and operations, and exacerbating the
                           breakdown of public services and infrastructure. The compounding challenges, along with climatic changes, pose further
                           threats to Lebanon's environment, economy, and social structure, with warmer temperatures, increased rainfall
                           variability, and extreme weather events impacting crucial sectors like water, agriculture, and tourism.


                            Sectoral and Institutional Context

                           3.      Water in Lebanon is paradoxically abundant, yet scarce. Precipitation is among the highest in the MENA region
                           and annual average water resources exceed demand. Precipitation ranges from 700 to 1,000 mm along the coastline to
                           1,600 mm in inland mountain areas. Per capita availability of renewable water resources is estimated at around 848 cubic
                           meters annually. However, compared to neighboring countries, Lebanon receives around 70 percent of its annual average
                           precipitation within the wet season (October to March), while there is a significant gap demand and availability of water


                          Feb 06, 2024                                                                                                           Page 3 of 11
                                    The World Bank
                                    Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project(P504170)


                           during the dry season (April to September). This gap is expected to grow and model projections suggest that, due to
                           climate change, water availability during dry seasons will be up to 50 percent lower by 2040. The projected reduction of
                           snowpack accumulation, increased evaporative losses, the prevalence of karstic groundwater resources1, and the lack of
                           storage infrastructure imply that it is difficult to store and carry over the surplus wet season water resources to the dry
                           season, leaving populations vulnerable to drought. This causes additional pressures on the surface water resources that
                           are already highly exploited, and the groundwater resources that are at risk of over-exploitation.

                           4.      The Beirut Mount Lebanon Water Establishment (BMLWE) is responsible for water supply and associated
                           services in the Greater Beirut and Mount Lebanon area. These comprise the areas of Jbeil, Barouk, Metn, Ein el Delbi and
                           Keserwan and serve a population of 2.9 million, of whom approximately 350,000 reside in the low-income neighborhoods
                           in Southern Beirut. BMLWE operates as a commercial entity and is headed by a Director General who also chairs the Board.
                           In 2020, BMLWE employed 415 people against an authorized staff strength of 1,120. The water utility is thus considerably
                           understaffed, mainly due to a longstanding hiring freeze in the Government of Lebanon (GoL) and natural attrition.

                           5.       The water sector faces significant governance challenges that impede effective resource management and the
                           delivery of sustainable water services. Despite the adoption of integrated water resources management principles,




_For Official Use Only_
                           progress toward meeting these principles is considerably below the regional average.2 Complex legal frameworks and
                           regulations have resulted in an opaque institutional structure, diminishing accountability and transparency.
                           Responsibilities for water management are fragmented across ministries and administrative levels, leading to overlap of
                           responsibilities and a lack of accountability. Coordination among stakeholders is deficient, and there is a notable absence
                           of reliable data for informed planning, strategy development, policy formulation, and investment prioritization.

                           6.       Despite the relatively high coverage rate of public water networks (90 percent), continuity of supply is
                           extremely low. The Beirut Mount Lebanon (BML) region, which accounts for 60.4 percent of total connected households,
                           receives only three hours of water supply/day during the summer season.3 This seasonal water imbalance is primarily
                           caused by very low water storage capacity, high amount of water lost to the sea, growing water demand and the deficiency
                           of existing water networks. Average technical and commercial losses in the national level are as high as 46 percent.45
                           Water abstractions from public and private wells are not measured regularly or continuously, with around 100,000 private
                           unlicensed and unregistered wells at the national level, according to data from the Ministry of Energy and Water (MoEW).
                           The inability of the public sector to meet basic household needs for water has led to the development of a parallel informal
                           and off network private water market, mostly water trucking, with costs accounting for up to 16 percent of total household
                           income in summer,6 while providing water of dubious quality from groundwater wells.7 Managing Beirut’s water supply
                           has been made even more difficult by the unforeseen influx of more than a million Syrian refugees into Lebanon,
                           compounding an already serious water deficit and stretching water resources to the limit, as well as other public services.




                           1 Groundwater structures of Lebanon are mostly karstic implying that most of the rainfall rapidly reaches the sea. For this reason, they do not allow

                           storing water to be carried over dry season with the consequent high reduction of their yield.
                           2 UNEP. 2021. Progress on Integrated Water Resources Management. Global Indicator 6.5.1 Updates and Acceleration Needs.
                           3
                             Choueiri et. Al. 2022. Energy-water nexus of formal and informal water systems in Beirut, Lebanon. Link
                           4 National Water Sector Strategy 2020.
                           5 The levels of NRW are likely to have increased since 2020 due to the WE’s inability to conduct proper O&M.
                           6
                             Alamine. 2022.Water rich and thirsty – Taping Lebanon’s renewable health. Synaps Network. Link
                           7
                             Choueiri et. Al. 2022. Energy-water nexus of formal and informal water systems in Beirut, Lebanon. Link

                          Feb 06, 2024                                                                                                                                Page 4 of 11
                                     The World Bank
                                     Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project(P504170)


                           7.      Maintaining operations are a permanent challenge in the water supply and sanitation sector. The water sector's
                           operational capabilities are severely hampered by the exorbitant dollarized maintenance costs, in addition to significant
                           water loss. Despite the adoption of a plan by the MoEW in 2022, to improve the sector’s financial sustainability, including
                           the approval of yearly water tariff increases, the current rates remain below what is needed for the Water Establishments
                           (WEs) to cover rising operational costs, much less cover capital expenditures.8 The collapse of the power grid exacerbates
                           the challenges, further impeding the sector's functionality and pushes up the fuel costs, adding an additional layer of
                           complexity to the already dire circumstances for water production, service delivery, and overall quality of water.

                           8.      There are several opportunities to increase the resilience of the water sector and reduce vulnerability to climate
                           change. The Updated National Water Sector Strategy of 2020-2035 prioritizes investments of more than US$1.8 billion to
                           ensure improved water security in Lebanon. These investments mainly address the infrastructure needs to improve water
                           use efficiency and increase adaptive capacity, while supporting a series of institutional reforms to ensure adaptive
                           governance, enhance operational efficiency and build resilience. Given the constraints imposed by the economic crisis,
                           these investments need to be prioritized, starting with a series of relatively low cost, no regret measures that can improve
                           water use efficiency, potable water quality, reduce non-revenue water, and improve financial sustainability within the
                           sector.




_For Official Use Only_
                           Project context
                           9.       On December 16, 2010, the World Bank approved a US$200 million investment project (Loan No. 7967) to
                           finance a portion of the Greater Beirut Water Supply Project (GBWSP). Following a series of particularly arid summers,
                           rising popular discontent about the quantity and quality of water, and the clear need for a solution to close the widening
                           water gap, the World Bank agreed to support the GBWSP. The BMLWE and GoL were to finance an additional US$140
                           million and US$30 million, respectively. The objective of the project was to provide an additional 250,000 cubic meters of
                           water every day to the Greater Beirut and Mount Lebanon region. The infrastructure included the construction of the
                           entire water supply system —conveyance, treatment plant, and a gravity-fed distribution system (supply reservoirs and
                           distribution networks).

                           10.       Most of the GBWSP activities have been successfully completed, but a financing gap has resulted in unfinished
                           critical infrastructure and a system that is not yet delivering water. Key investments financed by the Project, spanning
                           three main components, have been finalized. These include the excavation of 24 kilometers of tunnels, the rehabilitation
                           of over 180 kilometers of the water distribution network in Greater Beirut, and the construction of 23 water supply
                           reservoirs with storage capacities ranging from 500 m3 to 1,000 m3. The BMLWE completed all water networks and placed
                           them into service since June 2019. Under the initiative to enhance BMLWE's capacity, the pilot zone to enable conditions
                           for 24/7 continuous water supply has been extended to an additional 17 zones within the Greater Beirut area, and the
                           SCADA operation room at BMLWE has been completed. BMLWE has also successfully installed smart water meters within
                           the designated project area. In addition, the Project has made significant progress of some key infrastructure components
                           that need to be completed (notably the completion of the water treatment plant and the lining of the bulk water tunnels).
                           However, the severe economic and financial crisis in Lebanon since 2019 has significantly hindered the Government's
                           capacity to provide its share of co-financing for the Project and to complete the Project under the initial agreed financing
                           plan. In addition to the Government’s financing constraints, the project cost estimates have increased as a result of the
                           economic crisis. The main drivers of this cost increase include a sharp rise in prices of essential construction materials,
                           particularly fuel and concrete, and budgeting adjustments to account for Lebanon’s instability, resulting in an upward

                           8
                               MoEW. 2022. Roadmap to Recovery of the Water Sector in Lebanon. Link

                          Feb 06, 2024                                                                                                        Page 5 of 11
                                    The World Bank
                                    Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project(P504170)


                           revision of the risk premium and increased contingency allocations. These factors have created a financing gap to complete
                           the works of critical infrastructure which include the Wardanieh Water Treatment Plant (WTP), the Remaining Tunnel
                           Works (RTW) contract,9 the Remaining Pipelines works (RPW) contract, and a regional reservoir.

                           11.      The proposed Project will build on the progress already achieved in enhancing the water systems in the Greater
                           Beirut Mount Lebanon area and the institutional capacity of the implementing agencies (BMLWE and CDR). These funds
                           will enable the finalization of the water supply infrastructure, ensuring the achievement of the objective of bringing
                           urgently needed additional water supply to Greater Beirut which is vulnerable to droughts during summer. In addition,
                           the Project will serve to continue improving the capacity of the operational and financial capacity of the BMLWE. There
                           will be no changes in the responsible implementing agencies, and the CDR will oversee the RTW and the RPW, while the
                           Beirut BMLWE will manage the water treatment plant contract. Both CDR and BMLWE have taken steps to ensure that
                           the implementation of the Project can commence promptly upon effectiveness. The construction of the Wardanieh WTP
                           is well underway and ready to receive the additional funds, and the procurement process for the RTW is well advanced,
                           with expectations to conclude it in time for commencement of the works if the proposed Project is approved.




_For Official Use Only_
                            Relationship to CPF

                           12.      The project objective aligns with the World Bank's strategy in Lebanon. The project focuses on supporting water
                           supply infrastructure, which constitutes a pivotal aspect of both human and economic development. Furthermore, it
                           involves decreasing fuel dependency and includes specific interventions to facilitate the cost-recovery of the BMLWE, both
                           of which are water sector challenges identified in the latest Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) for Lebanon that is
                           currently under development. Moreover, the SGBWSP is consistent with the World Bank Group’s Country Partnership
                           Framework FY17–22 (as discussed by the Board of Executive Directors on July 14, 2016; Report 94768‐LB) focus areas of:
                           (i) expanding access to and quality of service delivery; and (ii) expanding economic opportunities and increasing human
                           capital, particularly improving the environment for private sector investment.

                           13.       The project aligns with the goals of the Paris Agreement and Lebanon’s pathway towards low greenhouse gas
                           emissions and climate-resilient development outlined in the country’s latest Nationally Determined Contributions
                           (NDCs).10 The project will play a crucial role in meeting Lebanon's unconditional commitment to increase its Greenhouse
                           Gas (GHG) emission reduction target from 15 percent to 20 percent compared to the Business-As-Usual scenario. This will
                           be achieved through the implementation of a gravity-based water supply system, leading to substantial emissions
                           reduction by reducing the reliance on private water tanker trucks for delivering drinking water. Moreover, the envisioned
                           water supply system is expected to bolster several adaptation-oriented commitments outlined in Lebanon’s NDCs,
                           particularly those pertaining to: (i) sustainable use of natural resources; (ii) the development of sustainable water services;
                           and (iii) ensuring public health safety and reducing disaster risk. In addition, and in line with the conclusions of the Country
                           Climate and Development Report (CCDR), the SGBWSP is expected to improve Lebanon’s adaptive capacity to climate
                           shocks, such as droughts and floods, by increasing the resilience and reliability of the water supply, supporting tools aimed
                           at reducing the non-revenue water (NRW), and implementing reforms to enhance the operational performance of the


                           9 The excavation works are completed, but the lining of the tunnels was disrupted by the bankruptcy of the main contractor responsible for the

                           tunnel works.
                           10 As of December 2023, the GoL had not submitted the climate-related National Adaptation Plan (NAP) or Long-term Strategy (LTS) to the UNFCCC,

                           and the NDCs continue to be the single national framework outlining Lebanon’s climate strategy.

                          Feb 06, 2024                                                                                                                             Page 6 of 11
                                    The World Bank
                                    Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project(P504170)


                           service providers. No specific risks with respect to the mitigation and adaptation aspects of the Paris Alignment
                           Assessment have been flagged at this stage.


                            C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
                            The project development objective is to increase the provision of potable water to the residents in the project area
                            within the Greater Beirut region, including those in the low-income neighborhoods of Southern Beirut, and to
                            strengthen the capacity of the Beirut Mount Lebanon Water Establishment in utility operations.


                             Key Results (From PCN)
                           14.      The achievement of the project development objectives will be monitored and measured by the following key
                           results indicators:
                                    • People provided with year-round access to improved water sources through piped household water
                                        connections in drought prone areas (male/female).
                                    • Volume (m3 /day) of additional potable water distributed in the project area.




_For Official Use Only_
                                    • Increase in average number of service hours per week during the dry season.


                            D. Concept Description

                           15.     The proposed Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project extends the Bank’s support to the provision of
                           potable water in the Lebanese Republic. Upon completion, the Project will provide potable water to 1.2 million residents
                           of the Greater Beirut area, including 350,000 low-income beneficiaries. The Project is expected to supply an additional
                           250,000 cubic meters of potable water per day, covering approximately 20 percent of the peak water demand in the
                           Greater Beirut area during the critical dry period between April and October.

                           16.      The Project will support the remaining works of the construction of a ‘source to tap’ water supply system that
                           was started under the GBWSP, and reforms to strengthen the capacity of the BMLWE. The water supply system consists
                           of the conveyance through 24 Km of tunnels, a water treatment plant located in Wardanieh, and the low emissions,
                           gravity-fed distribution system in the Greater Beirut Area (supply reservoirs and distribution networks). The Project will
                           ensure the operationalization of the system through the following three components:

                           17.     Component 1: Bulk water infrastructure (US$115 million). The component will support finalizing the construction
                           of three key infrastructure of the water supply system: (i) lining of two water tunnel conveyors of 3 km and 21 km; (iii)
                           completion of the 4 km transmission pipelines; and (iii) a regional reservoir.
                              i.   Subcomponent 1.1 – Tunnel and ancillaries works: The works include the lining of 24 kilometers of already
                                   excavated tunnel and the installation of shafts, syphons and other structures which are vital to ensure safety of
                                   the entire system.
                              ii.    Subcomponent 1.2 – Pipeline works: This subcomponent will finance the remaining works for the completion of
                                     the GBWSP twin transmission pipelines.
                             iii.    Subcomponent 1.3 – Regional reservoir: This subcomponent will improve the reliability of the water supply
                                     system through the construction of a 37,800 cubic meter capacity regional reservoir (Hadath 125). The reservoir

                          Feb 06, 2024                                                                                                      Page 7 of 11
                                        The World Bank
                                        Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project(P504170)


                                        will be located after the tunnel conveying the treated water from the Wardanieh WTP to the rehabilitated water
                                        supply distribution system, for the purpose of regulating the flow of the stream and enhancing the reliability of
                                        the system.
                           18.    Component 2 Remaining works at the Wardanieh WTP (US$25 million). This component will finance: (i)
                           remaining works for the completion of the Wardanieh WTP (capacity 250,000 m3/day); and (ii) necessary adjustments to
                           the Wardanieh WTP design to increase its ability to treat raw water, based on the latest water quality measurements. The
                           remaining works and adjustments will enable the plant to absorb the average levels of pollutants recorded during the 4-
                           year monitoring program conducted under the GBWSP and bring the water up to international drinking water standards.

                           19.     Component 3: Advancing the reform agenda for improved utility operations (US$10 million). The component
                           includes capacity strengthening of the BMLWE geared towards improving the operational efficiency, financial
                           sustainability and citizen orientation of the BMLWE. It will also include financing for project management activities.

                                  i.       Subcomponent 3.1 - Operational efficiency: Preparation of a NRW Reduction Roadmap including: (i)
                                           development of a NRW reduction baseline (water audit); (ii) NRW reduction objectives and targets; (iii)




_For Official Use Only_
                                           establishment of a NRW-reduction unit, including its TORs; (iv) budget needs to ensure NRW-reduction
                                           monitoring in already designed pilot zones, and budget needs for their scale-up; (v) investment plan and
                                           prioritization to scale-up the 24/7 pilot zone to other areas within the BMLWE.
                                  ii.      Subcomponent 3.2 - Financial sustainability: This subcomponent will include: (i) an audit of BMLWE assets; (ii)
                                           development of an inventory of fixed assets with re-evaluation and classification; and (iii) implementation of a
                                           new module to record fixed assets in BMLWE’s Enterprise Resource Planning software (ERP). These will allow
                                           BMLWE to determine when to repair, rehabilitate, or replace an asset, increasing cost-effectiveness of
                                           operations and improving transparency in financial processes.
                                 iii.      Subcomponent 3.3 – Citizen orientation: This subcomponent will work towards embedding citizen
                                           engagement within the project to enhance responsiveness and accountability of water sector agencies and
                                           increase awareness and trust of the public. it will include: (i) preparation of a phased Citizen Engagement (CE)
                                           plan to embed CE activities into existing communications and outreach processes within implementing entities,
                                           to be further discussed with the implementing agencies and detailed by project appraisal, taking into account
                                           the client’s capacity and ability; (ii) supporting the capacity building of the implementing agencies to roll out
                                           communication and outreach activities. This will include strengthening the implementing agencies’
                                           institutional capacity for gender mainstreaming and gender informed activities; and (iii) scaling-up CE activities,
                                           when possible, to include public awareness campaigns that could cover water conservation campaigns for
                                           improved service delivery to consumers and responsiveness of water utilities to client demand.
                                 iv.       Subcomponent 3.4 – Project management. This subcomponent will finance the setting up and operation of
                                           the Project Management Units (PMU) consisting of key specialist staff to implement, monitor and report on
                                           project progress.




                          Feb 06, 2024                                                                                                               Page 8 of 11
                                    The World Bank
                                    Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project(P504170)



                             @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
                             Legal Operational Policies                                                           Triggered?
                             Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                          No
                             Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                    No


                             Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts


                           Environmental Risk Rating Substantial
                           Proposed environmental risk rating of this new project is substantial as per Annex 1 of the October 2023 E&S Directive.
                           While the first GBWSP was classified as a Category A under the Bank Operation Policies on safeguards with OP4.01 &
                           OP4.12 triggered, the substantial risk for the new project is justified by the fact that a significant percentage of the
                           construction works have been completed under the ongoing GBWSP. The remaining works are associated with typical




_For Official Use Only_
                           construction E&S risks for the remaining tunnel works, pipeline works and the Wardanieh WTP. These risks will potentially
                           include air, dust and noise emissions, generation of solid and liquid non-hazardous wastes, pollution of soils, use of
                           chemicals, unsustainable use of construction materials from borrow-pits/quarries and the potential disruption to natural
                           habitats and eco-systems linked to such quarries. In addition, health and safety risks to workers include working at height
                           and in confined spaces, falls, trips, electrocution, slippage, noise, vibration, moving objects, airborne dust and materials,
                           manual handling…etc. For the construction works which will take place nearby existing communities, there is potential
                           high exposure levels to health and safety risks from dust and noise emissions, blocked or reduced mobility, road accidents
                           from construction vehicles, lack of access to services and businesses, etc. These risks though significant in nature yet
                           typical, limited to construction sites, temporary, predictable, reversible and can be avoided or mitigated with technical
                           feasible solutions and proper implementation of E&S mitigation measures following the risk management hierarchy, and
                           with strong E&S site monitoring and supervision, as per the implementation of the first project, taking also into
                           consideration application of ESF requirements proper to this operation. Operational E&S risks are associated with the
                           WTP.

                           Social Risk Rating Moderate
                           The social risks and impacts of the project are considered moderate, with minimal significance due to the completion of
                           most works under the first GBWSP. Health and safety impacts at the Wardanieh WTP site are expected to be low to
                           moderate, with the site being isolated, surrounded by uninhabited and seasonal housings, fenced, and guarded. Labor
                           influx risks and associated SEA/SH (low) are low as workers are likely to be local, similar to the first GBWSP. Low to
                           moderate risk of ineffective communication and consultation with affected communities may exist. This will be addressed
                           through stakeholder engagement as per ESS10. Temporary traffic disruptions and nuisances are anticipated during
                           remaining tunnel and pipeline works. The project aims to serve vulnerable groups in Greater Beirut areas, which include
                           vulnerable groups in poverty pockets and particularly those in the low-income neighborhoods of Southern Beirut,
                           therefore the risk of exclusion is deemed negligible. Water fees post-project are expected to be affordable, even to
                           vulnerable groups, improving upon the current expensive private water supply (due to lack of public water supply) , with
                           installment payment options remaining available. No new land acquisitions are required for the new loan, as these were
                           completed under the first GBWSP, with compensation nearly finalized. Monitoring and regular reporting of RAP


                          Feb 06, 2024                                                                                                         Page 9 of 11
                                    The World Bank
                                    Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project(P504170)


                           implementation and PAP compensation collections will continue. Any additional mitigation measures will be identified
                           through a gap assessment of the ESIA from the parent project.

                             @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
                             CONTACT POINT

                             World Bank
                               Elvira Cusiqoyllor Broeks Motta
                               Water Specialist

                               Sally Zgheib
                               Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

                             Borrower/Client/Recipient
                              Lebanese Republic




_For Official Use Only_
                              Georges Maarawi, Ministry of Finance Acting Director General, georgesm@finance.gov.lb

                             Implementing Agencies
                              Council for Development & Reconstruction
                              Elie Moussalli, Project Director, eliemoussalli@hotmail.com

                              Beirut and Mount Lebanon Water Establishment
                              Jean Gebran, Managing Director and Chairman, jeanygebran@gmail.com

                             FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

                             The World Bank
                             1818 H Street, NW
                             Washington, D.C. 20433
                             Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                             Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                             @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
                             APPROVAL


                             Task Team Leader(s):                      Elvira Cusiqoyllor Broeks Motta, Sally Zgheib

                             Approved By

                             Practice Manager/Manager:



                          Feb 06, 2024                                                                                                Page 10 of 11
                                    The World Bank
                                    Second Greater Beirut Water Supply Project(P504170)



                             Country Director:




_For Official Use Only_




                          Feb 06, 2024                                                    Page 11 of 11
