Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                 The World Bank
                                                                 Nile Civil Society for Climate Resilience Project(P505581)               Project Information Document (PID)




Public Disclosure Authorized




                   Public DisclosurePublic
                                    copy Disclosure Authorized
                                                                                  Project Information Document/
                                                                                 Identification/Concept Stage (PID)

                                                                              Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 13-Dec-2024 | Report No: PIDDC00574




Public Disclosure Authorized
                               The World Bank
                               Nile Civil Society for Climate Resilience Project(P505581)                      Project Information Document (PID)



                         BASIC INFORMATION

                         A. Basic Project Data


                         Operation Name                                                Operation Short Name
                         Nile Civil Society for Climate Resilience Project             NCSCR
                         Operation ID                                                  Financing Instrument
                         P505581                                                       Investment Project Financing (IPF)
                         Beneficiary country/countries                                 Region
                         Burundi, Congo, Democratic Republic of, Ethiopia, Kenya,
                                                                                       Eastern and Southern Africa
                         Rwanda, South Sudan, Sudan, Tanzania, Uganda
                         Environmental and Social Risk Classification




Public Disclosure copy
                         Moderate
                         Date PID Prepared                                             Estimated Date of Approval
                         14-Mar-2024                                                   29-Nov-2024
                         Borrower(s)                                                   Implementing Agency
                         Nile Basin Discourse                                          Nile Basin Discourse


                         PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)
                         SUMMARY

                           Total Operation Cost                                                                                           3.00

                           Total Financing                                                                                                3.00

                           Financing Gap                                                                                                  0.00


                         DETAILS
                          Non-World Bank Group Financing
                             Trust Funds                                                                                                  3.00
                               Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                                              3.00


                         B. Introduction & Context
                         Country Context
                         The Nile River basin is shared by eleven countries: Burundi, Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Egypt, Eritrea,
                         Ethiopia, Kenya, Rwanda, South Sudan, Sudan, Tanzania, and Uganda. As one of the world’s longest and iconic rivers—
                         covering one-tenth of Africa’s total land mass—it has been the economic lifeline of the estimated 238 million people

                                                                                                                                            Page 1
                               The World Bank
                               Nile Civil Society for Climate Resilience Project(P505581)                           Project Information Document (PID)



                         who have lived within the boundaries of the basin and the roughly 437 million that have depended on Nile
                         waters.Several of the Nile Basin countries are ranked among the world’s poorest, with eight of 11 among the bottom
                         50 of the United Nation’s Human Development Index, which ranks 189 countries according to indicators of life
                         expectancy, education, and per capita income.[+]
                         The development potential in the basin is largely untapped. All of the economies of the basin countries are highly
                         dependent on exploitation of natural resources, including agriculture and tourism. An estimated 75 per cent of the Nile
                         population lives in rural areas, where food security and livelihoods are at high risk to natural hazards. Climate change
                         presents a serious threat to development and could potentially reverse many of the gains that have been made in recent
                         decades. A recent example is the April 2024 floods, which displaced 197,000 people in Burundi and 413,000 people in
                         Kenya.[++] The floods have also destroyed schools, health centers, and roads. Floods in South Sudan in 2021 and 2022
                         displaced more than 1 million people. Even without taking climate change into account, disaster risk will continue to
                         increase in many African countries as more vulnerable people and assets are exposed to soil erosion, increased
                         sedimentation of reservoirs and canal systems, and water pollution, which raises the costs of treatment.
                         While the Nile countries are extremely diverse, they are united by their dependence on the river. Each of the countries
                         has ambitious national development plans to promote economic growth and alleviate poverty that depended on the
                         sustainable use and management of shared Nile waters. These included investments in energy, food production,




Public Disclosure copy
                         transportation, industrial development, and environmental conservation. While these investments were to be made
                         primarily at the national level, taking a regional perspective would greatly enhance their benefits and sustainability. The
                         interdependence of limited water resources across national boundaries makes coordination among stakeholders
                         critical. Civil society could play an important role in raising awareness on the benefits of Nile cooperation, and in
                         mobilizing support for cooperative dialogue and action. Community ownership and involvement in intervention
                         implementation is recognized by many as a critical factor for sustainability.
                         In addition to considering the transboundary impacts, Nile basin investments need to respond to the priorities of
                         local communities to ensure that their benefits are shared and help to build community resilience to the effects of
                         climate change. By consulting local communities, much could be learned about the ways in which they are already
                         adapting and managing risk. Engaging with riparian citizens is also important to promote Nile cooperation, monitor the
                         impacts of investment projects, and share knowledge on resilience building strategies.

                         [+] Nile Basin Initiative. “State of the River Nile Basin report 2021. January 31, 2022.
                         [++] World Food Programme. “Eastern Africa Seasonal Monitor.” May 23, 2024.

                         Sectoral and Institutional Context
                         The Nile Basin Discourse (NBD) is a civil society institution established with the support of donors, including the World
                         Bank, in 2003 to strengthen civil society participation in Nile Basin developmental processes and programs. First
                         hosted by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature, the NBD has evolved into an independent network
                         claiming over 640 member organizations throughout the basin. Member organizations are local and national
                         nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) working on a range of issues to promote Nile cooperation, including
                         environmental conservation, gender equity, livelihoods, and poverty reduction. The NGOs are members of national
                         level Nile Discourse Forums (NDFs) established in ten of the eleven riparian states, and the NDFs are in turn members
                         of the NBD coordinated by a regional secretariat based in Entebbe, Uganda*. The NDFs play a crucial role in gathering
                         citizen data, advocating for national perspectives, and addressing issues related to the river Nile water resources. The
                         NBD provides safe and politically neutral space for dialogue at the community, national, and regional levels. The NBD
                         brings the voices of grassroot communities to enrich transboundary programs and projects within the Nile Basin.
                         [*] The NDF office in Eritrea was closed in 2005, along with those of most other NGOs in the country.



                                                                                                                                                 Page 2
                               The World Bank
                               Nile Civil Society for Climate Resilience Project(P505581)                           Project Information Document (PID)



                         The NBD’s extensive ground presence in riparian communities makes it uniquely placed to link regional and local
                         perspectives. The Implementation Completion and Results Report dated June 6, 2022 (Report ICR00005700, World
                         Bank) rated the outcome of the previous project led by the NBD—Engaging Civil Society for Social and Climate Resilience
                         in The Nile Basin Project (P132448)—as Satisfactory. An independent evaluation of activities financed under
                         the Cooperation in International Waters in Africa (CIWA) trust fund concluded that the NBD had been highly effective
                         in facilitating sustained civil society engagement in the basin cooperation and development programs, processes, and
                         policies. In doing so, it has ensured that developpment partners respond to the development needs of local
                         communities by establishing benefit-sharing processes that contribute significantly to more equitable and sustainable
                         outcomes for poor people in the basin**.
                              • Communication and outreach between the government, civil society organizations (CSOs), and communities
                                   improved. The NBD undertook a stakeholder mapping covering the eleven Nile countries to identify the
                                   geographical, thematic orientation, and capacities of CSO members of the NDFs. It also provided insight into
                                   the institutional structures of civil society coalitions at national and subnational levels and highlighted
                                   challenges individual member organizations and NDFs face, such as capacity building, resource mobilization,
                                   official recognition, and impartiality. In addition to existing members, the mapping identified areas of expertise
                                   of potential CSO members, and invited those with expertise in women and youth empowerment, agriculture,




Public Disclosure copy
                                   nutrition, and sustainable energy (including hydropower development) to join the network. This comprehensive
                                   stakeholder map enabled project designers to communicate with and understand the interests of the different
                                   types of resource users, and to manage or resolve conflict. The NBD also actively updated a website to serve
                                   a as a platform for communication and information dissemination among member organizations and to steadily
                                   expand outreach and connections among CSO members. The number of monthly hits reached 69,350 in 2021,
                                   exceeding the target by 7 percent. In addition, the NBD was mentioned or cited in an increasing number of
                                   media sources throughout the project life.
                              • Transboundary dialogues led to improvements in the design of investment projects. Dialogues organized by the
                                   NBD Secretariat, which brought local communities together with relevant government ministries (such as
                                   agriculture and fisheries), project financiers, local authorities, and technical experts affiliated with the NDFs led
                                   to changes in the designs of several transboundary projects. For example, consultations with communities
                                   affected by the Nyimur-Aswa Multipurpose Water Resources Project influenced the location of the irrigation
                                   facilities and led to the decision to construct a permanent access road between Uganda and South Sudan to
                                   facilitate trade in agricultural products and fish, thereby expanding project benefits for the community.
                                   Consultations with communities affected by the Rusumo Falls Hydropower Project reduced the required
                                   resettlement from an estimated 6,700 households (40,000 people) to just 664 households (4,000 people), as
                                   community members voiced strong support for a run-of-river design option instead of an intermediary
                                   development scheme that would have generated more energy and involved a water storage reservoir. This
                                   resulted in huge savings in compensation costs for the governments and much reduced disruption for the
                                   affected communities.
                              • The NBD has proven to be a pivotal force in fostering regional cooperation through its strategic engagement
                                   with CSOs. Through leading dialogues that include CSOs representing the interests and rights of women and
                                   youth at the grassroots level, NBD has empowered vulnerable and socially excluded groups in decision-
                                   making processes concerning water resources. This inclusive approach has been instrumental in ensuring the
                                   development needs of local communities, establishing benefit-sharing processes that contribute to more
                                   equitable and sustainable outcomes for the poor in the basin. The external evaluation cited the last NBD
                                   project ‘Engaging Civil Society for Social and Climate Resilience in the Nile Basin Project’ stands out as
                                   exemplary and widely cited as its engagement with civil society and individual riparian countries has
                                   significantly contributed to the overall objective of regional cooperation.



                                                                                                                                                     Page 3
                              The World Bank
                              Nile Civil Society for Climate Resilience Project(P505581)                       Project Information Document (PID)




                         However, when the project closed, the NBD could not continue with the work it had started to meet the demands
                         of the riparian countries and its ambition to scale-up activities regionally. The NBD has received a grant to cover
                         2022–2023 as part of the Nile Cooperation for Climate Resilience Project supported under the Cooperation in
                         International Waters in Africa (CIWA) trust fund. However, only US$750,000 has been allocated to the NBD to focus
                         on a very limited set of activities under two themes: flood/drought risk mitigation, and platform for cooperation. This
                         funding has now been exhausted.
                         A solid base has been established from which benefits could be significantly increased if the NBD and its network of
                         civil society organizations (CSOs) were to be strengthened. The NBD is close to the local communities and can use its
                         relationships to engage them in giving urgent attention to mitigate and adapt to climate change. The NBD secretariat
                         also has access to national and local policy makers, which it can use to help align policies with community priorities.
                         NBD plays three critical roles for the network. These are (a) a bottom-up communications pipeline for raising the voices
                         of citizens and civil society up to the governmental and regional levels; (b) a top-down pipeline for educating and
                         informing citizens and civil society on Nile issues and development projects; and (c) a horizontal pipeline between
                         citizens and civil society organizations both within and across national borders for knowledge and capacity
                         sharing. While the importance and value of NBD’s role is undisputed by all stakeholders, there is a need to strengthen




Public Disclosure copy
                         the capacity of the network to fulfill its three core functions.

                         [*] The NDF office in Eritrea was closed in 2005, along with those of most other NGOs in the country.
                         [**] Universalia Management Group. 2022. “External Mid-Term Evaluation of Cooperation in International Waters in
                         Africa.” Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

                         Relationship to CPF
                         The proposed project is consistent with the Africa Regional Integration and Cooperation Assistance Strategy (ARICAS)
                         fiscal 2021–2023 Update. The proposed project contributes to the strategy’s fourth pillar—resilience—by supporting
                         communities to mitigate and adapt to climate risks and to better manage transboundary waters and natural resources.
                         The project also supports the strategy’s objective of promoting collective action to address risks of regional economic
                         contagion, fragility, epidemics, and climate ‘hot spots.
                         The proposed project will support implementation of the World Bank’s Water Security and Climate Adaptation
                         Global Challenge Program. This is intended to strengthen water security and increase access to safe water supply and
                         sanitation and invest in the scale-up of sustainable water management and disaster risk reduction solutions in the
                         countries in which the World Bank works.



                         C. Development Objective
                         Development Objective
                         The development objective for the project is to strengthen community engagement for climate resilience in
                         transboundary water cooperation in the Nile Basin. This will be achieved through strengthening the capacity of the
                         NBD to engage communities and stakeholders in the Basin. Over the long term, the project is expected to contribute
                         to equitable, sustainable, and climate resilient growth in the region by providing a platform for citizen engagement in
                         riparian dialogue, learning on climate risk management and resilience building strategies, and promoting awareness
                         of the benefits of Nile Basin cooperation.
                         Key Results


                                                                                                                                              Page 4
                              The World Bank
                              Nile Civil Society for Climate Resilience Project(P505581)                        Project Information Document (PID)



                         Key results expected are (i) improved municipal or community level data and information systems used by
                         communities and governments to strengthen resilience, (ii) women and men community members in selected
                         transboundary water projects help improve their design, implementation, and sustainability, (iii) female professionals
                         in WRM and related fields participate in professional networks and skills enhancement, and (iv) the Nile Basin
                         Discourse has increased their financial resources and improved its institutional sustainability. Together, this is
                         expected to support people living in the basin to have improved climate change resilience.



                         D. Preliminary Description
                         Activities/Components
                         Component 1: Community Engagements and Capacity Building (US$1,428,000). This component will (a) support a
                         program of citizen led data management, (b) community consultations with respect to transboundary development
                         projects, (c) capacity building of the NDFs, and (d) activities to strengthen communities’ resilience to climate change.
                         Subcomponent 1A: Support a program of citizen led data management (US$1010,000). This subcomponent will




Public Disclosure copy
                         support the collection and sharing of data by citizens on issues of water quality, water flows, land degradation, soil
                         erosion, wetland degradation, and climate-related hazards with the aim of influencing policy, resource allocations, and
                         behavior of citizens. More accurate and timely data will allow for better responses to emerging issues, potentially
                         preventing disasters. Better data will also contribute to the development of effective plans for water management and
                         the design and implementation of infrastructure. Finally, data collection by citizens will contribute towards sharing and
                         valuing indigenous knowledge and observations on water quality, floods, and droughts which enhance the
                         understanding of local hydrology, and at the same time increase community engagement, trust, and cooperation in
                         implementing mitigation measures.
                         Specific activities to be supported under this subcomponent include: (a) developing a comprehensive platform to
                         support citizen data collection and utilization for decision making. Initially targeted basins include- Kagera, Mara
                         Wetland and Sio-Siteko Wetland (WB personal data privacy policy will apply to the data collected); (b) building
                         capacities of selected stakeholders for data generation and engagement; (c) developing mechanisms for scale-up to
                         other catchment areas.
                         Subcomponent 1B: Cooperation on transboundary development programs (US$250,000). This subcomponent will
                         support (a) community consultations and dialogues on Nile cooperation and transboundary development projects; (b)
                         training of communities on approaches to adapt to and mitigate climate change, including through nature-based
                         solutions; and (c) establishment of collaboration and partnerships with media houses at regional level (MICT, Nile Media
                         Network, Info Nile) for information dissemination. Specifically, the NBD will lead community engagement, dialogues,
                         and training for communities participating in the following transboundary projects:
                             • Sudd Wetlands Action Plan Implementation. The Sudd wetland is the largest tropical wetland in the world,
                                 covering a vast area of seasonal and permanent wetlands in the central and northern parts of South Sudan. The
                                 Sudd Wetlands Action Plan, part of the Sudd Wetlands Strategy 2022–2050 developed by the Nile Basin
                                 Initiative is ready for launch and implementation. The NBD will link communities with policymakers and
                                 practitioners to raise awareness of the roles and responsibilities of various stakeholders to undertake actions
                                 to implement the plan. In addition, under the World Bak-financed Regional Climate Resilience Project, the
                                 government is undertaking studies and community dialogues to improve water policies, legislation, and
                                 institutions which the NBD will facilitate.
                             • Kagera River Basin Management. The Kagera River Basin makes up 75 percent of the Lake Victoria Basin. The
                                 river is the most important incoming river of Lake Victoria.[^] It encompasses a total area of 59,700 square
                                 kilometers spread over four countries: Burundi (23 percent), Rwanda (34 percent), Tanzania (35 percent) and
                                 Uganda (8 percent). The basin was estimated in 2007 to have a population of nearly 15 million people, most

                                                                                                                                               Page 5
                                 The World Bank
                                 Nile Civil Society for Climate Resilience Project(P505581)                    Project Information Document (PID)



                                   subsistence farmers.[^] The basin is an important source for hydropower at Rusumo waterfall. The natural
                                   resources in the basin face increasing pressure as a result of rapid population growth, intensification of
                                   agriculture and livestock activities, and unsustainable land management practices. The Lake Victoria Basin
                                   Commission (LVBC), with active participation of its partner states—Burundi, Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, and
                                   Uganda—has prepared an Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) Strategy for the Lake Victoria
                                   Basin 2023–2050. The NBD will assist the LVBC to engage communities in prioritizing activities and in learning
                                   practices for improved management of Lake Victoria resources, with particular focus on (a) integrated
                                   watershed management to reduce land-based inflow of nutrients to Lake Victoria; (b) disaster risk management
                                   for improved resilience to extreme climate events, through climate vulnerability assessments; developing
                                   climate disaster early warning systems; and controlling flood risk through structural and non-structural
                                   measures; and (c) water resources planning, and data and information management.
                             •     Sio-Siteko Transboundary Wetland Management Plan Implementation. Located in northeast Lake Victoria and
                                   encompassing the lower catchment of River Sio, the Sio-Siteko Transboundary Wetland covers an estimated
                                   area of 415 square kilometers spanning Kenya and Uganda. It supports four million people with agriculture as
                                   the main livelihood for 85 per cent. The Transboundary Wetland Management Plan was validated in June 2020.
                                   Activities supported by the German Federal Ministry of Environment’s International Climate Initiative are




Public Disclosure copy
                                   underway to implement the plan. NBD will assist the implementing agencies to engage communities in dialogue
                                   and in learning of practices to improve the management of the wetlands resources to improve livelihoods and
                                   promote ecosystem health and species diversity.

                         Other potential projects may benefit from NBD’s expertise in community engagement and dialogue. These include (a)
                         implementation of the Mara Wetlands Integrated Management Plan, coordinated by the Mara Regional Administrative
                         Secretary; (b) Akanyaru Watershed Management Project, benefiting Rwanda and Burundi, (c) Nyimur/Aswa
                         Multipurpose Water Resources Project benefiting South Sudan and Uganda, (d) Lakes Edward and Albert Fisheries
                         project benefiting Democratic Republic of Congo and Uganda, and (e) The Angololo Multipurpose Water Resources
                         Development Project.
                         Subcomponent 1C: Building the capacities of the National Discourse Forums (NDFs) (US$168,000). The NDFs are critical
                         at the national level to engage communities and bring their voices to policymakers and practitioners. However, to be
                         effective they need training and support to strengthen their networks. This subcomponent will support (a) training of
                         the NDFs’ coordinators on resource mobilization, networking and coordination skills; (b) training of the boards of the
                         NDFs on leadership, management, and stakeholder engagement; (c) the establishing strategic relationships between
                         the NDFs and relevant line ministries, and between NDFs and media houses through the signing of memorandums of
                         understanding or letters of agreement. These activities are expected to enhance the NDFs’ engagement, outreach,
                         visibility, and impact at national levels.
                         Component 2: Innovative Platforms for Stakeholder Dialogue and Action (US$592,000). This component will
                         strengthen the NBD and its stakeholders.
                         Subcomponent 2A: Women’s empowerment and youth engagement in dialogues on Nile cooperation and
                         transboundary water management (US$186,000). This subcomponent is intended to elevate the voice of women and
                         youth and strengthen their participation in the planning, design, and implementation of Nile development projects. The
                         voices of women and youth matter because they are primarily responsible for collecting water for drinking and
                         household use. Youth are also important because they are the agents of change. This subcomponent will support: (a)
                         Developing gender action plans and their implementation for NBD and respective NBDFs (b) workshops for national
                         Nile women’s networks on water management, adaptation to climate change, and other emerging issues; (c) a
                         workshop for Regional Nile Women Networks to discuss progress of the network’s actions and sustainability plans, best
                         practices on networking, and strategic partnership approaches; (d) workshops to establish national Nile youth networks



                                                                                                                                              Page 6
                               The World Bank
                               Nile Civil Society for Climate Resilience Project(P505581)                         Project Information Document (PID)



                         (youth transforming the Nile through water diplomacy); and (e) a workshop to establish Nile Youth Network at the
                         regional level.
                         Subcomponent 2B: Leveraging platforms for transboundary dialogue and knowledge exchange (US$216,000). This
                         subcomponent will support (a) an NBD Summit, (b) NBD Governance meetings (Board and General Assembly); and (c)
                         training of the new Board members on corporate governance. The Summit will bring together scientists, policymakers,
                         practitioners, and community representatives to: (i) share knowledge and best practices; (ii) jointly identify innovative
                         solutions to transboundary water management challenges; and (iii) develop joint strategies and action plans. This
                         subcomponent will also support NBD’s participation in World Water Week, hosted by the Stockholm International
                         Water Institute. The NBD will host a session to present its objectives and achievements, participate in panel discussions,
                         and provide material for the exhibitions. Through participation in this high-profile event, the NBD expects to attract
                         new development partners in support of NBD’s long-term engagements. Finally, this subcomponent will support
                         national and regional Nile Days. The Nile Days, which the NBD has previously sponsored, provide the opportunity to
                         bring together stakeholders to raise awareness of NBD’s members and communities on the benefits of cooperation in
                         the Nile Basin, and the role of the NBD, the NDFs, and other stakeholders in promoting collaboration and dialogue.
                         Subcomponent 2C: Scaling up the internship program (US$190,000). This subcomponent will support recruitment,
                         stipends, office expenses, and travel of 20 interns from 10 countries (two batches-for a period of six months each). The




Public Disclosure copy
                         NBD will recruit women and youth with expertise in specialized areas—water resources management, climate
                         adaptation and resilience, data generation and management—to serve as interns. Priority will be given to interns from
                         the science, technology, engineering and mathematics fields. The interns will work under the supervision of the NDFs
                         in their home countries. The interns will meet with communities participating in the project under subcomponents 1A
                         and 1B to build capacity for data collection and management, increase awareness of stakeholders of sustainable water
                         management practices, and mobilize public support for transboundary water cooperation. This subcomponent would
                         also support creation of a platform through which alumni of the internship program can communicate and share
                         knowledge.
                         Component 3: Project management (US$980,000). This component will finance remuneration of staff of NBD for
                         project coordination, financial management, procurement, monitoring and evaluation, communication, and
                         administrative support. This component will also support activities to operationalize recommendations from past
                         studies for longer term sustainability of NBD, in particular for mobilizing financial resources (providing consultancy,
                         crowdfunding, reserve fund, membership fees) . It will also finance the procurement of goods required to carry out
                         project activities, operating costs[^^^], and consultants required for specific tasks, such as redesigning the website and
                         carrying out an external audit.

                         [^] https://www.fao.org/fileadmin/templates/nr/kagera/Documents/Suggested_readings/nr_info_kagera.pdf
                         [^^] https://www.gwp.org/en/WACDEP/IMPLEMENTATION/Where/Kagera/
                         [^^^] Office rent, utilities, security, repair and maintenance, communication, fuel, office supplies, staff insurance, staff
                         recruitment, and others.



                         Environmental and Social Standards Relevance
                         E. Relevant Standards




                                                                                                                                                  Page 7
                              The World Bank
                              Nile Civil Society for Climate Resilience Project(P505581)                        Project Information Document (PID)



                         ESS Standards                                                                        Relevance
                         ESS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and
                                                                                                              Relevant
                         Impacts
                         ESS 10: Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                            Relevant
                         ESS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                                                  Relevant
                         ESS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                   Not Currently Relevant
                         ESS 4: Community Health and Safety                                                   Relevant
                         ESS 5: Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement       Not Currently Relevant
                         ESS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural
                                                                                                              Relevant
                         Resources
                         ESS 7: Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved
                                                                                                              Relevant
                         Traditional Local Communities




Public Disclosure copy
                         ESS 8: Cultural Heritage                                                             Not Currently Relevant
                         ESS 9: Financial Intermediaries                                                      Not Currently Relevant


                         Legal Operational Policies
                         Safeguard Policies                                       Triggered?              Explanation (Optional)

                         Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50              No

                         Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                        No


                         Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                         The project's development objective and components are meant to strengthen community engagement for climate
                         resilience in the affected communities, which in itself is a mitigation measure to the risk of exclusion of certain
                         stakeholders. The activities to be financed by the project are technical assistance and capacity building activities
                         without any civil works with potential negative environmental risks or impacts. Neither health nor safety concerns are
                         anticipated because of the project activities. Environmental risk is rated Moderate, as activities like support for
                         wetland/watershed management plans require consideration of and compliance with relevant ESF requirements,
                         which will be covered in the Project Operation Manual (POM). The main social risk associated with the proposed
                         activities however, is the exclusion of certain individuals or groups (Indigenous Peoples, Women, youth, and members
                         of other vulnerable groups) from the proposed capacity building activities; Notably during the identification/selection
                         of beneficiaries and intended dialogues. There's also a risk that activities such as the elaboration of gender action
                         plans, wetland/watershed management plans are not carried out in accordance with the ESF. To address this risk,
                         guidelines for (i) the engagement/inclusion of these groups, including the establishment of a grievance redress
                         mechanism (GRM) and (iii) clear selection criteria for beneficiaries will be included in the Project Operation Manual
                         (POM). The project will ensure that all Terms of Reference for relevant activities are consistent with the ESF. Guidelines
                         for the management of labor under the project, including the establishment of workers' GRM and signature of codes of
                         conduct will also be included in the POM. Based on the above, social risk at this stage is rated moderate.


                                                                                                                                               Page 8
                               The World Bank
                               Nile Civil Society for Climate Resilience Project(P505581)   Project Information Document (PID)




                         Contact Point

                         World Bank
                         Shyam KC
                         Sr Water Resources Mgmt. Spec.
                         Ai-Ju Huang
                         Ai-Ju Huang
                         Borrower/Recipient :

                         Nile Basin Discourse

                         Sylvester Matemu

                         Regional Manager




Public Disclosure copy
                         smatemu@nilebasindiscourse.org




                         Implementing Agency :

                         Nile Basin Discourse

                         Sylvester Matemu

                         Regional Manager

                         smatemu@nilebasindiscourse.org




                         For more information, contact:
                         The World Bank
                         1818 H Street, NW
                         Washington, D.C. 20433
                         Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                         Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects




                                                                                                                         Page 9
