Public Disclosure Authorized
                                        The World Bank
                                        Poultry And Aquaculture Development Project (P505271)




Public Disclosure Authorized


                                              Concept Environmental and Social Review Summary
                                                                            Concept Stage

Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      (ESRS Concept Stage)


       Public Disclosure
                                                        Date Prepared/Updated: 12/24/2024 | Report No: ESRSC04692




Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Jul 09, 2025                                                                         Page 1 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Poultry And Aquaculture Development Project (P505271)



                     I. BASIC INFORMATION
                     A. Basic Operation Data

                     Operation ID              Product                                 Operation Acronym            Approval Fiscal Year

                     P505271                   Investment Project Financing (IPF)      PADeP                        2026

                     Operation Name            Poultry and Aquaculture Development Project

                     Country/Region Code       Beneficiary country/countries           Region                       Practice Area (Lead)
                                               (borrower, recipient)

                     Congo, Republic of        Congo, Republic of                      WESTERN AND CENTRAL          Agriculture and Food
                                                                                       AFRICA

                     Borrower(s)               Implementing Agency(ies)                Estimated Appraisal Date     Estimated Board Date

                     Ministry of Planning,     Ministry of Agriculture Livestock and   29-Sep-2025                  25-Nov-2025
                     Statistics and            Fisheries
                     Regional Integration

                     Estimated Concept         Total Project Cost



Public Disclosure
                     Review Date

                     27-Nov-2024               150,000,000.00


                     Proposed Development Objective

                     To improve cost-effectiveness, market access and resilience of target poultry and aquaculture value chains in Congo.


                     B. Is the operation being prepared in a Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, as per Bank IPF
                     Policy, para. 12?
                     No


                     C. Summary Description of Proposed Project Activities
                     The project will finance the following activities to realize its development objective: Component 1: Enhancing Access to
                     High-Quality and Affordable Inputs Component 2: Facilitating Production and Marketing Component 3: Strengthening
                     the Agribusiness Ecosystem Component 4: Contingency Emergency Response Component 5: Project Management


                     D. Environmental and Social Overview
                     D.1 Overview of Environmental and Social Project Settings


                    Jul 09, 2025                                                                                                     Page 2 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Poultry And Aquaculture Development Project (P505271)



                     Based on information available at this stage, the project will be implemented in the country's 15 departments (Likouala,
                     Lekoumou, Plateaux, Pool, Sangha, Bouenza, Cuvette, Congo-Oubangui, Nkeni-Alima, Djoué- Lefini, Kouilou,). Project
                     interventions will be clustered around the “Protected Agricultural Zones” (ZAP) already identified, to foster a spatial
                     concentration of support in a special agro-industrial zone approach where land ownership is clear, and the
                     decentralized government is the sole owner. In terms of cumulative environmental impact, the concentration of a large
                     number of farms in ZAPs could lead to significant cumulative environmental impacts, including water pollution and
                     significant water use. The project's activities could present potential harm to aquatic life and habitat destruction due to
                     large waste generated in the farming processes, and could also generate air pollution and increase greenhouse gas
                     emissions (methane) from poultry manure. Similarly, on a social scale, project activities may affect vulnerable groups
                     including indigenous peoples who could be excluded from economic opportunities due to the high costs and technical
                     requirements of intensive aquaculture models. In addition, the high consumption of water for aquaculture activities
                     could lead to conflicts over water resources.


                     D.2 Overview of Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Managing Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
                     The Republic of Congo's institutional framework for E&S risk management involves several key government agencies.
                     The key institutions are as follows:

                     Ministry of Environment, Sustainable Development, and the Congo Basin (MESDCB): This ministry oversees
                     environmental regulations, permitting, and compliance with national and international standards, including impact
                     assessments. Although the ministry has mechanisms in place for environmental oversight, limited resources affect its




Public Disclosure
                     capacity for proactive monitoring, especially in rural areas where aquaculture and poultry projects operate. The
                     MESDCB is the main body responsible for implementing the country's environmental policy. The Direction Générale de
                     environment (DGE), which is under the authority this ministry, is responsible for leading and coordinating the
                     environmental and social assessment process. The DGE is responsible for the validation of environmental impact
                     assessments (EIA) and for granting environmental permits for projects. Although the agency has experience in EIA, its
                     ability to monitor compliance during project implementation, in line with the ESF framework, is limited by lack of
                     financing and human resources.

                     Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries (MALF): Responsible for regulating agricultural practices, this ministry
                     oversees animal health and sustainable practices in the livestock and fisheries sectors. Although some E&S
                     considerations are integrated into its mandate, specific capacity to manage risks related to biosecurity, waste
                     management and the environmental impacts of aquaculture and poultry farms remains limited. The MALF has
                     previously implemented World Bank projects under to safeguard policies, such as the Agricultural Development and
                     Rural Roads Rehabilitation Project (P095251) and the Commercial Agriculture Project (P159979), which were completed
                     as Category B.


                     II. SCREENING OF POTENTIAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS AND IMPACTS

                     A. Environmental and Social Risk Classification (ESRC)                                                         Substantial




                    Jul 09, 2025                                                                                                       Page 3 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Poultry And Aquaculture Development Project (P505271)



                     A.1 Environmental Risk Rating                                                                                      Substantial
                     The Environmental risk is classified as Substantial at concept stage. The project also presents some environmental
                     risks, such as those related to construction, Occupational Health and Safety (OHS), potential increase in pesticide use
                     in agriculture areas. In addition, the intensive agricultural activities associated with feed production, such as maize
                     and soybean farming, can deplete soil nutrients, degrade soil quality, and increase erosion if sustainable practices like
                     crop rotation or cover cropping are not implemented. The introduction of new aquaculture species or increased
                     monoculture crop production for feed may threaten local biodiversity. Also, intensive poultry and aquaculture
                     production generate substantial waste, including manure, unused feed, and dead animals and may increase
                     greenhouses emission. High-density poultry and aquaculture operations increase the risk of disease outbreaks, which
                     could spread to wild populations or lead to heavy use of antibiotics and chemicals, potentially contributing to
                     antimicrobial resistance and affecting human and animal health. The project only plans to rehabilitate one (1)
                     slaughterhouse exclusively for poultry (the size will be determined at appraisal).
                                                                                                                                        Substantial
                     A.2 Social Risk Rating
                     The social risk is classified as Substantial, at Concept stage. Although the project is expected to have several positive
                     social impacts, there are certain risks related to the following aspects: (i) Economic and physical displacement due to
                     land acquisition or restrictions on land use; (ii) GBV/SEA/SH, and health and safety risk; (ii) risk of elite capture (due to
                     information asymmetry), reducing the opportunities of traditionally underserved populations; (iii) risk of barriers to
                     access or outright exclusion from participating in project benefits for indigenous peoples (and among them,
                     indigenous women) because of their cultural and linguistic differences and their specific disadvantaged situation for
                     accessing technology and the knowledge needed to apply for competitive grants. These potential E&S impacts and



Public Disclosure
                     risks and corresponding mitigation measures will be set out in the Project’s Environmental and Social Management
                     Framework (ESMF) and Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP). The SEP will be developed incorporating stakeholder
                     mapping and a communication strategy to guide the interactions with Project beneficiaries and other stakeholders
                     (including the most vulnerable among them) and ensure that a Project Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) is in
                     place for addressing concerns and grievances (including SEA/SH grievances following a survivor centric approach)
                     during the Project implementation. In line with the ESS 5, a RPF will be prepared prior to the project appraisal and
                     site-specific RAP will be prepared if required and will include comprehensive community engagement with affected
                     and host communities, with specific attention to indigenous people and vulnerable groups during project
                     implementation. The project could have interventions in departments with indigenous populations (Sangha, Likouala,
                     Plateaux, Lekoumou, Bouenza), an IPPF will be prepared during preparation and disclosed prior to appraisal.


                     B. Relevance of Standards and Policies at Concept Stage

                     B.1 Relevance of Environmental and Social Standards

                      ESS1 - Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts                                     Relevant

                      Given the risks mentioned above, the following Environmental and Social Standards (ESS) apply: ESS1, ESS2, ESS3,
                      ESS4, ESS5, ESS6, ESS7, ESS8, and ESS10. In order to manage these risks, the project will prepare prior to appraisal : i)
                      an Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), ii) a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) including a Grievance
                      Redress Mechanism (GRM), iii) a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework
                      (IPPF), iv) an Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP), and v) an Environmental and Social Management Framework


                    Jul 09, 2025                                                                                                           Page 4 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Poultry And Aquaculture Development Project (P505271)



                      including a Labor Management Procedure (LMP), Hazard and a GBV/ SEA/SH Prevention and Response Plan. In
                      addition, the ESMF will include mitigation hierarchy measures to address risks and impacts related to occupation
                      health and safety issues, agrochemical pollution and waste management. In addition, the ESMF will include a
                      dedicated CERC chapter. Also, the ESMF will include an Exclusion List.

                      ESS10 - Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                                                       Relevant

                      Stakeholder engagement and information disclosure shall be at the heart of the project and are envisaged as a
                      continuous, ongoing process throughout its lifecycle. This approach will ensure participation, inclusiveness and
                      transparency. Details of the stakeholder engagement activities are outlined in the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP)
                      which will be disclosed prior to appraisal. The main stakeholders of the project, may include: (i) project affected
                      parties (PAPs) - those individuals or groups who are directly affected or likely to be affected by the project. PAPs
                      include positively affected beneficiaries, mainly smallholder and commercial emergent farmers (SCEFs); farmer
                      associations; informal farmer organizations or producer interest groups including groups of women and youth who
                      will be involved in agriculture, aquaculture.

                      ESS2 - Labor and Working Conditions                                                                             Relevant

                      ESS2 is relevant due to potential risks to labor and working conditions for applicable workers including direct and
                      contracted workers and potentially also use of community workers. Labor Management Procedures (LMP) will be
                      prepared to identify the main labor requirements and labor risks associated with the Project based on the
                      requirements of ESS2 . The LMP will summarize procedures to address labor issues including, but not limited to: (i)




Public Disclosure
                      contracts of employment and terms and conditions of employment, (ii) protection of wages including fair treatment,
                      non-discrimination and equal opportunity of project workers, (iii) occupation, health and safety issues which will be
                      applicable to all project workers, (iv) labor influx and associated risks including GBV and (v) grievance Redress
                      mechanism for workers with accessible means to raise workplace concerns.

                      ESS3 - Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                                              Relevant

                      ESS3 is considered relevant to the project. The Project is multi-sectoral and will involve activities likely to generate
                      pollution. Although the infrastructure rehabilitation activities are limited in magnitude and scale, they could result in
                      pollution to land, water, and air as well as use of natural resources and to significant use of water. The project
                      activities may generate some adverse impacts from disposal and management of waste during the renovation works
                      and pose non-significant public health concerns due to air emissions such as exhaust from vehicles, noise emission
                      and fugitive dust generated during transportation of materials, and rehabilitation works and to nuisance vibration.
                      Moreover, that are risks associated with managing hazardous materials and waste from infrastructure
                      refurbishment/renovation works. To mitigate these risks and impacts, a standalone Integrated Pesticide Management
                      Plan (IPMP) will be developed.

                      ESS4 - Community Health and Safety                                                                              Relevant

                      ESS4 is considered relevant to the project as the proposed activities involve pose community health and safety risks
                      to nearby communities. Community health and safety issues are associated with risks and impacts of civil works civil
                      works priority rural roads, the extension of power grids to production areas or the provision of off-grid power
                      solutions, market infrastructure (markets, cold chains, etc.), biosecurity and sanitation infrastructure etc. Risks


                    Jul 09, 2025                                                                                                       Page 5 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Poultry And Aquaculture Development Project (P505271)



                      related to community health and safety include community exposure to health issues such as air quality pollution,
                      water-borne and vector-borne diseases from irrigation activities. Health risks also include communicable diseases
                      such as STDs, including HIV/AIDs. The ESMF will provide an overarching framework for managing the engagement of
                      security forces. A SEA/SH Response and Prevention Plan will be prepared as part of ESMF to mitigate to the extent
                      possible and manage SEA/SH risks, which requires integrating Codes of Conduct.

                      ESS5 - Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement                                  Relevant

                      ESS5 is considered relevant for this project. Although the project activities are expected to be implemented in
                      Protected Agricultural Zones” (“Zone Agricole Protegee” - ZAP). Project activities under Component 1 and 2 could
                      require land acquisition, impose restrictions on land use or induce involuntary resettlement the standards is
                      considered relevant at this stage in the event that sub-activities would induce such impacts as these become more
                      defined (although these would be mainly linked to livelihoods). Although the critical infrastructure support activities
                      will focus on supporting infrastructure centered around ZAPs, among other things, the project will finance the
                      rehabilitation of priority rural roads, the extension of power grids to production areas or the provision of off-grid
                      power supply solutions, market infrastructure (markets, cold chains, etc.), biosafety and sanitation infrastructure, etc.

                      ESS6 - Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural                                   Relevant
                      Resources

                      ESS6 is considered relevant. Project activities under Component 1 and 2 may lead to expansion of agricultural and
                      fishing activities into sensitive biodiversity hotspots, including localized ones and/or natural and modified critical




Public Disclosure
                      habitats, and aquaculuture farms can facilitate spread of diseases to wild fish or introduction of invasive species in
                      the ecosystems. The ESMF and the ESCP exclusion criteria will exclude from financing any activities that may involve
                      alien species and any significant risks to biodiversity, animal welfare, land conversion or legally protected natural
                      resources. The ESMF screening procedures will address and screen out subproject activities proposed that may have
                      direct, indirect or cumulative impacts on critical habitat or sensitive natural habitats and will provide guidance on
                      biodiversity screening to ensure that project activities do not alter or cause destruction or degradation of such
                      habitat, as defined in ESS6.

                      ESS7 - Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional                              Relevant
                      Local Communities

                      ESS7 is considered relevant to this project. Although the project will operate in circumscribed, these interventions will
                      be carried out in the departments with the presence of the indigenous populations. The project will prepare a
                      Indigenous People Planning Framework (IPPF).

                      ESS8 - Cultural Heritage                                                                                        Relevant

                      ESS8 is considered relevant. Although the Program activities are unlikely to affect tangible and intangible cultural
                      heritage as they will mainly be implemented in the existing farmlands. Namely, key physical investments will be
                      undertaken in the existing agricultural land where the likelihood of existence of tangible and intangible cultural
                      heritage is low. Chance Find Procedures shall be adopted for precautionary reasons for infrastructure investments to




                    Jul 09, 2025                                                                                                       Page 6 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Poultry And Aquaculture Development Project (P505271)



                      address unknown archeological or historical remains and objects and the procedure will be described in the ESMF for
                      the participating countries.

                      ESS9 - Financial Intermediaries                                                                Not Currently Relevant

                      ESS9 is not considered relevant for this project.



                     B.2 Legal Operational Policies that Apply

                       OP 7.50 Operations on International Waterways                                                                      No
                       OP 7.60 Operations in Disputed Areas                                                                               No

                     B.3 Other Salient Features

                       Use of Borrower Framework                                                                                          No
                       Although the Republic of Congo has an E&S Framework, there are gaps between the environmental and social
                       assessment regulations and practice, especially in description of the environment, level of impact analysis and
                       mitigation measures, and public consultation and disclosure of information. There is no experience among the
                       different Project implementing agencies in implementing and applying the ESF and its associated environmental and
                       social standards. The project therefore will apply World Bank Group ESF and does not use the Borrower’s E&S
                       Framework within this project.



Public Disclosure
                       Use of Common Approach                                                                                             No
                       N/A

                     C. Overview of Required Environmental and Social Risk Management Activities

                     C.1 What Borrower environmental and social analyses, instruments, plans and/or frameworks are planned or
                     required by Appraisal?
                     Documents and actions prepared and completed prior to Appraisal:

                     1.     Preparation, consultation and disclosure of the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) including GRM,
                     2.     Preparation and disclosure of Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP),
                     3.     Preparation, consultation and disclosure of the Environmental and Social Management Framework
                        (ESMF) including, Labor Management Procedures (LMP) and templates for Occupational, Health
                        and Safety (OHS), Waste Management plans, GBV risk assessment, Integrated Pesticide
                        Management Plan (IPMP) and the Chance find Procedure,
                     4.     Preparation, consultation and disclosure of the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF),
                     5.     Preparation, consultation and disclosure of the Indigenous People Planning Framework (IPPF).

                     Possible issues to be addressed in the Borrower Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP):
                     1.      Preparation, consultation and disclosure of site-specific E&S instruments such as Biodiversity


                    Jul 09, 2025                                                                                                   Page 7 of 8
                               The World Bank
                               Poultry And Aquaculture Development Project (P505271)



                        assessments and Management Plans, ESIAs and ESMPs as per ESMF screening and requirement,
                     2.     Preparation and disclosure of LMP including GM for workers post effectiveness and prior to hiring
                        workers and Occupational, Health and Safety Management Plan,
                     3.     Institutional Capacity Enhancement Plan as part of the project ESCP,
                     4.     Development of a detailed GBV Action Plan based on the GBV risk rating.




                     III. CONTACT POINT

                     World Bank
                      Task Team Leader:       Manievel Sene                          Title:         Senior Agriculture Economist

                      Email:                  msene@worldbank.org

                      TTL Contact:            Karim Ouled Belayachi                  Job Title:     Senior Private Sector Specialist

                      Email:                  kbelayachi@worldbank.org



Public Disclosure    IV. FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT
                     The World Bank
                     1818 H Street, NW
                     Washington, D.C. 20433
                     Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                     Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects


                     V. APPROVAL

                     Task Team Leader(s):                             Manievel Sene, Karim Ouled Belayachi

                     ADM Environmental Specialist:                    Amour Freddy Bilombo Bazedimba

                     ADM Social Specialist:                           Fabena Divine Babindamana Nee Niemet Gampika




                    Jul 09, 2025                                                                                                       Page 8 of 8
