Public Disclosure Authorized
                                   The World Bank
                                   Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)



                               @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidconcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                Project Information Document (PID)


Public Disclosure Authorized
                                               Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 03-Jul-2024 | Report No: PIDDC00686




Public Disclosure Authorized
     The World Bank
     Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


A. Basic Project Data
Project Beneficiary(ies)       Operation ID                Operation Name
Peru, Peru                     P505093                     Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy
Region                         Estimated Appraisal Date    Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
LATIN AMERICA AND              09-Dec-2024                 20-Feb-2025                   Water
CARIBBEAN
Financing Instrument           Borrower(s)                 Implementing Agency
Investment Project             Republic of Peru            Ministry of Housing
Financing (IPF)                                            Construction and
                                                           Sanitation , Safe Water
                                                           Program for Lima and
                                                           Callao

Proposed Development Objective(s)
Increase access to safely managed sanitation in selected basins and strengthen government capacity for
mainstreaming circular economy principles in wastewater treatment

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                  No
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?            No

SUMMARY
  Total Operation Cost                                                                                          240.00

  Total Financing                                                                                               240.00
             of which IBRD/IDA                                                                              200.00
  Financing Gap                                                                                                   0.00

DETAILS
  World Bank Group Financing
   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                             200.00

                                                                                                                   Page 1
       The World Bank
       Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)



   Non-World Bank Group Financing
     Counterpart Funding                                                                                              40.00
       National Government                                                                                            40.00

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskclassification#doctemplate
Environmental and Social Risk Classification                      Concept Review Decision
Substantial                                                       The review did authorize the preparation to continue




 B. Introduction and Context

 Country Context

1.      Peru's growth potential has slowed since 2014, leading to stagnation in both convergence and poverty
reduction. The aftermath of the commodity boom posed challenges for sustained growth, with Gross Domestic Product
(GDP) growing at an annual rate of 3.5 percent between 2013 and 2019—at half the pace of the previous decade. The
COVID-19 pandemic led Peru into one of the deepest recessions in Latin America and increased the poverty rate by 10
percent. The economy rebounded in 2021 to pre-pandemic levels, and, while poverty declined to 25.9 percent in 2021, it
remains above the 2019 rate, hampered by lower employment quality and higher informality.
2.      Water is a key driver of economic development in Peru. Water is crucial to Peru's economic development, with
water-intensive sectors like manufacturing, mining, hydrocarbons, construction, agriculture, and utilities comprising
nearly 40% of GDP. Agriculture alone, dependent on irrigation, employs nearly a quarter of the workforce and is vital for
rural development, where poverty is prevalent. Mining and agriculture also dominate exports, accounting for 63% and
16% respectively. Hydropower, generating 57% of the country’s electricity, further underscores water's role across GDP-
contributing sectors. Additionally, Peru's diverse ecosystems, including wetlands, rivers, and lakes, support tourism,
contributing 4.5% of GDP in 2020. Improving water security is essential for Peru’s prosperity and climate resilience. Despite
being water-rich, Peru faces threats from climate change, pollution, and inefficient water use, making enhanced water
management critical.
3.       In this challenging context, embracing circular economy principles is essential for Peru’s roadmap towards
water security. This is particularly important for municipal water supply and the agriculture sector, which together
account for 98 percent of water consumption. These, as other productive sectors, have operated historically with a
predominantly linear “take, make, consume and waste” model. In Peru coastal areas, characterized by water scarcity and
concentrating most of the national population and consequently where most of sewerage flows are generated, urban
wastewater infrastructure has, in the best of cases, relied on large collectors to convey wastewater to centralized
wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs), with effluent discharged into the sea, resulting in the loss of valuable resources.
Similarly, technical losses in drinking water supply systems are high, and irrigation efficiency is between 30 and 35 percent.
Moreover, the lack of wastewater treatment, and poor irrigation, drainage nutrient management practices in agriculture
are putting pressure on natural water bodies. Besides polluting water bodies, the water and agricultural sectors are
accountable for over 16 percent of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions.


 Sectoral and Institutional Context

                                                                                                                         Page 2
        The World Bank
        Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)



4.      Despite having a comprehensive legal framework for water management, Peru has not reaped its benefits due
to low levels of implementation. Over the past two decades, the Government of Peru (GoP) has demonstrated its
commitment to strengthening the water sector by developing policies, plans and legislation on water resources
management, water and sanitation services delivery, irrigation, and disaster risk mitigation. Although the reforms are
comprehensive, implementation is lagging due to wider governance challenges pertaining to bias in the allocation of water
usage rights,1 low levels of decentralization, the need for greater collaboration across sectors in water management and
disaster management approaches, and limited gender equity in water resources management.
5.       Peru is developing a policy and regulatory framework to transition to a circular economy, aiming to enhance
water security. Challenges persist in achieving effective interinstitutional collaboration. The Ministry of Housing,
Construction and Sanitation (MVCS) has introduced a circular economy roadmap for drinking water supply and sanitation
under Legislative Decree 1620, yet regulatory and financial incentives for its implementation by water utilities are still in
progress. Barriers in the energy and solid waste sectors hinder projects combining renewable energy generation with
wastewater treatment and sludge utilization. The Ministry of Agricultural Development and Irrigation (MIDAGRI) has
drafted a circular economy plan but awaits official enactment, lacking specific actions for reclaimed wastewater in
irrigation or sludge as fertilizer. The Water Resources Law anticipates mechanisms for enhancing water efficiency across
sectors, but implementation by the National Water Authority (ANA) is pending. Reclaimed water is recognized under law,
but integration into basin-level water management plans and allocation schemes remains inadequate.
6.      Peru faces significant challenges in wastewater treatment and circular economy due to heavy investment
needs, low sector execution capacity, and weak utility performance. The National Sanitation Plan (2022-26) estimates
an additional US$2.6 billion per year is needed to achieve universal access to safely managed water and sanitation services
by 2030. However, in recent years, Peru has only allocated about US$1.6 billion annually to the sector, with a budget
execution rate of just 50-60%. Low tariffs for water services, averaging US$0.62 per cubic meter compared to the regional
average of US$1.44, further hinder utility performance and service quality. Consequently, 77% of the country’s 171
wastewater treatment plants (WWTP) fail to meet discharge and reuse standards, with rural areas particularly affected.
The situation necessitates a paradigm shift in the delivery and management of wastewater treatment infrastructure,
adopting basin-wide and circular economy approaches, leveraging private capital through public-private partnerships, and
ensuring appropriate technology and management models. This also requires balanced responsibility and risk allocation
among the government, utilities, community organizations, and the private sector.


 Relationship to CPF

7.                The proposed MPA aligns with the Peru Country Partnership Framework for FY23-FY27 and the
Strategic Country Diagnostic update. It will contribute to its three High Level Objectives (HLO): increased quality economic
opportunities (HLO1), improved access to quality public services across the territory (HLO2), and increased resilience to
shocks (HLO3), by promoting water security. The MPA also aligns with the Peru Climate Change Development Report,
highlighting the need to improve the resilience of infrastructure and public services and tackling the decarbonization path
by reusing wastewater and treating wastewater effluent. The proposed operation will contribute to the WB’s vision “to
end extreme poverty and boost prosperity on a livable planet”; and aligns with the WB’s Global Challenge Program to
Fast-Track Water Security and Climate Adaptation, which is designed to strengthen water security and related climate

1 Female farmers oftentimes do not own the land that they farm, or if they do, do not hold the land titles under their names, which impacts their

productivity and their participation in decision-making bodies, as land titles are required to obtain water rights and to become members of WUOs.
Women have less access than male farmers to irrigation technology, extension services, finance, and information about markets and innovative
concepts such as climate resilient agriculture. They are often under-represented, both as members and leaders, in irrigation institutions, such as
water user associations, thereby limiting their voice in decision-making processes about the management of irrigation systems.

                                                                                                                                             Page 3
       The World Bank
       Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


adaptation through systems change and targeted investments in water, sanitation, irrigation, water resources
management, and by reducing flood and drought risks.
 C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
 Increase access to safely managed sanitation in selected basins and strengthen government capacity for mainstreaming
 circular economy principles in wastewater treatment

  Key Results (From PCN)

 D. Concept Description (MPA and first phase IPF)

8.      The proposed MPA is a comprehensive, four-phase, multisectoral program with overlapping Investment Project
Financing (IPF) operations over a 10-year implementation period. Two of these IPF operations, led by MVCS, will focus
on reducing pollution, increasing water availability, enhancing resilience against, and mitigating the impact of climate
change. This will be achieved by strengthening the governance framework and implementing basin-wide pilot initiatives
for wastewater treatment and reuse, adopting circular economy principles. The other two IPF operations will be jointly
implemented by MIDAGRI and ANA, aiming to enhance water security by strengthening the institutional capacity of these
two institutions to improve water resources governance, facilitate the adoption of green and climate-smart agricultural
practices, and increase water access and efficiency of irrigation services.




9.      Mainstreaming circular economy approaches will require a triple shift of integrating various institutions’
approaches, developing a new generation of circular projects in critical basins and improving PPP models learning from
first phase. The MPA instrument gives the opportunity to bring various institutions and involves coordinating multiple
actors and ministries with diverse mandates. The MPA offers flexibility by enabling a focus on immediate challenges while
also providing support for addressing longer-term, structural challenges. In particular, during the first phase, the
instrument will enable the implementation of non-regrettable circular economy solutions. It will also lay the foundation
for a regulatory framework that facilitates the adoption of sustainable practices identified in the roadmap of circular
economy in the water sector for Peru and WWTP strategy development. Additionally, this phase will prepare the
groundwork for the next generation of circular projects and PPP models, which will be implemented in subsequent phases.

10.     The Program Development Objective (PrDO) is to “strengthen the capacity of the Peruvian government for
mainstreaming circular economy principles to improve water security in the national territory”. For this, the MPA will
use “reduce-reuse-recycle-recover” circular approaches by: (i) improving and increasing wastewater treatment an
supporting the adoption of enhanced nutrient management techniques in agriculture to reduce pollution and maintain an
acceptable quality of water resources for all uses; (ii) improving the efficiency of irrigation systems and recycling and
reusing wastewater effluents to increase water availability for all uses; (iii) recovering renewable energy, nutrients and


                                                                                                                      Page 4
       The World Bank
       Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


other byproducts of agricultural activities and the wastewater treatment process to mitigate climate change (CC) and the
impact of water service delivery on natural ecosystems. The MPA will also build resilience against CC induced droughts
and floods, supporting the development of water security plans both at basin and utility level, increasing the capacity to
regulate natural water flows, balancing the use of gray (dams) and green (managed aquifer recharge) infrastructure.

11.      In a context of high vulnerability to climate change, Phase I will target the Lurín river basin, which constitutes
the southern expansion area of the Lima Metropolitan region in its lower part. As part of this phase, MVCS will design
wastewater treatment infrastructure and intervention approaches to be tested in two other basins (the rural water scarce
basin intervened in phase II and the third basin screened for its circular economy and PPP potential) during Phase III. The
Lurín basin faces challenges of insufficient water quantity and low water quality, in a context of strong anthropogenic
pressure and vulnerability to climate change. The Lurín river is born in the central mountain range of the Andes (5,300
meters above sea level) and flows 111 km into the Pacific Ocean. Of the total water demands in the basin, 86 percent is
for irrigation and 14 percent is for municipal, industrial, and mining uses. However, only 20 percent of the agricultural
water demand is met during the dry period (September-November), mainly due to the basin’s unregulated condition. In
addition to having an unmet demand cover, according to the last water balance for 2023-2024, the Lurín aquifer is being
slightly overexploited with a groundwater deficit between May and December.

12.      Phase I Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase access to safely managed sanitation in selected
basins and strengthen government capacity for mainstreaming circular economy principles in wastewater treatment.
The operation of the WWTPs will benefit approximately 500,000 people by providing direct access to safely managed
sanitation services. Additionally, these operations will remove organic contamination from the Lurín River, improving
environmental conditions. Water reuse practices will make additional water available for 2,000 hectares of agricultural
land in the Lurín Water Basin. The proposed PDO indicator for the first phase is: i) people provided with access to safely
managed sanitation services (target 500,000); ii) m3/year of wastewater reuse (TBD); iii) mass of BOD pollution load
removed by WWTPs developed under the project (TBD); and iv) adoption of a water security plan for the water utility,
establishing drought and flood management measures in an area affected by climate change–aggravated droughts.

13.       This first component will finance the infrastructure and studies needed to enable circularity projects in the
 Lurín basin (US$210 million). Specific component activities are:
(i)       Expansion of the Julio C. Tello and Manchay WWTPs and associated, energy cogeneration, and sludge treatment
facilities. These infrastructure works will also include activities needed for water reclamation and aquifer recharge.
(ii)      Water and sanitation infrastructure for rural communities located up stream of SEDAPAL’s service area,
including wastewater treatment facilities employing technologies adapted to the local rural context.
(v)       Necessary engineering and environmental studies needed for the infrastructure under this component.

14.     The governance component will support the improvement of MVCS’ institutional capacity and of wastewater
management and circular economy governance frameworks, necessary to scale up lessons learned through program
implementation (US$ 12 million). This will improve the government’s IWRM and help it mainstream circular economy
principles in its policy planning and implementation, thus contributing to climate resilience.

15.      The project management component will finance the procurement of equipment and tools, the hiring of
specialized personnel, and consulting services for the two implementing units of Phase I. (US$ 18 million). The
infrastructure component of the project will be implemented by the Water Security Program for Lima and Callao (PASLC
in its Spanish acronym), an autonomous execution agency operating under the authority of the MVCS, in charge of


                                                                                                                       Page 5
       The World Bank
       Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


developing WSS infrastructure in the Lima Metropolitan area. The governance component will be implemented by MVCS’
DGPPCS. Under the management component, the PASLC will hire a Project Management Office (PMO) to support the
implementation and supervision of the project.

16.      In Phase I, MVCS’ DGPPCS and PASLC will be the PIUs in charge of the governance and infrastructure
components, respectively. PASLC will consolidate interim financial reports for the project and prepare the annual financial
audit report. PASLC is an autonomous execution agency operating under the authority of MVCS, responsible for
developing WSS infrastructure in the Lima Metropolitan area. Since its creation in 2017, PASLC has significantly expanded
its project portfolio and has been responsible for implementing 88 projects over the past four years, with an average
annual investment budget of around USD 85 million and an average burn rate of 90 percent. While this will be the first
project involving the construction of wastewater treatment facilities, PASLC has previous experience managing large works
contracts, particularly for WSS network construction, with its biggest project having a budget of US$ 86 million. This will
by the first operation for PASLC not funded exclusively with fiscal resources. DGPPCS conducts projects with private sector
participation, contracts pre-investment studies for co-financed state initiatives, and defines the scope of PPP contracts
with the national PPP unit, Proinversión. While DGPPCS has previous experience managing large consulting contracts, it
has no previous experience with WB procurement and financial management regulations. Figure 3 below illustrates the
implementation arrangements considered for Phase I of the MPA.



 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@legalpolicyandscreeningrisk#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
                                                                                    Triggered?
                                                              Last approved                             Current
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                        No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                  No



 Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts



The environmental and social risk rating is currently considered Substantial. The first component includes at least four
types of infrastructure interventions: i) two types of WWTPs (Manchay and Julio C. Tello) requiring a deeper E&S
assessment, ii) water and sanitation infrastructure, and iii) aquifer recharge infrastructure in the lower part of the aquifer.
The precise location of the infrastructure works in the upper Lurin basin are still unknown. Associated facilities, such as
the expansion of the sewage network for the new WWTPs are potentially relevant, this will be confirmed during project
preparation. Preliminary environmental and health & safety risks and impacts include: i) non-compliance with
environmental quality standards (EQS) in the receiving water body due to seasonal and scarce/dry basin conditions ii)
untreated sludge accumulation due to unavailable disposal/reuse options, iii) EHS risks rising from transportation of
equipment, construction materials and project waste, iv) affectation of archaeological remains (Julio C. Tello WWTP is
adjacent to the Pachacamac Archaeological Sanctuary), v) community accidents, public space occupation, and traffic


                                                                                                                          Page 6
       The World Bank
       Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


obstructions, and vi) outages or overflows at the existing WWTP during the construction of the new plants, risking
untreated wastewater spills and community health.

The main social risks that contribute to the rating include: (i) potential minor physical and economic displacement; ii)
opposition from community members to the expansion of the two wastewater treatment plants or construction of new
plants; iii) disturbances to local communities during civil works, such as noise, dust and traffic disruptions; (iv) occupational
health and safety risks for project workers; and (v) potential exclusion of vulnerable groups and water users from project
benefits, particular for the expansion of water supply and sewer networks in the Lurin and Manchay districts, and exclusion
from decision making processes under the governance component to support the improvement of MVCS’ institutional
capacity and water and wastewater management frameworks. In addition, the client does not have experience in
managing environmental and social risks under the WB ESF and making them compulsory to their contractors. Measures
to mitigate environmental and social risks include the preparation of a Stakeholder Engagement Plan and Labor
Management Procedures by appraisal and site specific environmental and social management plans for Tello and Manchay
WWTP by appraisal and plans for the rural WWTPs during implementation. These measures will be summarized in the
Environmental and Social Commitment Plan drafted by appraisal and agreed to during negotiation.

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
 CONTACT POINT

 World Bank
   Malva Baskovich
   Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

   Zael Sanz Uriarte
   Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

 Borrower/Client/Recipient
  Republic of Peru

 Implementing Agencies
  Ministry of Housing Construction and Sanitation
  Carolina Gizella Lenkey Ramos
  General Director of the General Directorate of Programs and Projects in Construction and Sanitation
  clenkey@vivienda.gob.pe

  Safe Water Program for Lima and Callao
  Max Alberto Sáenz Carrillo
  Executive Director of the Safe Water Program for Lima and Callao
  msaenz@vivienda.gob.pe

  FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT



                                                                                                                            Page 7
     The World Bank
     Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, D.C. 20433
Telephone: (202) 473-1000
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
APPROVAL


Task Team Leader(s):                 Malva Baskovich, Zael Sanz Uriarte

Approved By

Practice Manager/Manager:            David Michaud                        18-Jun-2024

Country Director:                    Karina V. Olivas                     03-Jul-2024




                                                                                        Page 8
