Public Disclosure Authorized                                               FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
                                                                                                                           Report No: PADHI00640

                                                   INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                      PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
                                                                                 ON A

                                                                           PROPOSED GRANT
                                                                   IN THE AMOUNT OF US$7.9 MILLION
                                                                FROM THE GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT FACILITY

                                                                                    TO THE

                                                                           REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                                     FOR A

                                          RESTORING ECOSYSTEMS FOR MARINE POLLUTION PREVENTION PROJECT (RE-MAP)
                                                                        (P505546)

                                                                             SEPTEMBER 23, 2025




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                Environment Department
                                Europe and Central Asia Region


                               This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official
                               duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.
                        CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

                (Exchange Rate Effective August 31, 2025)

                    Currency Unit = MOLDOVAN LEU (MDL)
                       MDL 17.41 = US$1
                         US$ 0.06 = MDL 1

                               FISCAL YEAR
                         January 1 - December 31




  Regional Vice President: Antonella Bassani
Regional Practice Director: Sameh Naguib Wahba Tadros
        Division Director: Robert J. Saum
       Practice Manager: Gayane Minasyan
     Task Team Leader(s): Fisseha Tessema Abissa
                    ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AM           Accountability Mechanism (WB)
CHO IP       Clean and Healthy Ocean Integrated Program
CPF          Country Partnership Framework
CiRCE        Climate Resilience Center of Excellence
DA           Designated Account
DHC          Dniester Hydroenergetic Complex
DP           Development Partner
EBRD         European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
EFA          Economic and Financial Analysis
EIB          European Investment Bank
ES           Ecosystem Services
ESMF         Environmental and Social Management Framework
EU           European Union
EUR          Single European Currency
FAO EX-ACT   Food and Agriculture Organization EX-ANTE Carbon-Balance Tool
FM           Financial Management
FMP          Forest Management Plan
GBF          Global Biodiversity Framework
GDP          Gross Domestic Product
GEF          Global Environment Facility
GHG          Greenhouse Gases
GoM          Government of Moldova
GRM          Grievance Redress Mechanism
GRS          Grievance Redress Service
Ha/ha        Hectare
HDI          Human Development Index
IBRD         International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
ICAS         Forest Research and Management Institute
IDA          International Development Association
IFAC         International Federation of Accountants
IFAD         International Fund for Agricultural Development
IFC          International Finance Corporation
IFI          International Financial Institution
IMF          International Monetary Fund
IPSAS        International Public Sector Accounting Standards
IPSASB       International Public Sector Accounting Standards Board
ISA          International Standards on Auditing
LME          Large Marine Ecosystems
LPA          Local Public Authority
MAFI         Ministry of Agriculture and Food Industry
MoE          Ministry of Environment
MoF          Ministry of Finance
Moldsilva    Forestry Agency “Moldsilva”
MDL          Moldovan Leu
M&E          Monitoring and Evaluation
MFD          Maximizing Financing for Development
MTR          Mid-Term Review
NAAM         National Administration Apele Moldovei [Water Agency]
NbS          Nature-based solutions
NCPH         National Centre of Public Health
NDC       Nationally Determined Contributions
ND-GAIN   Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative
NDS       National Development Strategy
NEF       National Environmental Fund
NFERP     National Forest Extension and Rehabilitation Program
NFG       National Forest Ground
NGO       Non-governmental Organization
NOEPI     National Office for Environmental Project Implementation
NPV       Net Present Value
NWMS      National Waste Management Strategy
OHS       Occupational Health and Safety
PA        Paris Agreement
PIU       Project Implementation Unit
PCF       Prototype Carbon Fund
PDO       Project Development Objective
PMP       Pasture Management Plan
PMT       Project Management Team
POM       Project Operational Manual
PPG       Project Preparation Grant
RF        Results Framework
RISP      Rural Investments and Services Project
SAP       Strategic Action Program
SCD       Systematic Country Diagnostic
SDG       Sustainable Development Goal
SFE       State Forest Enterprise
SHS       State Hydrometeorological Service
SLM       Sustainable Land Management
SOE       Statement of Expenditures
SPMP      Silvopastoral Management Plan/Planning
STEM      Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
STEP      Systemic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement
TDA       Transboundary Diagnostic Analysis
TOC       Theory of Change
ToR       Terms of Reference
UNDP      United Nations Development Program
WB        World Bank
WBG       World Bank Group
The World Bank
Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)



                                                            TABLE OF CONTENTS

DATASHEET ........................................................................................................................... i
I.    STRATEGIC CONTEXT ..................................................................................................... 7
      A. Project Strategic Context .................................................................................................................7
      B. Sectoral and Institutional Context ...................................................................................................7
II.   PROJECT DESCRIPTION ................................................................................................ 11
      A. Project Development Objective .....................................................................................................11
      B. Results Chain and Key Indicators ...................................................................................................11
      C. Project Beneficiaries ......................................................................................................................13
      D. Project Components ......................................................................................................................13
      E. Rationale for Bank Involvement and Role of Partners ...................................................................17
      F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design....................................................................18
III. PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION ........................................................................................ 19
      A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements ..........................................................................19
      B. Results Monitoring, Evaluation, and Verification Arrangements ..................................................22
      C. Disbursement Arrangements .........................................................................................................22
IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY .................................................................................. 22
      A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis ..................................................................................22
      B. Fiduciary .........................................................................................................................................25
      C. Environmental, Social and Legal Operational Policies ...................................................................26
V. KEY RISKS .................................................................................................................... 29
ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK ........................................................................................ 30
ANNEX 2: Project Map ........................................................................................................ 37
ANNEX 3: Alignment with the CHO IP Program.................................................................... 38
ANNEX 4: The CHO IP Governance Structure ....................................................................... 42
      The World Bank
      Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padbasicinformation#doctemplate
DATASHEET


BASIC INFORMATION


Project
                         Operation Name
Beneficiary(ies)
Moldova                  Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (RE-MAP)
                                                     Environmental and Social Risk
Operation ID             Financing Instrument
                                                     Classification
                         Investment Project
P505546                                              Moderate
                         Financing (IPF)
GEF Focal Area
Multi-focal areas


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padprocessing#doctemplate
Financing & Implementation Modalities
[ ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA)                      [ ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)
[ ] Series of Projects (SOP)                                    [ ] Fragile State(s)
[ ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs)                         [ ] Small State(s)
[ ] Financial Intermediaries (FI)                               [ ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country
[ ] Project-Based Guarantee                                     [ ] Conflict
[ ] Deferred Drawdown                                           [ ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster
[ ] Alternative Procurement Arrangements (APA)                  [ ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS)


Expected Approval Date                 Expected Closing Date
10-Oct-2025                            31-Dec-2030
Bank/IFC Collaboration
No


Proposed Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective is to increase the area under sustainable landscape management practices in
targeted areas within the Dniester River Basin in Moldova.


                                                                                                                      i
      The World Bank
      Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


Components
 Component Name                                                                                          Cost (US$)
 Component 1: Institutional Capacity Development and Community
                                                                                                       1,000,000.00
 Engagement
 Component 2: Landscape Restoration and Watershed Management                                           6,450,000.00
 Component 3. Project Management, Monitoring, and Communication                                         453,975.00

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padborrower#doctemplate

Organizations

 Borrower:                       Republic of Moldova

 Implementing Agency:            Ministry of Environment, National Office for Environmental Projects
                                Implementation (NOEPI)



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padfinancingsummary#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)


Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   No

Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             No

SUMMARY

  Total Operation Cost                                                                                        7.90

  Total Financing                                                                                             7.90

  Financing Gap                                                                                               0.00

DETAILS

 Non-World Bank Group Financing
   Trust Funds                                                                                                7.90

      Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                                       7.90


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@paddisbursementprojection#doctemplate
Expected Disbursements (US$, Millions)
                                                                                                                     ii
      The World Bank
      Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


WB Fiscal
Year                   2026             2027              2028             2029             2030   2031

Annual                 0.56              1.50             2.50             2.00             1.34   0.00
Cumulative             0.56              2.06             4.56             6.56             7.90   7.90


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padclimatechange#doctemplate
PRACTICE AREA(S)


Practice Area (Lead)                                          Contributing Practice Areas
Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy             Agriculture and Food; Water


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padrisk#doctemplate
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK- RATING TOOL (SORT)


Risk Category                                                               Rating
1. Political and Governance                                                 ⚫ Substantial
2. Macroeconomic                                                            ⚫ Moderate
3. Sector Strategies and Policies                                           ⚫ Moderate
4. Technical Design of Project or Program                                   ⚫ Moderate
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability             ⚫ Substantial
6. Fiduciary                                                                ⚫ Moderate
7. Environment and Social                                                   ⚫ Moderate
8. Stakeholders                                                             ⚫ Moderate
9. Overall                                                                  ⚫ Moderate


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padcompliance#doctemplate
POLICY COMPLIANCE


Policy
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects?
[ ] Yes      [✓] No

Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?
[ ] Yes [✓] No

                                                                                                          iii
      The World Bank
      Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)




ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL


Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal
E & S Standards                                                                     Relevance
ESS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and
                                                                                    Relevant
Impacts
ESS 10: Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                           Relevant
ESS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                                                 Relevant
ESS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                  Relevant
ESS 4: Community Health and Safety                                                  Relevant
ESS 5: Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement      Relevant
ESS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural
                                                                                    Relevant
Resources
ESS 7: Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved
                                                                                    Not Currently Relevant
Traditional Local Communities
ESS 8: Cultural Heritage                                                            Not Currently Relevant
ESS 9: Financial Intermediaries                                                     Not Currently Relevant
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review
Summary (ESRS).

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalcovenants#doctemplate
LEGAL
Legal Covenants
Sections and Description
Grant Agreement: Schedule 2. Section I. A - Institutional Arrangements (i) By one hundred eighty (180) days after the
Effective Date - The Recipient, through MOE, shall establish, and thereafter maintain throughout the Project
implementation, a Project Steering Committee chaired by Minister of Environment or a designate appointed by the
Minister, and including representatives from MOE, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Education and Research, State
Forestry Services, Public Institutional National Administration Apele Moldovei, and other relevant stakeholders
Grant Agreement: Schedule 2. Section I. A - Institutional Arrangements (ii) By ninety (90) days after the Effective Date
The Recipient, through MOE, shall establish, and thereafter maintain throughout the Project implementation, a Project
Implementation Unit within National Office for Environmental Project Implementation (“NOEPI”) with composition,
powers, functions, staffing, facilities, and other resources satisfactory to the Bank
Grant Agreement: Schedule 2. Section I. A - Institutional Arrangements (iii) Recurrent, Continuous The Recipient,
through MOE, shall ensure that: (a) all expenditures financed under this Agreement are directly incurred on account of

                                                                                                                      iv
       The World Bank
       Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


the implementation, management, and monitoring of the Project; and (b) in the event that the goods, works, consulting
services, and non-consulting services are shared with other projects or events, such expenditures are properly prorated
to the respective budgets of the relevant projects and/or events
Grant Agreement: Schedule 2, Section I.B – Environmental and Social Standards The Recipient, through MOE, shall
ensure that the Project is carried out in accordance with the Environmental and Social Standards and the ESCP
(including the management tools and instruments referred to therein) in a manner acceptable to the Bank
Grant Agreement: Schedule 2, Section I.C – Project Manuals The Recipient, through MOE, shall prepare, adopt and
thereafter, maintain throughout the Project implementation a Project Operations Manual and a Subproject Manual,
both in form and substance satisfactory to the Bank
Grant Agreement: Schedule 2, Section I.D – Annual Work Plan By November each calendar year The Recipient, through
MOE, shall prepare and furnish to the Bank a draft annual work plan and thereafter ensure the Project is implemented
in accordance with such work plan as shall have been approved by the Bank
Grant Agreement: Schedule 2, Section I.E - Riverbed and Wetland Protection Subprojects The Recipient, through MOE,
shall ensure that the Riverbed and Wetland Protection Subprojects financed out of the proceeds of the Grant are
selected and carried out in accordance with eligibility criteria and the terms and conditions under the Grant Agreement
as further detailed in the Subproject Manual

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padconditions#doctemplate
Conditions
Type                          Citation                      Description                      Financing Source
                                                            (i) The Project Operations
                                                            Manual has been adopted
                              Grant Agreement. Article      by the Recipient, through
Effectiveness                                                                                Trust Funds
                              IV. paragraph 4.01 (b)        MOE, in form and
                                                            substance acceptable to
                                                            the Bank
                                                            (ii) the legal opinion has
                                                            been issued confirming
                                                            that (a) the MOE has the
                                                            legal capacity under the
                                                            laws of the Recipient to
                                                            accept this Grant and the
                                                            terms of this Agreement,
                              Grant Agreement. Article      and to carry out the
Effectiveness                 IV. paragraphs 4.02 (a) and   Recipient’s obligations          Trust Funds
                              (b)                           herein, all for the benefit of
                                                            the Recipient; and (b) the
                                                            Grant Agreement has been
                                                            duly authorized or ratified
                                                            by, and executed and
                                                            delivered on behalf of the
                                                            Recipient and is legally
                                                            binding upon the Recipient

                                                                                                                     v
     The World Bank
     Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


                                                          in accordance with its
                                                          terms
                                                          (i) No withdrawal shall be
                                                          made under Category (2)
                                                          unless and until the Centre
                                                          of Excellence for Climate
                            Grant Agreement: Schedule
Disbursement                                              Resilience has been           Trust Funds
                            2, Section III.B.1 (b)
                                                          established by the
                                                          Recipient with composition
                                                          and functions satisfactory
                                                          to the Bank
                                                          (ii) No withdrawal shall be
                                                          made under Category (3)
                                                          unless and until the Bank
                                                          has received satisfactory
                            Grant Agreement: Schedule
Disbursement                                              evidence that the             Trust Funds
                            2, Section III.B.1 (c)
                                                          Subproject Manual has
                                                          been adopted by the MOE
                                                          in form and substance
                                                          acceptable to the Bank




                                                                                                      vi
        The World Bank
        Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


 I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT

 A. Project Strategic Context
1. Moldova is vulnerable to and currently grappling with the effects of climate change, including two recent droughts
   that severely affected agricultural production at national scale in 2020 and 2022.1 The country has witnessed at least
   one major natural disaster every three years over the last 20 years, including floods and droughts (being inextricably
   linked), which are disastrous for Moldova’s primarily rain-fed agriculture. This is being exacerbated by climate change
   that lists Moldova among the most climate-vulnerable countries in Europe, and the ND-GAIN 2 vulnerability
   assessment ranks it 77th in 2022 on a global vulnerability rank (lower middle). The country also ranks 84th on the ND-
   GAIN readiness indicator (lower middle), showcasing a lack of ability to leverage investments and convert them into
   adaptation actions. The cost of inaction on climate adaptation is estimated to be around US$600 million per year, and
   it is projected to more than double reaching US$1.3 billion per year by 2050.3 Changes in precipitation patterns caused
   by climate change is particularly affecting agriculture, water resources, forestry, human health, energy, and
   infrastructure, leading to a significant decrease in agricultural productivity and diminishing of Moldova’s forests.
2. Following European Union (EU) decision to open negotiations (November 2023) and the start of accession talks with
   Moldova (June 2024), strong reform momentum and growth-enhancing, climate-resilient investments are needed
   to foster long-term, sustainable development and convergence toward EU income levels. Granted in 2022 the EU
   Candidate Status and freshly started accession negotiations with Moldova represent a significant milestone that will
   serve as a catalyst for aligning all sectors, including environment and natural resources, with EU requirements, building
   on the present framework of harmonization through the EU-Moldova Association Agreement. 4 The Agreement
   recognizes the importance of the EU integration process as a framework for the country’s modernization through
   alignment to the EU norms and standards in all fields, as these are considered amongst best international practices.
   While pre-accession support will offer Moldova outstanding opportunities for aligning these and all other sectors
   development processes and institutional organization, the country must undergo profound legislative and institutional
   changes to adapt legislation, implementation, and enforcement to EU requirements.
3. The project is part of the GEF-8 Clean and Healthy Ocean Integrated Program (CHO IP). The GEF-8 CHO IP targets
   nitrogen, phosphorus, and organic matter released by agri-food (crops, livestock, poultry and aquaculture) and
   industrial and municipal systems, as nutrient pollutants generated by these sectors are the primary agents causing
   harmful algal blooms (HAB) and eutrophication that leads to hypoxia. The overall goal of the CHO IP, to which the
   project contributes, is to address marine hypoxic zones by curbing coastal pollution from agriculture, industrial and
   municipal sources through policy and regulatory measures and infrastructure investments combined with nature-
   based solutions. The CHO IP consists of 15 Child Projects: 1 Global Coordination Project (GCP) and 14 Country Projects
   (CP). These CPs span across regions including Latin America, Africa, Asia and the Middle East, with participating
   countries such as Maldives, Thailand, Sri Lanka, Viet Nam, Venezuela, Mexico, Trinidad and Tobago, Panama, St. Kitts
   and Nevis, Grenada, Jordan, Moldova, Peru, and Madagascar, which altogether are included within 9 Large Marine
   Ecosystems (LMEs).5
 B. Sectoral and Institutional Context
4. The Black Sea is vulnerable to pressure from land-based pollution influencing its catchment area that causes the
   degradation of marine and estuary ecosystems through eutrophication. The Dniester River flows to the Black Sea,

    1
      World Bank Group. 2024. Moldova Country Climate and Development Report. CCDR Series
    2
     Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative, 2020. Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative // University of Notre Dame (nd.edu)
    3World Bank. 2016. Republic of Moldova – Moldova Climate Adaptation Investment Planning Technical Assistance. Report No: ACS18562.

    4The Association Agreement was signed on May 14, 2017.
    5
      Ibid.

                                                                                                                                         Page 7
        The World Bank
        Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


    carrying significant nutrient pollutants that mainly contribute to its eutrophication. Nutrients from agriculture
    drainage to the water body are estimated to be 80 percent of total nutrients discharged. Annual economic losses for
    the Black Sea due to environmental problems, particularly in the fisheries and tourism industries, were estimated to
    be approximately US$500 million.6
5. Moldova’s landscapes influence its hydrographic network of more than 3,000 rivers and small rivulets, with two
   main high transboundary rivers (Dniester and Prut), while smaller rivulets are gradually dying. The Dniester River
   Basin covers more than 70,000 km2 with an area of the basin within Moldova of 19,070 km², which constitutes 57
   percent of its territory. Its waters are affected by pollution and altered hydrologic regime, including environmental
   and economic challenges posed by the Dniester Hydroenergetic Complex (DHC) in Ukraine. Although agriculture
   dominates, wetland remnants (concentrated mainly along the Dniester’s mouth section and locally within its
   tributaries) and riverbank forests represent an important feature of the river basin landscapes. Due to combined
   complex factors over the last decades, the Dniester River Basin has encountered a dramatical decrease in wetland
   areas and in natural forest composition, all associated with a sharp reduction in the quality and quantity of fish stock
   and changes in ecosystem patterns.7
6. The Dniester River Basin faces pressing environmental challenges. The Dniester River Basin is crucial for Moldova
   and its economic development but only 30 percent of its waters originating within Moldova's network of tributaries,
   including contributions from the Transnistrian region. The river serves as the primary source of drinking water for
   Moldova and for a significant portion of Ukraine. It also plays a pivotal role in sustaining Moldova's substantial
   agricultural sector, accounting for 10 percent of its GDP in 2023. However, the Dniester River Basin faces pressing
   environmental challenges that have far-reaching implications for both Moldova and Ukraine.8 Within this basin, a
   staggering 94 percent of water bodies are polluted and have been assessed as being at risk of "not achieving good
   ecological status" according to EU standards, with none classified as "no risk."9 The most severely impacted are the
   inland Dniester's network of streams, including the many tributaries on the brink of drying up and requiring urgent
   revitalization efforts.
7. Nutrient pollution coming into the Dniester River represents one of the most critical environmental issues, leading
   to eutrophication, hypoxia, acidification, and toxicity in the Black Sea. This problem has complex root causes,
   primarily arising from: (a) the discharge of household and urban wastewater and stormwater directly into natural
   waterways, ponds, and, eventually, the Dniester River and Black Sea; (b) disturbances in upstream ecosystems that
   permit discharges from the agricultural sector, resulting in downstream nutrient pollution from the use of mineral
   fertilizers and animal waste; and (c) inadequate treatment or the complete lack thereof in the discharge of industrial
   and power sector effluents into the river. The whole area segment from Soroca district in the middle sector of the
   Dniester River up to its mouth, as well as its inner system of smaller streams (e.g., Răut, Botna, Ichel, Bâc, etc.), are
   considered highly vulnerable to nitrogen pollution.
8. One of significant sources of nitrogen emissions in the north-west part of the Black Sea represents the discharged
   waters from the Dniester River Basin. It is recognized that addressing nutrient pollution from point and diffuse
   sources will help mitigate eutrophication, which in turn has the potential to create huge impacts on GHG emissions.
   The Dniester River has an average downstream flow rate of 310 m³/s with the volume of annual runoff being at 10.2


    6 Republic of Moldova: State of the Environment report 2015-2018
    7 Dniester Hydro Power Complex Social and Environmental Impact Study: Non-technical summary / Petru Bacal, Daniela Burduja, Olga Cazanteva [et al.]; project

    coordinator: Nadejda Chilaru; Ministry of Environment, United Nations Development Program in Moldova (PNUD). – Chişinău: S. n., 2022 (Bons Offices). – 34 p.
    8 World Bank. Blueing the Black Sea: Turning the Tide of Pollution Volume 2: Country Marine Pollution Diagnostics. 02BackgroundPaperBBSEAUAMarch6.pdf

    (worldbank.org)
    9 OECD. (2020). Developing a Water Policy Outlook for Georgia, the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine. Developing a Water Policy Outlook for Georgia, the Republic

    of Moldova and Ukraine | OECD Studies on Water | OECD iLibrary (oecd-ilibrary.org)

                                                                                                                                                          Page 8
         The World Bank
         Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


    km³.10 Overall, it is recognized that nutrient runoff in the river basin is caused mainly by: (i) very low coverage and
    poor status of forest vegetation; (ii) environmentally unsustainable crop and soil management practices; (iii) water
    discharges from wastewater treatment facilities;11 (iv) degradation and over-grazing of pastureland which contribute
    to soil degradation and erosion; (v) inappropriate management, storage and disposal of animal manure, including
    dumping of manure in household backyards and riverbanks along with the poor solid waste management and
    existence of many non-licensed dumpsites in rural areas; and (vi) conversion and mismanagement of wetlands.12
9. The water quality and sources of nutrient pollution of the Dniester River are not well understood. Overall, the water
   of the Dniester River belongs to the II and III quality classes. At the same time, almost all its tributaries fit the V quality
   class (lowest), which indicates that they are very polluted.13 Although there was an improvement in water quality over
   the last decades, mainly due to the decrease in economic activities, the water quality remains a serious problem and
   further deterioration is expected, which is related to nitrogen and phosphorus compounds and microbiological and
   chemical status.14
10. Moldova’s agriculture contributes significantly to nutrient emissions, accounting for about 90 percent of its
    total discharge into the Dniester River Basin.15 Agricultural lands of the Dniester River Basin occupy 76 percent of
    the total area and half of them are used as arable land (51 percent), mainly for cereals and technical crops. Only 9
    percent of the Dniester River Basin’s territory is covered by forests, but there is an advancement of forest-type
    vegetation over abandoned lands, including active penetration of exotics and weeds. Due to this and because
    agriculture is often undertaken on hilly land with poor soil conservation techniques, erosion is significantly
    resulting in some of the topsoil being carried by the river system into the estuary. Such land use and intensive
    agriculture practice generate an increased diffuse nutrient river pollution.
11. Unsustainable land management practices in the country contribute to increased nitrogen emissions. It is estimated
    that about 43 percent of Moldova’s agricultural land is affected to some degree by soil erosion, of which 6.4 percent
    is considered highly eroded. The area of eroded soil has increased over the last 40 years by 283,400 ha, advancing by
    7,086 ha annually, causing damage to the national economy estimated at about 3.1 billion lei (about US$155 million).16
    Annual soil loss rates vary from 5 - 10 tons/ha to over 30 tons/ha for slightly eroded and severely eroded lands,
    respectively.17 At national level, humus losses in agricultural soil annually release circa 1.8-2.0 million tons of CO2
    emissions.18
12. Forest ecosystems have been negatively affected by poor management (coppicing or intensive treatments) and
    abusive practices (including selective illegal logging and unauthorized grazing), currently more affected by climate
    change.19 The country has an insignificant forest vegetation cover (14.7 percent of its territory) and forest ecosystems
    (nearly 11 percent of its territory), while the necessary cover to meet livelihood needs and cope with climate change
    is several times higher (25-30 percent of its territory). At least 60 percent of Moldova’s forests are of coppice origin

    10 V. Khilchevskyi et al. 2019. Description of the hydro-chemical regime of the Dniester River
    11
       The existing wastewater treatment plants in cities continue to decrease efficiency or are out of order. Secondly, discharges of insufficiently purified or
    untreated water have a greater weight in rural areas, where sewage networks are practically absent, animal farms and households constituting numerous
    sources of pollution
    12 Impacts of the rivers on the Black Sea ecosystem. Bucuresti, CD Press. 2021. BSB319_ANEMONE_-_Impact-of-the-rivers-on-Black-Sea-ecosystem_EN.pdf

    (blacksea-cbc.net)
    13
       Republic of Moldova: State of the Environment report 2015-2018.
    14 Impacts of the rivers on the Black Sea ecosystem. Bucuresti, CD Press. 2021. BSB319_ANEMONE_-_Impact-of-the-rivers-on-Black-Sea-ecosystem_EN.pdf

    (blacksea-cbc.net)
    15 World Bank. Agriculture Pollution Control Project. 2004. 277460MD.pdf (worldbank.org)
    16
       State Environmental Protection Inspectorate. Annual Report. 2023
    17 Sutton, W. et al. 2008. Integrating Environment into Agriculture and Forestry: Progress and Prospects in Eastern Europe and Central Asia. The World Bank,

    Washington DC.
    18Ibid.
    19
       World Bank. Republic of Moldova: Forestry Policy Note. 2015

                                                                                                                                                             Page 9
         The World Bank
         Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


    (meaning higher vulnerability to climate change). More than 120,000 ha of state-owned forests (representing 40
    percent of Moldsilva’s holdings) 20 are degraded to varying degrees, with their composition and structure poorly
    aligned with site conditions. Community-owned forests are in even worse condition, requiring urgent restoration and
    improvement, while many communities intend to create even more forest plantations. These factors reduce forests’
    role in biodiversity and soil conservation, affecting their resilience to climate change, thus requiring urgent
    rehabilitation measures. In addition, at least one-third of forestlands are covered by exotic species (mainly black
    locust, which is nearly naturalized) originally introduced to support communities’ livelihoods and protect soils.
    However, their management faces challenges, requiring site-specific adjustments and an innovative approach. The
    current low forest cover, advanced status of forest degradation and poor forest management contribute to increased
    nutrient runoff in the river basin.
13. Pastureland degradation has dramatically increased over the last 2-3 decades, primarily due to poor management
    practices (non-environmentally friendly and uncontrolled grazing), leading to a consistent decline in their
    productivity. The total area of pastures - including hayfields and fallow lands - in the country is nearly 10 percent of
    its territory, while in the Dniester River Basin it constitutes about 12-14 percent of its total area.21 Generally, current
    pastures (which were formerly steppes, meadows, wetlands or forests) are mostly degraded, with poor grass cover
    and low biological productivity, estimated only at 20-50 percent of their potential. As a result, they cannot meet the
    growing demands of the developing livestock sector, nor is their role in soil stabilization and nutrient absorption
    adequately fulfilled. Almost all pastures in the country are public property, owned and managed by local public
    authorities (LPAs). Pastures are generally subject to unauthorized and, most often, uncontrolled grazing, which has a
    significant negative impact on their quality and biodiversity, even though there is a dedicated legal framework clearly
    regulating grazing and mowing.22 Considering that diversified forest vegetation is naturally present in pastures and its
    continued existence is desirable to a certain extent, a silvopastoral approach to improve pasture management is
    urgently needed.
14. During the last century most of the wetland areas in the country, including in the Dniester River Basin, have dried
    out for agriculture, now they are highly fragmented, and their current condition is only worsening due to multiple
    factors. In the past, Moldova boasted with large areas of land covered with various types of interconnected wetlands
    (rivers, lakes, marshes), especially in the lower part of its two main rivers, all very rich in species and habitat diversity.
    During the Soviet era, many wetlands became subject to extensive agriculture, being destroyed by human activity and
    converted to agriculture. Nowadays, the Dniester River harbors two out of three wetlands of international importance,
    being included in the list of Ramsar Convention: (a) “The Lower Dniester” with an area of about 60,638 ha and located
    downstream; and (b) “Unguri–Holoşniţa” covering an area of 15,553 ha and located in the middle portion of the river.23
    Wetland remnants outside Ramsar sites are small and scattered throughout the basin, persisting mainly along rivers
    or other water bodies (such as lakes and ponds). Most of these areas are subject to overgrazing and are on the brink
    of extinction as wetland-type ecosystems. Generally, wetlands are highly underestimated in the country’s
    conservation agenda, which implies a special wetland conservation program to save the last remnants of once-large
    delta type wetlands.24 Local people have traditionally gained significant benefits from wetlands (especially water, fish,
    fodder, and leisure), but these benefits are diminishing due ongoing degradation.


    20
       Majority of and best forests in the country are managed by Agency Moldsilva (84 percent of all forest lands), which is the central authority for forestry and
    hunting, a subdivision of the Ministry of Environment.
    21 Statistical Yearbook of the Republic of Moldova, editions 2002-2023 (https://statistica.gov.md/en/statistical-yearbook-of-the-republic-of-moldova-2023-

    9877_59482.html).
    22
       Regulations on grazing and mowing (GD 667 from 23.07.2010)
    23A. Tarita, s.a. Zonele umede (naturale si construite) importante pentru Republica Moldova (Wetland areas of the Republic of Moldova). 279-284_12.pdf

    (idsi.md)
    24 A. Lozan (2021). Report: current state and gaps implementation of the legislation on protected areas in the Republic of Moldova, including recommendations

    for improving the legal framework and conservation practices. Chisinau.

                                                                                                                                                           Page 10
         The World Bank
         Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


15. Landscape restoration as a response to ecosystem degradation (including forest, pasture and water/wetland
    ecosystems) is on the EU agenda, and Moldova must take immediate steps to maximize nutrient removal in the
    Dniester River and the Black Sea. The EU Nature Restoration Law requires member states to restore 20 percent of
    degraded EU land and sea ecosystems by 2030 and all ecosystems by 2050. In its accession negotiations, Moldova
    should address this law. The country is currently developing its eco-restoration vision to remove excess nutrients and
    restore the balance of the agricultural ecosystem in the Dniester River Basin. This effort aligns with the UN Decade on
    Ecosystem Restoration,25 which aims to prevent, halt, and reverse ecosystem degradation on every continent and in
    every ocean, as well as with the recent EU4Green Recovery East project.
16. The current institutional capacity at both national and local levels to address land degradation and environmental
    pollution issues remains limited. The Ministry of Environment (MoE) and its main bodies (such as the Environmental
    Agency, Environmental Protection Inspectorate, National Administration Apele Moldovei (NAAM), Moldsilva, and the
    State Hydrometeorological Service (SHS)) are currently undergoing reforms. These institutions face challenges due to
    weak institutional frameworks and limited human resources. The MoE lacks specialized bodies, structures, and
    dedicated personnel. Wetlands are one example of an area that has largely been underestimated and neglected, which
    has contributed to their gradual degradation.
17. While authorities continue to invest in harmonizing national legislation with EU legislation, implementation and
    law enforcement remain challenging and require due attention. Sub-governmental institutions require careful
    transformation, taking into account existing relationships with community-level audiences and established social-
    economic traditions at local level. Given the increased availability of financial inputs (loans and grants) from the EU
    under the current negotiation process, Moldova may face additional challenges related to institutional incapacity to
    absorb and efficiently utilize such financial resources. Implementing sectoral reform involves more than just building
    policy. For example, in the forestry sector, the recently adopted Forest Law 26 will need to be followed by
    comprehensive implementation, requiring both optimized institutional and financial structures, as well as sustainable
    ecosystem management. All of this will necessitate a balanced approach to applying NbS and ensuing benefits for
    stakeholders, especially local communities.

 II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

 A. Project Development Objective
18. The Project Development Objective is to increase the area under sustainable landscape management practices27
    in targeted areas within the Dniester River Basin in Moldova.
 B. Results Chain and Key Indicators
19. The proposed project seeks to confront the issue of land-based nutrient pollution by enhancing adaptive capacity
    for upstream ecosystem restoration, in compliance with EU directives and the Dniester Commission. Employing an
    integrated approach, the project will focus on restoring and sustainably managing resources through Nature-based
    solutions (NbS). The project is designed to tackle the primary challenge of increased nutrient runoff from agricultural
    activities, erosion, poor natural resource management, and the degradation of remaining forests and pastures, all
    exacerbated by climate change. These issues lead to overall environmental degradation within the country and

    25 https://www.decadeonrestoration.org/
    26 https://mediu.gov.md/ro/content/4727
    27
      Sustainable Landscape Management practices are defined as practices that promote or introduce nature-based solutions (NbS) by the project and aimed at
    preventing nutrient loading, particularly nitrogen and phosphorus, into the Dniester River Basin. These NbS include ecological restoration, riparian and wetland
    rehabilitation, silvopastoral management planning, and agroforestry interventions to enhance ecosystem functionality, soil retention capacity, and water
    quality. The project will strategically target high-impact sub-basins and degraded ecosystems and erosion-prone land that significantly contribute to
    eutrophication and marine pollution in the Black Sea.

                                                                                                                                                           Page 11
       The World Bank
       Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


   contribute to marine pollution and the eutrophication of the Black Sea. The targeted interventions of the proposed
   project will, therefore, aim to enhance capacity through institutional strengthening, address policy gaps in pollution
   management, forest, and watershed management, provide training and equipment, and invest in landscape
   restoration in selected areas, involving local communities, to foster healthier freshwater ecosystems. The project will
   focus on restoring ecosystem processes directly, resulting in expanded areas of healthier ecosystems (restored
   functionality) and broader range of generated ecosystem services through adoption of NbS. These actions will help
   improve landscape/habitat conditions and water quality through reanimated synergies between upstream and
   downstream ecosystems. The anticipated outcome includes an increased area of sustainably managed terrestrial
   ecosystems within the Dniester River Basin that will contribute to more resilient communities. The intended results,
   objectives, and expected outcomes from the proposed project are summarized in a Theory of Change (ToC) below
   (Figure 1). At a higher level, as a participant in the CHO IP, under the overall coordination and support of the Global
   Coordination Project (GCP), the project will contribute to addressing the issues affecting land-based nutrient pollution
   and marine hypoxia identified in the programmatic ToC and following the Program Framework Document (PFD) (see
   Annex 3).
                                                  Figure 1. Theory of change




20. The following are the indicators to measure the achievement of the PDO and the project’s key results.

                                                                                                                   Page 12
        The World Bank
        Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


    (a) Area of land under sustainable management practices within the Dniester River Basin focused on nutrient
        pollution prevention (Hectare)
    (b) People benefitting from selected restoration and/or sustainable management practices within the Dniester River
        Basin (sex disaggregated) (Number)

 C. Project Beneficiaries
21. The project will aim to bring benefits to a wide range of stakeholders including the public and private sectors as
    well as a wider population. Direct beneficiaries at the national level are the MoE, including: (i) staff of NAAM,
    responsible for implementing the state policy in the field of water resources management, which operate under the
    MoE; (ii) staff of Moldsilva, responsible for implementing state policy in forestry and hunting, including some of its
    subsidiary State Forest Enterprises (SFEs) and the Forest Research and Management Institute (ICAS); and (iii)
    representatives of the Local Public Authorities (LPAs), who manage around 18 percent of the National Forest Ground
    (NFG) 28 and most of pastures, 29 as well as communities and local populations benefitting from the landscape
    rehabilitation (afforestation of degraded lands, forests restoration, wetland reconstruction and pastures
    improvement or other revitalization works). Approximately 99,200 rural inhabitants in up to 20 selected communities,
    where restoration activities will be implemented, are expected to be the primary project beneficiaries.
 D. Project Components
22. The proposed project follows the basic principles and requirements specified in the GEF CHO IP and, in the longer
    term, seeks to confront the issue of land-based nutrient pollution by enhancing adaptive capacity for upstream
    ecosystem restoration. Employing an integrated approach, the project will focus on restoring and sustainably
    managing natural resources through NbS. It will enhance capacity through institutional strengthening, address policy
    gaps in pollution management, forest, and watershed management, provide training and equipment, and invest in
    direct landscape restoration in selected areas, involving local communities and private sector, to foster healthier
    freshwater ecosystems.
23. The project targets only the right side of the Dniester River. All administrative districts in the western Moldova
    bordering the Dniester’s hydrological network are considered for project activities across the whole basin ranging
    from the northern districts (Ocnita, Donduseni, Drochia, Soroca) and central districts (Floresti, Soldanesti, Rezina,
    Telenesti, Orhei, Criuleni, Ialoveni, Anenii-Noi, Dubasari) to southern districts (Causeni and Stefan Voda). Annex 2
    presents the preliminary project area of interest for ecosystem restoration along the Dniester River Basin, including
    its tributaries subject to high restoration concern (most of them originate from the forested highlands of Moldova).
24. The project activities will help prevent marine pollution by enhancing adaptive capacity for river basin ecosystem
    restoration at the landscape level, in accordance with EU directives and the Dniester River Agreement between
    Moldova and Ukraine. The project’s design consists of three components: (i) Component 1: Institutional Capacity
    Development and Community Engagement; (ii) Component 2: Landscape Restoration and Watershed Management;
    and (iii) Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring, and Communication.
25. As a member of the CHO IP, Moldova RE-MAP will also contribute to a set of standard activities (e.g., inter alia,
    research and site assessments, capacity building, etc.) that will link activities at the regional and global levels, via the
    Global Coordination Project (GCP), providing greater connectivity and networking between the Program’s Child
    Projects, and enhancing opportunities for awareness raising and knowledge exchange (particularly technical

    28 National Forest Ground (NFG) includes forests, lands intended for afforestation, and lands under forest management, as well as nonproductive lands, as per

    forest management plans (FMPs), lands registered in national cadaster as forests and/or forest plantations (as per formulations in the Forest Code).
    29 From nearly 350 thousand hectares of pasturelands, more than 80 percent are owned and managed by local public authorities. Over the last decades,

    pasturelands have degraded due to unregulated overgrazing and the use of chemicals in the nearby lands.

                                                                                                                                                          Page 13
       The World Bank
       Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


    knowledge), stakeholder dialogue and innovation at scale. Furthermore, participation in the Integrated Program offers
    Moldova RE-MAP the opportunity to access additional targeted technical capacity not available to the project alone,
    to enhance achievement of project results, such as support through the GCP to guidance on improving financing for
    investments that include measures to address nutrient pollution and marine hypoxia and technical capacity on
    monitoring and tracking of nutrient pollution, hypoxia, and coastal health to promote science-based strategic and
    adaptive management.
    Component 1: Institutional Capacity Development and Community Engagement (estimated budget: US$1 million)
26. This component aims at improving the enabling conditions for strengthening community resilience, increasing the size
    of restored ecosystems and strengthening pollution management in the Dniester River Basin. The component will
    focus on the following core interventions: improving policy environment, institutional capacity development, system
    modernization, spurring communities’ economic benefits, and supporting government’s reform of the forest
    governance including the effective implementation of the new Forest Code.
27. Subcomponent 1.1: Policy Harmonization and Capacity Development (estimated budget: US$0.5 million). This sub-
    component will focus on developing and harmonizing policy framework and enforcement mechanisms for effective
    nutrient pollution prevention and watershed management in the Dniester River Basin through NbS. The project will
    finance analysis and revisions of existing policy and legal frameworks for pollution management, forest and wetland
    restoration, afforestation/reforestation, and watershed management to help align these with EU and international
    obligations including NDC commitments. This sub-component will also finance improving institutional capacity with
    better technology, system development and staff skills related to marine pollution management, NbS, landscape
    restoration, watershed management, forest/wetland conservation, etc. This could include purchasing equipment and
    tools to support effective nutrient pollution prevention, monitoring and management, developing training materials,
    organizing workshops, awareness campaigns, study tours (for mayors and other government officials), hiring of
    experts for system development, feasibility studies for modernization, etc.
28. Subcomponent 1.2: Community Benefits and Engagement (estimated budget: US$0.4 million). This sub-component
    will support local communities (in particular, women and under privileged communities) in implementing restoration
    activities that aim at improving marine pollution management through NbS in the Dniester River Basin. Community
    engagement includes involvement in the design of the project through multi-stakeholder engagement and
    implementation of specific river restoration activities as paid seasonal workers or volunteers, including tree planting,
    wetland revitalization, habitat restoration, disturbance control, and clean-up efforts. Selected communities will be
    also provided with material support to change their agricultural practices, such as reducing the use of chemical
    fertilizers. The communities will benefit economically from increased agroforestry products, and resilient and
    sustainable food production. The project will also improve the livelihoods of the communities by increasing supplies
    of food, water, timber, and biomedicines. They will also benefit from paid labor work in the restoration activities of
    the project. The target communities will be selected based on a set of criteria linked to site selection criteria. The set
    of criteria and a detailed procedure of selection will be elaborated in the Project Operations Manual (POM). The
    implementation of the Community Engagement will be handled by service providers to support the communities with
    the sylvopastoral planning activities and agricultural practices, who will be recruited based on a competitive
    procurement process.
29. Subcomponent 1.3: Supporting the establishment of the Centre of Excellence for Climate Resilience and NbS
    (estimated budget: US$0.1 million). The Centre of Excellence for Climate Resilience (CiRCE) will be established at the
    State University of Moldova to serve as a hub for start-ups and national expertise, and to bring together top talent
    and specialized knowledge in nature restoration, forest/wetland management, climate resilience, and the green
    economy. The services of CiRCE could include the followings: (i) Startup Acceleration: the Centre will have intensive

                                                                                                                      Page 14
       The World Bank
       Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


    mentorship and training program to support early-stage startups in the development of successful high-growth
    climate smart businesses through mentorship, education, networking, and partnerships; (ii) Capacity and Workforce
    Development: providing training and credit schemes for individuals involved in nature restoration, climate resilience
    activities or interested in pursuing careers in the green industry; (iii) Technical Guidance and Standards Development:
    this includes the development and application of standards in nature restoration, and climate smart products; and (iv)
    Technical and Research-based support for Innovation and Sustainability.
30. The establishment of CiRCE may require: (i) preparation of a business plan which would envision financial sustainability
    of the center in two years of its operation and include clear and measurable goals and metrics, governance structure,
    leveraging partnership and collaboration, revenue schemes, financial flows, talent management, identified services
    and delivery modalities, etc.; (ii) provision of equipment and machinery needed for business development for start-
    ups, training program and extension services of CiRCE; (iii) preparation of training materials and mentorship programs;
    and (iv) technical support for the first two years of operations.
31. The establishment of CiRCE will be supported by both RE-MAP project and Moldova Higher Education Project
    (P167990) and will be led by the MoE together with the Ministry of Education. However, the support of RE-MAP
    project in the CiRCE will be limited to providing technical assistance once the center is established, including through
    development of qualifying training materials, support to the setup of the governance structure and management
    system, and support for the selection of the first two batches of trainees.
    Component 2: Landscape Restoration and Watershed Management (estimated budget: US$6.45 million)
32. This component aims at enhancing water quality through healthier and functionally restored ecosystems that will
    contribute to creating more resilient communities. It includes three interconnected subcomponents. The first
    subcomponent focuses on improving conditions of forest ecosystems, involving restoring degraded forest landscapes
    to a healthier state using different approaches. The second subcomponent aims at enhancing river/wetland networks
    that link different habitats, primarily wetland remnants and smaller rivers. The third subcomponent will support
    silvopastoral management planning process by involving three livelihood-sensitive natural resources for local
    communities (pasture, forest, water), thus raising it to the level of Landscape Restoration Planning; it also includes
    pilot activities. Proposed NbS methods will range from ‘soft’ rehabilitation and revegetation to disturbance control
    techniques or ‘hard’ ecological reconstruction that envisage the interlinked key natural components (forests,
    wetlands, meadows/pastures, and water bodies) at macro-ecosystemic level.
33. Subcomponent 2.1: Improved forest ecosystem condition (estimated budget: US$4.85 million). This subcomponent
    expects to remove various pollutants, including nutrients, sediment, coliforms, pesticides, and heavy metals, from
    agricultural landscapes by enhancing the functionality of restored forest ecosystems within the Dniester River Basin
    in Moldova. Proposed activities will be conducted on publicly owned land managed either by the state (Moldsilva’s
    entities) or non-state owners (LPAs), and none of these lands can be privately owned or located in a protected area
    (PA). Another condition is that selected sites have forest management plans (active or under re-management cycle)
    fully aligned with provisions set in the Land Code and the Forest Code. All landowners must ensure the investment's
    sustainability by implementing appropriate measures supported by the project. For this subcomponent, the project
    will support only silvicultural interventions that respect NbS principles, such as (i) appropriate forest treatment and
    regeneration (maintenance from cleaning/thinning and successive/progressive treatment to direct planting/seeding
    and enrichments), along water/wetland bodies; (ii) forest rehabilitation through species substitution (degraded stands
    that lost viability because of invaded exotic or inappropriate species, thus promoting suitable native species/stands);
    (iii) reforestation (bringing forests back on deforested or degraded lands by promoting natural succession); and (iv)
    afforestation of newly forests or shelterbelts (especially in critically torrent-vulnerable areas).
34. Subcomponent 2.2: Riverbed and Wetland Protection (estimated budget: US$0.93 million). This sub-component aims

                                                                                                                    Page 15
       The World Bank
       Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


    at protecting riverbed landscapes that harbor aquatic and wetland habitats (permanent or temporarily flooded) in
    selected tributaries along the Dniester River. Land areas under this subcomponent are publicly owned properties
    either managed by communities (village/commune or district levels) or by the state (NAAM or Moldsilva). The lands
    for the project will be selected based on their (i) significance for reducing nutrient pollution from nearby agricultural
    fields, (ii) role in landscape functionality and connectivity, and (iii) sustainability of investments.
35. Specific project activities to restore degraded wetlands include: (a) Identification of project sites; (b) delineation of
    boundaries of ‘wetland-type’ habitats through consultations (to ensure future conservation measures including
    establishing protection vegetation buffer zones along or around wetlands through planting/replanting, enhancing
    ecological corridors); (c) design of the wetland to be restored or revegetated, considering the habitat requirements of
    the targeted biodiversity; (d) revision of the water supply and sources of pollution; (e) ecological reconstruction,
    including cleaning-up works and species repopulation; (f) monitoring of the biodiversity recovery in the restored
    ecosystems, and (g) measuring of the wetlands’ restoration, including carbon sequestration. This subcomponent will
    also include subprojects directly implemented by local communities. This approach has been successfully
    implemented in Moldova through similar projects, such as grant schemes provided to local communities by the
    National Office for Environmental Projects Implementation (NOEPI) under the Ministry of Environment, funded by the
    EU. This approach includes well-defined procedures and engages local communities committed to executing the
    activities. The project will develop a Subproject Manual to guide the entire process and support local communities in
    managing the funds for sub-projects.
36. Subcomponent 2.3: Promoting silvopastoral agroforestry systems (estimated budget: US$0.67 million). This sub-
    component targets the improvement of community-owned lands through sustainable agroforestry systems
    (integrated tree/shrub with crops) and silvopastoral practices (combining trees/shrubs with grazing). The sub-
    component includes demonstration of integrated nutrient management and implementation of landscape restoration
    strategies focusing on agroforestry/silvopastoral practices and other innovative NbS for nutrient pollution prevention.
    Communities for silvopastoral management planning (SPMP) process will be selected based on criteria that meet
    specific conditions such as (i) close location to river/rivulet landscape (districts that are part of the Dniester River
    Basin), (ii) at least 10-15 percent of pastureland is covered by natural or spontaneous forest vegetation, (iii) the
    property has at least 50 ha in size, (iv) participation through decision-taking process (proved by the decision of LPA’s
    local councils), and (v) ensuring subsequent actions for the implementation of produced planning documents.
37. Stakeholder engagement is critical to the SPMP process, which will encompass the entire selected LPA area, potentially
    including several sites and sectors, thereby building trust and ensuring an integrated landscape approach. The project
    will also support the pilot implementation of selected SPMP sites by focusing on demonstrational restoration of
    degraded ecosystems. The pilot activities could include revegetation, direct planting/seeding, erosion control
    techniques, water harvesting management through enhancing riverbeds.
    Component 3. Project Management, Monitoring, and Communication (estimated budget: US$0.45 million - US$0.35
    million Project Management Coordination & US$0.1 million M&E)
38. This component will finance the operating costs of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) under the National Office
    for Environmental Project Implementation (NOEPI), subordinated directly to the MoE, to carry out project
    management functions. Support will be provided for procurement, financial management (FM), management of
    environmental and social risks, coordination of restoration operations, and communication activities. It will also
    support monitoring and evaluation (M&E) functions. The communication activities will also focus on promoting
    interactions through policy consultation, dissemination of information, and outreach activities on marine pollution
    management through applying NbS within the Dniester River Basin. This component will also cover surveys and
    evaluations at the mid-term review (MTR) to assess the project's progress and effectiveness and at project closure to

                                                                                                                     Page 16
           The World Bank
           Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


    assess the efficiency and effectiveness of the project's implementation process and to provide valuable insights by
    sharing experiences, best practices, and lessons learned.

 E. Rationale for Bank Involvement and Role of Partners
39. The project will establish partnerships with representatives from the private sector, specifically local wineries and
    farmers' associations, to engage them in pollution mitigation and ecosystem restoration activities. Strong interest
    was expressed by two wineries - Purcari and Castel Mimi, both managing vineyards located close to the Dniester River
    and whose production rely very much upon environmental conditions in the landscape (or terroir). Purcari Winery has
    already engaged in discussions with local state forestry enterprises and adjacent local public authorities to conduct
    afforestation activities in neighboring areas and create a green zone. Castel Mimi currently is collaborating closely
    with the Ministry of Culture on the development of a new touristic trail along the historic Silk Way Road that is planned
    to be included in the national trail network. The involvement of the specified wineries will include, inter alia, piloting
    initiatives to enhance land productivity for wine producers and further develop ecotourism ventures.
40. In addition to the Bank, other International Financial Institutions (IFIs) and Development Partners (DPs) are also
    supporting some projects related to NbS and climate adaptation in the country. In particular, UNDP is implementing
    GEF Conservation and sustainable management of wetlands with focus on high-nature value areas in the Prut River
    basin (US$0.9 million, under implementation between 2022-2027)30 aimed at achieving ecological integrity of key
    floodplain wetlands in the Prut River basin. The French Agency for International Development Forestry €40 million loan
    supports the forestry sector’s reforms and its governance, jointly with a €1.2 million grant for technical assistance.31
    The European Investment Bank (EIB) Forestry project which is under development will be supporting the
    implementation of the National Forest Extension and Rehabilitation Program (NFERP) with a loan of €200 million.
41. The GEF/UNDP-OSCE Dniester River Basin Project. Also, UNDP is implementing another GEF project with a focus on
    advancing transboundary co-operation (between Moldova and Ukraine) and Integrated Water Resources
    Management in the Dniester River Basin (US$6 million, to be implemented between 2024-2028). This transboundary
    initiative promotes joint governance and water cooperation for the Moldova–Ukraine river basin. Moldova REMAP
    complements these efforts by implementing on-the-ground nutrient retention interventions in Moldova that reinforce
    the Dniester Basin Management Plan. It also strengthens the effectiveness of early warning systems and long-term
    water quality monitoring promoted under the UNDP project by addressing the root causes of pollution at landscape
    level. Together, these actions support harmonized water resource management and help operationalize Moldova's
    international obligations under the Dniester Treaty.
42. This regional alignment maximizes the environmental benefits of GEF investments, improves transboundary
    coherence, and elevates Moldova’s role in the collective efforts to mitigate eutrophication and enhance ecological
    health in the Black Sea basin. The project aligns with the objectives of the Dniester Commission by reinforcing national
    capacities, participatory planning, monitoring protocols, and community-based conservation within the Moldovan
    portion of the basin. This alignment enhances coherence between upstream and transboundary actions, supports
    Moldova’s EU approximation agenda under the EU Water Framework Directive (WFD), and contributes to a cohesive
    source-to-sea strategy in the Black Sea catchment.
43. Additionally, the project will contribute to the Common Maritime Agenda (CMA) and complement the World Bank’s
    Blueing the Black Sea (BBSEA) regional umbrella program (P173890). As one of Black Sea economies joining forces
    that aim to make progress toward the Black Sea sustainability and meet the CMA, the actions to reduce land-based
    nutrient pollution that would otherwise indirectly end up in the Black Sea will also contribute to the BBSEA program.

    30   https://www.thegef.org/projects-operations/projects/10650
    31
         French Development Agency and the Republic of Moldova. https://unece.org/sites/default/files/2023-05/AFD_Moldova_April_2023.pdf

                                                                                                                                           Page 17
        The World Bank
        Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


    Since the green and innovative activities defined in the BBSEA program are focused on Georgia, Moldova, Türkiye, and
    Ukraine, the pollution prevention efforts of the project in Moldova can inform and support the dialogue with its
    regional partners.
 F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design
44. The project will expand the best practices of implemented and ongoing initiatives, adopting improved management
    of nutrient pollution in the Dniester River Basin. The experience of similar initiatives in Moldova proved that NbS
    targeted at managing nutrient pollution through afforestation/reforestation or rehabilitation activities, wetland
    restoration, pastures improvement, play an important role not only in nutrient pollution prevention but also adapting
    to, and mitigating climate change, and, at the same time, in improving soil and biodiversity conservation, as well as
    helping create jobs and improving livelihoods in poor rural areas.
45. The project design was informed by the following important lessons drawn from decades of the World Bank
    engagement in Moldova and implementation of integrated landscape projects in the region.
    •   Importance of considering the status of reforms/reorganization within state institutions involved in the project.
        Following lessons of past engagement, proposed investment projects can be more effective and impactful when
        acting as a catalyst for future reforms rather than being anchored to very difficult and lengthy reform processes.
        Lessons show that projects working with weak institutions are implemented more efficiently when a reform
        process is already underway. Both Moldsilva and NAAM, strategic project partners, face serious institutional
        constraints but have not yet initiated or are at the initial stages of the reform processes. The project design
        considers the risk associated with this weak institutional context and focused on working more closely with the
        target beneficiaries (small farmers and rural communities and inhabitants, private companies) by relying on
        technical subsidiaries, including ICAS, SFE, and NAAM’s territorial branches for the implementation of core
        activities.
    •   The best stimulant for widespread adoption of new or additional nutrient pollution management technologies
        is demonstration of their benefits. Previously implemented by the WB projects in the country in forestry (PCF and
        BioCarbon Funds Soil Conservation and community Forestry Development) and agricultural sector (the RISP; RISP
        I and II; APC) have provided support in piloting technologies aimed at afforestation of degraded agricultural lands,
        pastures improvement and increasing resilience to climate changes. All this provided a clear lesson that the best
        motivation for widespread adoption of various NbS for ecosystems restoration is demonstration of benefits
        stakeholders receive on the ground, through both advisory services and initial financial assistance. Such
        demonstration can be done by selecting proper sites and providing funding to co-finance the investment and
        advisory costs for the pioneering local communities, farmers, private companies, and SFEs.
    •   Engaging local public authorities in forest and pasture management combined with securing water sources is
        an effective way to mainstream NbS into community-level planning. Most LPAs often lack the resources and
        capacity necessary for effective forest and pasture management, resulting in non-compliance with legal
        sustainability requirements. Preparing SPMPs/LRPs poses fewer challenges than their implementation,
        highlighting a central issue in project design related to investment sustainability. The project will primarily focus
        on local needs and will aim to: (i) strengthen capacity for community pastures and forest vegetation, by providing
        advisory services; (ii) improve governance at the local level, including cooperation between state forest units and
        public and private sector; and (iii) synchronize the co-financing of pilot NbS activities.
    •   Both forest maintenance and afforestation activities play an important role in reducing the adverse effects of
        climate change, preventing soil erosion and nutrient load of rivers, soil conservation but also increasing
        agricultural competitiveness. The country's low forest cover and high levels of forest degradation significantly
        contribute to erosion, landslides, nutrient pollution of water resources, and increased droughts. Respectively, by

                                                                                                                     Page 18
        The World Bank
        Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


        continuing forest rehabilitation through afforestation/reforestation/maintenance of degraded lands one can
        greatly contribute to soil conservation and improved agricultural productivity, as well as to climate change
        mitigation and adaptation and eventually reducing demand for illegally produced wood and providing a series of
        other forest benefits and ecosystem services. Furthermore, these activities can help create job opportunities in
        poor rural areas.
    •   Ensuring involvement of private sector participation and creating incentives for scaling up landscape restoration
        and nutrient pollution prevention in the Dniester River Basin. The existing practice in the country and lessons
        learnt from previously implemented projects prove the scaling up of proposed activities can be successful if there
        is involvement from local entrepreneurs, private companies and farmers’ associations. They are becoming more
        and more interested in improving not only land productivity or establishing new forested areas (providing a series
        of forest, biodiversity and climate benefits), but also in landscape restoration activities which can contribute to
        greening the lands, making them more attractive for recreational scopes. This is important for developing touristic
        trails by many local wineries of the Dniester River Basin but also for further development of ecotourism ventures
        by rural population. For these purposes, the project needs to develop relevant incentives through both catalytic
        economic support and technical assistance.
    •   To ensure effectiveness and scaling up, SPMP/LRP implementation through proposed NbS approach require
        more cooperation and coordination among and with other IFIs and DPs. Considering strong support to Moldova
        provided by various IFIs and DPs, the project needs to build efficient relationships with them and ensure not only
        coordination of activities but also exchange of lessons learnt, most advanced and efficient practices in
        implementing NbS as well as in their scaling up in the country. Local communities that previously benefited from
        forest and pasture-related projects now express keen interest in continuing landscape improvements due to
        recognizing the benefits of such investments. Local public administrations have also clearly expressed their desire
        for more holistic approaches, including securing local water resources (rivers, ponds, streams) while sustainably
        managing both forest and pastoral resources.

 III. PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION

 A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
46. The Project will be implemented by the National Office for Environmental Projects Implementation (NOEPI),
    subordinated directly to the MoE. The NOEPI, established by a government decision in 2018, operates as a public
    institution under the MoE and is managed by a Supervisory Committee chaired by the Minister of Environment. The
    institution has several permanent and coopted staff covering a vast range of areas of interest for the MoE and is
    dedicated to the protection and improvement of the environment, with a mission to safeguard natural ecosystems,
    mitigate the impacts of climate change, and ensure the sustainable management of natural resources. Furthermore,
    it administers the National Environmental Fund (NEF), a financial entity established within the state budget specifically
    for funding projects in environmental protection, climate change, and sustainable management of natural resources.
47. NOEPI will bear overall responsibility for project management and coordination, encompassing the housing of the
    Project Implementation Unit (PIU). NOEPI will also handle fiduciary management, environmental and social risk
    management, contract management, M&E, and the supervision of project activities under Components 1 and 2. It will
    manage the project's Designated Account and will be responsible for reporting to the World Bank. The PIU will
    comprise a Project Coordinator alongside specialists in procurement, financial management (FM), M&E, technical
    fields like forestry, wetland, and silvopastoral practices, as well as environmental and social/gender specialists. The
    PIU will be set up within three months of the project effectiveness. The project will also deploy Service Providers
    (contractors) in the project target areas to support the implementation of activities under both components. NOEPI

                                                                                                                     Page 19
       The World Bank
       Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


    will be entrusted with responsibilities for ensuring adherence to GoM and World Bank procedures during project
    implementation and for reporting on project activities. NOEPI will report directly to the Minister of Environment (or a
    designated representative).
48. The PIU will include a Project Coordinator/ Director, who oversees the entire project, ensuring it is completed on time,
    within budget, and meets its objectives. FM Specialist manages the project's financial aspects, including budgeting
    and reporting, ensuring compliance with financial regulations. Procurement Specialist is responsible for acquiring
    goods and services, ensuring transparency and adherence to policies. M&E Specialist tracks project progress and
    assesses impacts through designed frameworks. Environmental and Social Specialists play a crucial role in ensuring
    the project adheres to environmental standards and addresses social impacts, promoting sustainable and equitable
    outcomes. The PIU also includes an extended team of Technical Experts who provide specialized knowledge and
    Administrative Support staff to facilitate logistical and communication and administrative needs
49. Other key project partners. NOEPI will be supported by and work closely with the following key partners: (i) Moldsilva,
    (ii) NAAM, and (iii) ICAS, and will collaborate with other agencies during the implementation of certain specialized
    activities such as forest rehabilitation, wetland/river restoration and conducting SPMP (including pilots), etc. The
    project key technical partners (Moldsilva, and NAAM) will support the quality control and supervision of
    works/services undertaken by the State Forest Enterprises (SFEs, ICAS) and Service Providers (SPs) contracted by the
    PIU for specific work. Both SFEs and SPs will work very closely with the local administration and communities. The
    technical monitoring of the impact on nutrient load will be supported by the SHS and SPI.
50. The Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be established to coordinate activities across ministries and agencies.
    Project oversight and accountability will be provided by the PSC which will include representatives from the following
    agencies: MoE, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Agriculture and Food Industry (MAFI), Moldsilva, and NAAM. The PSC
    will also invite representatives from the local communities, NGOs, and other experts when/if needed for planning and
    communication of project activities. Chaired by the Minister (or a designated representative), the PSC is expected to
    (a) provide strategic guidance and oversight, (b) suggest improvements and recommendations in project operations
    and coordination, and (c) endorse the progress reports and annual work programs prepared by the PIU before
    submission to the World Bank, among other issues. The PSC will be set up during the first six months of project
    implementation and will meet at least once a year. Details of these arrangements will be provided in the Project
    Operations Manual. The institutional arrangements diagram for the project is presented below.
51. A Project Operations Manual (POM) will be developed to explain details of the processes and procedures, as well as
    roles and responsibilities of the institutions involved. The POM will detail institutional and implementation
    arrangements, technical aspects of all components and activities, guidance related to M&E of the Results Framework,
    management of environmental and social risks, disbursements and FM aspects, internal arrangements relating to
    procurement and contract administration, supervision and reporting provisions related to the project between the
    PIU and other project partners. The POM will be approved by the MoE and the World Bank.
52. For Sub-component 2.1, State Forestry Enterprises (Moldsilva’s entities) will be contracted directly for non-consulting
    services, including planting and restoration activities, with contracts based on specific activity areas. State Forestry
    Enterprises under Moldsilva are the only entities legally and operationally equipped to deliver these services, ensuring
    long-term continuity, strategic coherence, and compliance with national environmental policies. Managing
    approximately 88.6 percent of the national forest fund (about 370,000 ha of state-owned land), Moldsilva operates
    under Government Decision No. 150/2010, holding exclusive legal and institutional responsibility for forest
    management, protection, and ecological regeneration. According to the new Forest Code No. 69, dated March 28,
    2024, this responsibility could be transferred to private entities; however, these enterprises can only conduct technical



                                                                                                                     Page 20
       The World Bank
       Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


    work, due to their limited legal mandate, infrastructure, and national accountability mechanisms required for
    administering sovereign forest property.
                                       Figure 2. Project Implementation Arrangements




53. For Sub-component 2.2, subprojects will be implemented by the eligible LPAs for Riverbed and Wetland Protection
    activities. MoE, jointly with NOEPI, will define the eligibility criteria and screening procedures for the provision of
    subprojects to LPAs.
54. A Subproject Manual will be developed to outline the detailed processes and procedures for implementing the
    selected activities under Subcomponent 2.2. This manual will provide comprehensive guidance to local communities
    on how to effectively carry out these activities, ensuring proper management and utilization of resources. It will cover
    aspects such as sub-projects selection, planning, execution, monitoring, and reporting, with the aim of facilitating
    successful implementation. The manual will also explain roles and responsibilities of the associated stakeholders,
    supervision and reporting provisions related to sub-projects between the PIU and local communities, as well as a
    Subproject Agreement template. The Subproject Manual will be cleared by the World Bank and approved by MoE. FM
    function, including management of funds, will remain with NOEPI and there will be no transfer funds to the LPAs. All
    subproject related payments will be executed by the PIU only, based on the LPAs’ requests for the eligible
    expenditures as defined in the subproject agreements.
55. The project will collaborate with local institutions, such as private/individual or farmer/peasant organizations and civil
    society organizations (CSOs) or non-governmental organizations (NGOs). For instance, several key NGOs (Biotica,
    Arboretum platform, Moldova 100 Frontieres) have been already involved in small-scale restoration activities and
    their experience could be important for some specific work, such as wetland restoration.

                                                                                                                      Page 21
       The World Bank
       Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


56. The project is part of the CHO IP. While having its own governance arrangements, the project will appoint a country
    focal point to represent the country on the Program Coordination Committee (CHO PCC), help with annual Program
    reporting, ensure coherence and support coordination between the GCP and the national country projects, as well as
    with the overall CHO IP. See also Annex 4 for CHO IP Governance Structure, including the relationship and governance
    arrangements between the child projects and the GCP and overall program level.
 B. Results Monitoring, Evaluation, and Verification Arrangements
57. M&E Plan. A comprehensive monitoring, evaluation, and reporting system will be designed for and established in the
    project. The project's M&E framework and plan will support evidence-based decision-making, encourage learning,
    and cultivate a results-focused project environment. Data and information will be gathered through inputs, activities,
    outputs, outcomes, and associated impacts. The primary goal is not only to track progress towards targets but also to
    identify any unforeseen changes and facilitate effective learning and adaptive management, ensuring successful
    project implementation. Regular monitoring will assess progress, intermediate outcomes, development results,
    compliance with safeguard policies, fiduciary regulations, and third-party validation. To track the progress of the
    Results Framework indicators, questionnaire surveys will be designed and administered as needed. Additionally, an
    independent impact evaluation study may be conducted for specific activities to assess the project's results, impacts,
    and implementation performance during the Mid-Term Review (MTR) and completion stages. The MTR evaluation will
    provide valuable insights into lessons learned, progress towards achieving the PDO and respective indicators, and any
    necessary adjustments to the targets.
58. M&E arrangements for the project will be managed by the PIU, which will be responsible for monitoring and reporting
    on the project indicators and outcomes specified in the Results Framework, including for compiling and consolidating
    necessary information and data. In addition, the PIU will assist the project involved entities in preparing annual work
    plans, so that the implementation progress is to be measured against planned activities. The MoE will oversee the
    M&E function, ensuring adherence to agreed procedures and enhancing the M&E process as needed. Semiannual
    progress reports will be prepared by the PIU and submitted to the Government and the World Bank to inform them
    on the project's implementation progress and performance, including towards achievement of the development
    outcomes. The M&E arrangement, including third-party validation, baseline assessment, and impact evaluations, will
    be covered under Component 3.
 C. Disbursement Arrangements
59. Disbursement. The grant proceeds will be disbursed using transaction-based disbursement methods that include
    advances to the Designated Account (DA), reimbursement, special commitments, and direct payments to third parties.
    NOEPI will open a separate DA in the grant currency in the National Bank of Moldova to facilitate the flow of funds
    under the Project. NOEPI will manage the DA and replenish it as often as needed up to the agreed ceiling. The DA will
    be audited annually in conjunction with the audit on the project’s financial statements. Further instructions on
    disbursement arrangements and supporting documentation requirements will be provided in the Disbursement and
    Financial Information Letter.

 IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY

 A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis

60. The proposed project’s technical design seeks to improve the ecosystem resilience in the Dniester River Basin.
    Forest floor litter captures particles and chemicals, preventing them from entering water bodies. Organic matter in
    forest soils can also adsorb and degrade pollutants, including nitrogen and phosphorus, which are common
    contributors to water pollution in the Dniester River Basin. Usually, forest vegetation stabilizes soil with its root

                                                                                                                   Page 22
           The World Bank
           Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


    systems, reducing soil erosion and sedimentation in water bodies. The project will adopt an NbS approach to tackle
    these pollution and erosion issues and strengthen ecosystem functions, through NbS investments, policy and
    institutional strengthening and community-based planning and demonstration projects support.
61. The NbS approach adopted by the project will support the reduction of erosion and runoff risks in the targeted
    watersheds as it increases the services provided by forests to act as natural filters by trapping sediments, nutrients,
    and pollutants from erosion and runoff. This will also minimize socioeconomic and physical damage exacerbated by
    climate change through: (i) forest rehabilitation, reforestation and afforestation; (ii) reinvigorate biodiversity by
    reconstructing and restoring ecosystem functions and adopting substitution of species where needed; and (iii)
    managing river flows by considering torrent protection shelterbelts, enhanced vegetation buffers and riverbank
    management and disturbance control. The project will target several public tiers and beneficiaries by building capacity,
    providing policy support and using adaptive forest management techniques. It will also support citizen engagement
    through silvopastoral management planning and demonstration projects.
62. The project preparation prioritized areas in the targeted Dniester River Basin after deriving exposure and
    vulnerability to pollution from runoffs and erosion.32 It is expected that the NbS approach will effectively regulate
    the natural flow and improve the water quality in the watersheds, the restoration or conservation of wetlands which
    have been degraded through uncontrolled upstream land use. The project will also promote sustainable land use and
    planning (10,000 ha) where demonstration activities and riverbed and wetland protection are considered with the
    communities over a 200-ha area and restore ecosystem provisioning, regulating, habitat and cultural services that will
    benefit vulnerable farmers, women and youth living in the targeted watersheds.
63. As the project will improve the watershed ecosystem services owned by the public sector (2,800 ha of which 200
    ha are managed by private farmers) that is considered a public good, only an economic analysis based on an ex-
    ante Cost-Benefit Analysis (CBA) was performed. Local communities are expected to reap environmental and social
    benefits of NbS interventions as they will be trained and granted ownership over their implementation and
    outcomes. This analysis focuses on a subset of anticipated project benefits that can be quantified and selects
    conservative estimates for all indicators. All quantifiable and tangible benefits are expected to arise from sub-
    component 2.2. The economic benefits from the project are expected to contribute more to restoring critical
    ecosystem services (ES) in the Dniester River Basin through NbS approaches. These ES include reduced damage from
    erosion, nutrient pollution, flooding, improved livelihoods (e.g., increased agricultural productivity), and other goods
    and services provided through ecosystem restoration. The proposed project will help access more ecosystem benefits
    by expanding areas of healthier ecosystems (restored functionality), improving landscape/habitat conditions and
    water quality at the upstream and downstream watersheds. Restoration (forest and wetland) and conservation
    (sustainable forest management) activities with NbS will involve catchment/watershed management measures on
    nearly 2,000 ha upstream. It will directly capture regulatory ES by reducing soil erosion, water purification, restoration
    of natural habitats and improving biodiversity, reducing risks of floods, ultimately allowing to improve livelihoods of
    local population downstream. Sub-component 2.2 has a positive Net Present Value (NPV) of US$1.3 million as well as
    a positive economic IRR of 9 percent and a positive Present Value benefit-cost ratio of 1.2. The sensitivity analysis
    shows that investment is more sensitive to a reduction in benefits than in costs. The project remains viable with a 4
    percent but not with an 8 percent discount rates. Under the optimistic scenario with a 10 percent increase in benefits
    and a 10 percent reduction in costs, the project generates a NPV of US$4.9 million discounted at 4 percent, an
    economic IRR of 12 percent and a Present Value Benefit-Cost ratio of 1.9. Under the pessimistic scenario with a 10
    percent increase in costs and a 10 percent reduction in benefits, the project generates a negative NPV of US$1.1
    million discounted at 8 percent, an economic IRR of 5 percent and a Present Value Benefit-Cost ratio of 0.9. Moreover,


    32
         EU4Environment. 2024. Identification of High Conservation Value Forests in the Republic of Moldova. World Bank. Washington, D.C.

                                                                                                                                            Page 23
         The World Bank
         Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


    a yearly knock-on effect of US$2.6 million on the local economy will occur after the creation of 300 green jobs by the
    end of the project.
64. Improvement of provisioning ES will have a significant development impact, improving the life of rural
    communities, especially the most vulnerable groups and women. It will help address poverty in rural villages, where
    income is heavily reliant on agriculture and remittances from family members working elsewhere. By improving
    agricultural productivity, the project is projected to increase incomes of direct beneficiaries. The project will field test
    innovative and inclusive ecosystem restoration, forest and agroforest/silvopastoral management practices and
    models that aim to enhance and increase social benefits and community empowerment (related to local
    responsibilities, benefit sharing and landscape planning), which is expected to build social capital and empower
    communities and their institutions, including for women.
65. The benefits from restored ES and reduced nutrient pollution could be multiplied with averting climate change
    impacts considering the estimate of an average loss of US$40 million per year in foregone agricultural production
    due to soil erosion in Moldova and increasing frequency and intensity of droughts 33. The improved frameworks for
    marine pollution management, forest and wetland restorations, and watershed management aligning these with
    European Union and international obligations including NDC commitments will bring additional benefits in adapting
    to climate change.
    Paris Agreement Alignment
66. The operation is aligned with the goals of the Paris Agreement on both mitigation and adaptation. The project will
    promote climate change mitigation and adaptation by supporting the sustainable use of land and ecosystems
    restoration and management, applying NbS principles to mitigate nutrient pollution. This is in line with the Moldova’s
    updated NDC priorities on promoting the ecosystem approach in adaptation to climate change.
67. Assessment and reduction of adaptation risks. Restored landscapes and improved management of nutrient pollution
    through the proposed NbS activities, informed by climate risk assessments at the national level, help reduce landscape
    vulnerability to climate change impacts and enhance resilience. Reduced vulnerability and enhanced resilience would
    mean improved adaptation of landscape to expected risks posed by climate change. The project includes capacity
    enhancement and awareness raising for target beneficiaries. The project also includes support for diversification out
    of climate-sensitive livelihoods. The impact of project interventions such as the afforestation of the riparian strips will
    be felt by reducing surface leakage; increasing their infiltration in the soil; contributing to increased humidity in
    riparian and humid areas (especially during the summer); as well as increasing humidity resources in the soil. The
    restored forests will contribute to the regulation of river flows, minimizing the risks related to the lack of water in the
    neighboring agricultural land. The emphasis will be on promoting species adapted to climatic changes that will help to
    secure multifunctional and sustainable forests. By restoring natural processes, NbS will help improve water quality,
    reduce nutrient pollution, and enhance ecosystem resilience, often providing additional co-benefits such as habitat
    restoration and flood mitigation. Combined, these features will reduce the anticipated risk from climate and
    geophysical hazards.
    Assessment and reduction of mitigation risks. The project will overall generate significant climate co-benefits by
    contributing to both climate change mitigation and adaptation. The integration of NbS not only aids in mitigating
    climate change, but also enhances ecosystems’ capacity to withstand its effects, fostering ecosystem health and
    human well-being. Carbon sequestration will be enhanced through project activities such as afforestation,



    33 Sutton, W.R., Srivastava, J.P., Neumann, J.E., Iglesias, A. and Boehlert, B.B., 2013. Reducing the Vulnerability of Moldova's Agricultural Systems to Climate

    Change: Impact Assessment and Adaptation Options. World Bank Publications.

                                                                                                                                                               Page 24
        The World Bank
        Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


    reforestation, revegetation, agroforestry, and wetland restoration. GHG accounting will be carried out using the FAO
    EX-ANTE Carbon-Balance Tool (EX-ACT).
 B. Fiduciary
68. The FM assessment of NOEPI was conducted according to the Financial Management Manual for World Bank
    Investment Project Financing Operations. The assessment concluded that NOEPI has adequate FM systems in place,
    including an automated accounting system and experienced FM staff but they lack specific knowledge of World Bank
    FM and disbursement guidelines. Therefore, the current FM capacity needs to be strengthened either through hiring
    a qualified FM consultant and / or extensive on-the-job training that could be offered by the Bank designated staff.
69. The major FM risk associated with the Project is the insufficient or untimely budgetary appropriation and allocations.
    To mitigate this risk, NOEPI shall ensure a realistic project budget and include the forecast in the Medium-Term
    Budgetary Framework and the Annual Budget Law, and coordinate with the MoF on any budgetary revisions in a timely
    and effective manner. The residual FM risk is Moderate.
70. The Project will rely on some elements of Moldova’s public FM system, including project planning in accordance with
    the MoF’s budgetary rules and preparation procedures for all budgetary units, integrating the project in the Annual
    State Budget Law, and securing flow of funds through a single treasury account. The execution of the project budget
    will be overseen by the State Treasury, which will apply additional controls over spending limits. The 2021 Public
    Expenditure and Financial Accountability Assessment of the public FM systems in Moldova indicates that state budget
    planning, execution, controls, and reporting are overall strong.
71. NOEPI will handle the project’s FM responsibilities, including planning, budgeting, accounting, internal controls, flow
    of funds, regular financial reporting, and auditing.34 NOEPI will apply a cash basis for the project accounting and the
    International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) ‘Financial Reporting Under the Cash Basis of Accounting’
    issued by the International Public Sector Accounting Standards Board (IPSASB) of the International Federation of
    Accountants (IFAC) for the project financial reporting. NOEPI will prepare interim financial reports (IFRs) quarterly and
    submit them to the World Bank within 45 days after the end of each calendar quarter. The IFRs will include (a) project
    sources and uses of funds, (b) uses of funds by project activity, (c) Designated Account (DA) statements, (d) a
    statement of the financial position, and (e) the Statement of Expenditures (SOE) withdrawal schedule. The project
    would use FundsChain, an online tracking tool made available by the Bank, for purposes of supporting NOEPI’s
    financial reporting to the Bank on the use of grant proceeds during Project implementation.
72. NOEPI will arrange annual audits of project financial statements to be performed by an independent, private auditor
    acceptable to the World Bank, hired by NOEPI, or by the Court of Accounts, Supreme Audit Institution, if they confirm
    their availability to perform annual audit under the project once it becomes effective. The audit will follow terms of
    reference (ToR) acceptable to the World Bank and comply with the International Standards on Auditing (ISA) issued
    by the International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board of the IFAC. NOEPI will submit audited project financial
    statements to the World Bank within six months after the end of each calendar year throughout the project timeline
    and will publicly disclose them. Following the World Bank’s formal receipt of these reports from the borrower, the
    World Bank will make them publicly available according to the World Bank Policy on Access to Information.
73. Procurement under the project will be managed by NOEPI. NOEPI will assume the overall function of coordinating
    the preparation of Terms of References, technical specifications, and procurement documents and organizing
    procurement processes. NOEPI has limited experience in implementing Bank-funded operations and the Bank


    34 These responsibilities for PPG will be handled by another PIU, Consolidated Agricultural Projects Management Unit, that is implementing other two projects

    financed by the World Bank in agriculture sector, and has good track record and satisfactory arrangements in place.

                                                                                                                                                          Page 25
        The World Bank
        Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


    procurement procedures. The institution currently employs one Procurement Specialist (PS) who has no knowledge
    of Bank procurement procedures.
74. Procurement will be carried out in accordance with the World Bank ‘Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers:
    Procurement in IPF of Goods, Works, Non-Consulting and Consulting Services’, dated February 2025 (Procurement
    Regulations) and the latest Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and Corruption in Projects Financed by
    IBRD Loans and IDA Credits.
75. The WB team’s assessment revealed the following procurement process issues and risks to implementation: (i) limited
    knowledge and experience with Procurement Regulations; (ii) potential of delays in the development of terms of
    reference and technical specifications; and (iii) delays with the implementation of contracts.
76. The following measures have been put in place to mitigate the risks above: (i) the WB would provide in-depth training
    on Procurement Regulations and applicable procurement documents; (ii) entities involved in implementation would
    attract technical expertise for highly specialized technical areas if lacking in-house; (iii) NOEPI would consider
    enhancing the procurement capacity by hiring a PS with experience in Bank procurement procedures or procedures
    of other international financial institutions; (iv) NOEPI would reasonably assess the timeline of each activity and strictly
    follow this timeline to avoid delays in project implementation; and (v) NOEPI would closely follow up and monitor the
    implementation of contracts by establishing proper contract administration mechanisms (regular
    inspections/meetings) and ensure amendment of contracts if delivery is justifiably delayed due to the current situation
    in the region. The project’s residual procurement risk is assessed as Moderate.
77. The WB will exercise its project procurement oversight through a risk-based approach comprising prior, post, and
    independent procurement reviews as appropriate. Post reviews would be conducted to determine contract
    compliance with legal requirements and the Project Operations Manuals. The project will use STEP, which is an online
    tool for procurement planning and tracking to prepare, clear and update the project’s Procurement Plan. The project
    counterparts have developed a Procurement Plan for the entire scope of the proposed project.

 C. Environmental, Social and Legal Operational Policies

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalpolicy#doctemplate
 Legal Operational Policies                                                               Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                              Yes
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                        No




78. The World Bank OP 7.50 is applicable because project interventions involve tributaries of the Dniester River shared
    by Moldova and Ukraine. Project financed activities are limited to the rehabilitation of wetlands and will not adversely
    affect the quantity or quality of water flows to other riparian areas. Accordingly, the Regional Vice President approved
    an exception to the notification requirement according to paragraph 7(a) of the Policy on November 13, 2024.

79. The project will generate significant positive environmental effects at the watershed level by implementing various
    upstream measures to reduce marine pollution entering the Dniester River. No significant environmental risks are
    expected neither at the construction or operation stages of the project. The envisaged environmental and social risks

                                                                                                                        Page 26
            The World Bank
            Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


    are considered moderate, which are related to minor civil works for wetland restoration, rehabilitation of small rivers
    beds and afforestation/reforestation activities. While the proposed project will take the NbS approach, no significant
    civil works are anticipated. The areas of intervention will not interfere with special conservation zones as the Ramsar
    sites. Mitigation measures will be implemented to address environmental risks associated with small civil works as
    described above. Social risks are also considered as moderate. Project interventions are expected to take place on
    public land (state or community) and no land acquisition and physical and economic resettlement are anticipared. Any
    involuntary restrictions to land use or natural resources (for example, site-specific temporary access restrictions at
    reforestation sites or civil work site) will be appropriately avoided, minimized and managed through close engagement
    with key stakeholders. Labor and working conditions and OHS and community health and safety risks will be managed
    through appropriate mitigation and monitoring measures, including appropriate use of PPE (such as for forest/wetland
    restoration activities and silvopastoral planning).
80. Social tensions and exclusion risks may arise from site or beneficiaries selection processes, if the criteria are not
    sufficiently consulted and disseminated with a wide range of stakeholders and beneficiaries in local areas, including
    those who are more likely to be poor, women and youth who are considered disadvantaged in terms of engagement
    and access to economic opportunities in the agricultural sector. To address such risks, the project design includes
    activities to strengthen community capacity for conservation and offer opportunities for stakeholder engagement and
    employment. The PIU will prepare appropriare E&S instruments, which will guide risk screening and application of
    mitigation measures at the sub-project level under the project. Once the areas of intervention are identified, a
    thorough screening of potential risks will be undertaken and relevant mitigation measures will be put in place and
    monitored for all project interventions.
81. Key stakeholders are being consulted since the concept stage of the proposed project in an inclusive manner, which
    include local community representatives, NGOs, research institutes and central and local government entities
    resonsible for environment, forest, water resource management. Their input has informed the project design, which
    includes the type of intervention, site selection, identification of potential E&S risks and impacts and their mitigations
    and implementation arrangements. From September 2 to September 13, the client, together with the Bank team, met
    with representatives of Moldsilva (both headquarter and local units), NAAM, districts and villages within the Dniester
    River Basin (in the north, central and southern Moldova), NGOs (Biotica, Arboretum.md, 100 Frontiers), and ICAS. A
    broader public consultations with local community representatives have been conducted by the client by appraisal
    (October 2024).
82. The draft SEP has been prepared by the client, disclosed before appraisal, and redisclosed after negotiations in August
    2025. The draft ESCP prepared by the client and the Bank team, disclosed before appraisal, and redisclosed after
    negotiations.35 Considering the moderate E&S risks of the proposed project, a simplified ESMF proportionate to such
    risks will be prepared and implemented during the project implementation, which include a section on the Labour
    Management Procedures (LMP).
Corporate Commitments
83. Gender. Moldova demonstrates commendable achievements in certain areas such as gender equality in school
    enrollment or women's parliamentary representation (39.6 percent in 2021). However, challenges persist, including
    low female participation in STEM fields, a female labor force participation rate of 33.9 percent (compared to regional
    and global averages), and limited access to financing for entrepreneurial endeavors. Other gender disparities also
    exist, including instances of gender-based violence and entrenched social norms disadvantaging women and girls.
    Realizing the full potential of women and girls' human capital investments requires addressing multiple barriers to
    women's economic empowerment, including enhancing their decision-making power. The proposed project will
   35
        The SEP and the ESCP are available on the NOEPI’s website: https://onipm.gov.md/proiecte-programe

                                                                                                                      Page 27
       The World Bank
       Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


    contribute to closing the gender gap in Moldova, in line with the proposed WB Gender Strategy 2024-30 and the EU
    Gender Equality Strategy 2020-2025.
84. Gender action. The project, through both Component 1 and Component 2, will have direct impacts on women in the
    project target areas. Previous efforts have shown that women, particularly young women, have less voice and access
    in local decision-making. Gender equality will form part of the project implementation, such as (but not limited to)
    gender sensitive and participatory stakeholder engagement.
85. Gender indicator. To measure the effectiveness of the proposed gender actions, the project will disaggregate
    respective PDO-level as well as intermediate results indicators (IRIs): (i) Women benefitting from selected restoration
    and/or sustainable management practices within the Dniester River Basin (Percentage), (ii) Green jobs created as a
    result of project-supported interventions (to be sex-disaggregated), and (iii) Female beneficiaries with improved
    knowledge and skills (Percentage).
86. Citizen Engagement. Emphasizing the significance of stakeholder involvement, the project will underscore the roles
    of diverse stakeholders at the local, regional, and national levels and integrate their perspectives into the project
    design. The proposed project will develop a citizen engagement plan to proactively work with communities, CSOs, and
    other project stakeholders, including through meaningful consultations, beneficiary satisfaction surveys, involvement
    in landscape restoration activities, etc. The project will also ensure a robust grievance redress mechanism (GRM) in
    place to respond to stakeholder feedback or concerns related to project-financed activities. The detailed strategy/plan
    will highlight mechanisms and actions for enhancing multi-stakeholder dialogue and inclusion throughout the project
    cycle.
Commitments of the individual Child Project under CHO IP
87. The project will follow principles that will guide their collaboration on Knowledge Management and Learning (KML),
    communications, gender and stakeholder engagement, programmatic coordination and reporting, as well as M&E.
    These principles and reporting frameworks will be defined and agreed upon during the Inception phase of the
    program.
88. More specifically, the project will contribute to and engage with regional and global learning, help build a resource
    information base and best management practice archive, strengthen scientific monitoring, shared capacity-building
    efforts such as thematic Communities of Practice and other common activities established by the GCP that link and
    support action on nutrient pollution and marine hypoxia issues at global, LME, and national levels, and in the process
    help shape a global network of informed stakeholders and countries concerned with and better equipped to address
    this critical issue. See also Annex 3 for details.
 Grievance Redress Services:
89. Grievance Redress. Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a project supported
    by the World Bank may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance mechanisms or the Bank’s Grievance
    Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed to address project-related
    concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the Bank’s independent
    Accountability Mechanism (AM). The AM houses the Inspection Panel, which determines whether harm occurred, or
    could occur, as a result of Bank non-compliance with its policies and procedures, and the Dispute Resolution Service,
    which provides communities and borrowers with the opportunity to address complaints through dispute resolution.
    Complaints may be submitted to the AM at any time after concerns have been brought directly to the attention of
    Bank Management and after Management has been given an opportunity to respond. For information on how to
    submit complaints to the Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS), visit http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For


                                                                                                                   Page 28
        The World Bank
        Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


    information on how to submit                 complaints     to    the   Bank’s    Accountability     Mechanism,      visit
    https://accountability.worldbank.org.


 V. KEY RISKS

90. The overall residual project risk is assessed as Moderate. This rating applies to sector strategies and policies, technical
    design, fiduciary, stakeholders, and environmental and social risk management. Despite challenges such as the
    economy’s dependence on energy imports and associated risks related to fiscal sustainability and inflation, the
    macroeconomic residual risk is also assessed as Moderate, given that the project receives financing on grant terms.
91. The Political and Governance residual risk is assessed as Substantial. Moldova’s political landscape is influenced by
    both domestic and regional challenges that are beyond the direct control of the proposed project. Political fluctuations
    in Moldova in recent years have resulted in frequent changes, leading to instability within government institutions
    and policy frameworks. These shifts could affect various aspects, such as policy priorities, implementation strategies,
    decision-making processes, and leadership structures, including the pace of implementation. Consequently, project
    priorities may be impacted, potentially hindering the achievement of development objectives. As mitigation
    measures, the project has been endorsed by the government, the team has established strong working relations with
    MoE, and the project will operate primarily at a technical level remaining largely insulated from national political
    agendas.
92. The Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability residual risk is assessed as Substantial. This is mainly
    due to the technical capacities required to sustain interventions across different scales, stakeholders, and sectors.
    There is also limited knowledge regarding ecosystem restoration approaches, particularly in the context of NbS, which
    may result in less sustainable and resilient outcomes. Additionally, NOEPI, which is directly subordinated to the MoE
    and is intended exclusively for financing projects in environmental protection and sustainable management of natural
    resources, lacks substantial experience in implementing WB-financed projects. To address these risks, the project will
    include capacity-building activities, providing timely and on-the-job training throughout the implementation period,
    as well as bringing in international experts to ensure effective knowledge transfer and strengthening of institutional
    capacity. Risks will be further mitigated by applying lessons and experiences from restoration projects worldwide, as
    well as documenting and promoting benefits that arise through project M&E and communication outreach.




                                                                                                                       Page 29
        The World Bank
        Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention(P505546)


ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padannexresultframework#doctemplate
PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes

   Baseline                                                                               Closing Period
   Increased area under sustainable landscape management practices in targeted areas within the Dniester River Basin in Moldova
   People benefitting from selected restoration and/or sustainable management practices within the Dniester River Basin (Number)
   Dec/2025                                                                               Dec/2030
   0                                                                                      99,200
     ➢Women benefitting from selected restoration and/or sustainable management practices within the Dniester River Basin (Percentage)
   Dec/2025                                                                               Dec/2030
   0                                                                                      40
   Area of land under sustainable management practices within the Dniester River Basin focused on nutrient pollution prevention (Hectare(Ha))
   Dec/2025                                                                               Dec/2030
   0                                                                                      2,800


Intermediate Indicators by Components

   Baseline                                                                             Closing Period
   Component 1: Institutional Capacity Development and Community Engagement
   By-laws and/or regulatory documents for ecosystem/ landscape restoration based on NbS principles formulated under the Forest Code or NFERP and submitted for approval
   (Number)
   Dec/2025                                                                             Dec/2030
   0                                                                                    2
   Communities participating/involved in Landscape Restoration Planning process (Number)
   Dec/2025                                                                             Dec/2030
   0                                                                                    20
     ➢People consulted on the landscape restoration planning processes and management plans within participating communities (Percentage)
   Dec/2025                                                                             Dec/2030
   0                                                                                    70




                                                                                                                                                                           Page 30
     The World Bank
     Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention(P505546)


Beneficiaries equipped with knowledge and skills on NbS for nutrient pollution prevention and sustainable landscape management (Number)
Dec/2025                                                                                 Dec/2030
0                                                                                        1,000
  ➢Female beneficiaries equipped with knowledge and skills (Percentage)
Dec/2025                                                                                 Dec/2030
0                                                                                        35
Component 2: Landscape Restoration and Watershed Management
Forest area rehabilitated and/or reforested and afforested in targeted forest ecosystems within the Dniester River Basin to prevent land-based pollution into the coastal
environment (Hectare(Ha))
Dec/2025                                                                                 Dec/2030
0                                                                                        2,000
  ➢From which area managed by Moldsilva (Hectare(Ha))
Dec/2025                                                                                 Dec/2030
0                                                                                        1,500
  ➢From which area managed by targeted communities (Hectare(Ha))
Dec/2025                                                                                 Dec/2030
0                                                                                        500
Forest area ecologically treated in targeted landscapes (managed by Moldsilva) (Hectare(Ha))
Dec/2025                                                                                 Dec/2030
0                                                                                        200
Area of riverbed landscapes restored and protected in selected tributaries along the Dniester River (Hectare(Ha))
Dec/2025                                                                                 Dec/2030
0                                                                                        500
Area of land (pastures/ meadows, forest/shelterbelts, water bodies) under sustainable management plans/ NbS planning focused on agroforestry and sylvopastoral practices
(Hectare(Ha))
Dec/2025                                                                                 Dec/2030
0                                                                                        10,000
Area of demonstrational plots for SPMPs best practices implementation (Hectare(Ha))
Dec/2025                                                                                 Dec/2030
0                                                                                        100
Green jobs created as a result of project-supported interventions (Number)
Dec/2025                                                                                 Dec/2030
0                                                                                        300




                                                                                                                                                                            Page 31
     The World Bank
     Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention(P505546)


Net greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions avoided/sequestered (Metric tons/year)
Dec/2025                                                                                    Dec/2030
0                                                                                           173,800
Component 3. Project Management, Monitoring, and Communication
Grievances registered related to delivery of project activities and addressed within a stipulated timeframe, as publicly communicated by the project (Percentage)
Dec/2025                                                                                    Dec/2030
0                                                                                           100




                                                                                                                                                                    Page 32
        The World Bank
        Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)



Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes
Increased area under sustainable landscape management practices in targeted areas within the Dniester River Basin in Moldova
People benefitting from selected restoration and/or sustainable management practices within the Dniester River Basin (Number)(Custom CRI)
                          This indicator measures the number of people in the project areas that benefit from the range of NbS that the project is
                          able to implement. Benefits include monetary (employment, income) and non-monetary (changes in improved condition
Description               of natural resources, etc.).
                          Assumptions: the project interventions are expected to target at least 10% of people in targeted communities within the
                          Dniester River Basin.
Frequency                 Semi-annually
Data source               PIU report on the project implementation progress; socio-economic baseline study/ beneficiary surveys
Methodology for Data      Data will be collected through project reports semi-annually and studies that will be carried out at the mid-term review
Collection                and project completion
Responsibility for Data
                          PIU; Evaluation Team at mid-term and project-end; consultants
Collection
Women benefitting from selected restoration and/or sustainable management practices within the Dniester River Basin (Percentage)
                          This sub-indicator measures the percentage of women in the project areas that benefit from the range of NbS that the
Description               project is able to implement. Benefits include monetary (employment, income) and non-monetary (changes in improved
                          condition of natural resources, etc.).
Frequency                  Semi-annually
Data source               PIU report on the project implementation progress; socio-economic baseline study/ beneficiary surveys
Methodology for Data      Data will be collected through project reports semi-annually and studies that will be carried out at the mid-term review
Collection                and project completion
Responsibility for Data
                          PIU; Evaluation Team at mid-term and project-end; consultants
Collection
Area of land under sustainable management practices within the Dniester River Basin focused on nutrient pollution prevention (Hectare)
(Custom CRI)
                          The indicator measures, in hectares, the land area for which new and/or improved sustainable landscape management
                          practices have been introduced. Land is the terrestrial biologically productive system comprising soil, vegetation, and the
                          associated ecological and hydrological processes. Sustainable landscape management practices refer to nature-based
                          solutions (NbS) focused on nutrient pollution prevention, promoted or introduced by the project.
Description
                           Assumptions: (i) area of ecosystems (forest and wetland) restored within the Dniester River Basin to reduce land-based
                           pollution into the coastal environment (2,700 ha); and (ii) area of demo sites with targeted interventions under NbS
                           planning focused on agroforestry and sylvopastoral practices and (100 ha).
Frequency                  Semi-annually
Data source                PIU report on the project implementation progress
                           Data will be collected through project reports annually, studies that will by carried out at the mid-term review and
                           project completion.
Methodology for Data
                           The reporting should clearly disaggregate data to include the following metrics: (i) area of ecosystems (forest and
Collection
                           wetland) restored within the Dniester River Basin (Hectares); (ii) area of land under NbS planning focused on
                           agroforestry and sylvopastoral practices and area of demo sites with targeted interventions (Hectares).
Responsibility for Data
                           PIU; Evaluation Team at mid-term and project-end
Collection


Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: Intermediate Results Indicators by Components
 Component 1: Institutional Capacity Development and Community Engagement
 By-laws and/or regulatory documents for ecosystem/ landscape restoration based on NbS principles formulated under the Forest Code or NFERP
 and submitted for approval (Number)




                                                                                                                                            Page 33
       The World Bank
       Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


                           This indicator measures the number of by-laws and/or regulatory documents for ecosystem/ landscape restoration based
Description
                           on NbS principles developed by the project.
Frequency                  Annually
Data source                PIU report on the project implementation progress
Methodology for Data
                            Data for this indicator will be collected through review of project reports and activities’ deliverables/ outputs
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                            PIU, Ministry of Environment
Collection
Communities participating/involved in Landscape Restoration Planning process (Number)
                           This indicator measures the number of participating communities in landscape restoration planning process within the
Description
                           Dniester River Basin.
Frequency                   Semi-annually
Data source                PIU report on the project implementation progress
Methodology for Data       Data for this indicator will be collected through review of project reports and other materials related to capacity-building
Collection                 activities
Responsibility for Data
                           PIU, consultants
Collection
People consulted on the landscape restoration planning processes and management plans within participating communities (Percentage)
                           This sub-indicator measures the percentage of people within the participating communities consulted and informed
Description
                           about landscape restoration planning processes and management plans.
Frequency                  Semi-annually
Data source                PIU report on the project implementation progress
Methodology for Data       Data for this indicator will be collected through review of project reports and other materials related to capacity-building
Collection                 activities
Responsibility for Data
                            PIU, consultants
Collection
Beneficiaries equipped with knowledge and skills on NbS for nutrient pollution prevention and sustainable landscape management (Number)
                           The indicator measures the number of people (government officials at central and regional/district level, officials of
                           agencies in forest and wetland management areas) who participate in training, short courses, workshops, and seminars
Description
                           (both in-person and virtual) on a range of topics related to landscape restoration and/or improved marine pollution
                           management through NbS.
Frequency                  Semi-annually
Data source                PIU report on the project implementation progress, Beneficiary Surveys
Methodology for Data       Data for this indicator will be collected through review of project reports and other materials related to capacity-building
Collection                 activities as well as Beneficiary Surveys
Responsibility for Data
                            PIU, consultants
Collection
Female beneficiaries equipped with knowledge and skills (Percentage)
                           This sub-indicator measures the number of female beneficiaries who participate in capacity-building activities on a range
Description
                           of topics related to landscape restoration and/or improved marine pollution management through NbS.
Frequency                  Semi-annually
Data source                PIU report on the project implementation progress, Beneficiary Surveys
Methodology for Data       Data for this indicator will be collected through review of project reports and other materials related to capacity-building
Collection                 activities as well as Beneficiary Surveys
Responsibility for Data
                            PIU, consultants
Collection
Component 2: Landscape Restoration and Watershed Management
Forest area rehabilitated and/or reforested and afforested in targeted forest ecosystems within the Dniester River Basin to prevent land-based
pollution into the coastal environment (Hectare(Ha))




                                                                                                                                             Page 34
      The World Bank
      Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


                          The indicator measures, in hectares, the area of land in the existing natural-by-origin forest ecosystems, (i) all managed
                          by the network of state forestry enterprises (SFEs) under Agency Moldsilva and (ii) the area of community-owned land,
                          with project interventions focused on forest rehabilitation, i.e., returning forests to healthy state and well-functional
                          condition through, inter alia, a low-risk and low-cost replanting/regrowing vegetation in once-natural degraded or
Description
                          destroyed forests, etc.
                          Communities: (i) reforestation or restoring/enhancing ecological functionality of degraded or disturbed community-
                          owned forest ecosystems on 300 ha; and (ii) afforestation on degraded land or destroyed forest vegetation on 200 ha
                          (shelterbelts).
Frequency                 Semi-annually
Data source               PIU report on the project implementation progress
Methodology for Data
                           Data for this indicator will be collected through review of project reports and activities’ deliverables/ outputs
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                            PIU, consultants
Collection
Forest area ecologically treated in targeted landscapes (managed by Moldsilva) (Hectare(Ha))
                           The indicator measures, in hectares, the area of land in the existing natural-by-origin forest ecosystems, all managed by
Description                the network of state forestry enterprises (SFEs) under Agency Moldsilva, with project interventions focused on species
                           substitution within key vulnerable areas along riverbeds.
Frequency                  Semi-annually
Data source                PIU report on the project implementation progress
Methodology for Data
                           Data for this indicator will be collected through review of project reports and activities’ deliverables/ outputs
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                            PIU, consultants
Collection
Area of riverbed landscapes restored and protected in selected tributaries along the Dniester River (Hectare(Ha))
                           The indicator measures, in hectares, the area of land with project interventions focused on protecting riverbed
                           landscapes that harbor aquatic and wetland habitats (permanent or temporarily flooded) in selected tributaries along the
Description
                           Dniester River. The indicator will cover (i) area of vegetation buffer zones (100 ha); area under riverbank maintenance
                           (existing degraded shleterbelts) (100 ha); (iii) area under disturbance control measures (300 ha).
Frequency                  Semi-annually
Data source                PIU report on the project implementation progress
Methodology for Data
                           Data for this indicator will be collected through review of project reports and activities’ deliverables/ outputs
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                            PIU, consultants
Collection
Area of land (pastures/ meadows, forest/shelterbelts, water bodies) under sustainable management plans/ NbS planning focused on
agroforestry and sylvopastoral practices (Hectare(Ha))
                           The indicator measures, in hectares, the area of community-owned lands under sustainable agroforestry systems
Description
                           (integrated tree/shrub with crops) and silvopastoral practices (combining trees/shrubs with grazing) planning.
Frequency                  Semi-annually
Data source                PIU report on the project implementation progress
Methodology for Data
                           Data for this indicator will be collected through review of project reports and activities’ deliverables/ outputs
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                            PIU, consultants
Collection
Area of demonstrational plots for SPMPs best practices implementation (Hectare(Ha))
                           The indicator measures, in hectares, the area of land with demonstration of SPMP/LRP for integrated nutrient
Description
                           management plans (involving pasture, forest, and water resources), promoted or introduced by the project.
Frequency                  Semi-annually




                                                                                                                                            Page 35
      The World Bank
      Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


Data source               PIU report on the project implementation progress
Methodology for Data
                          Data for this indicator will be collected through review of project reports and activities’ deliverables/ outputs
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                           PIU, consultants
Collection
Green jobs created as a result of project-supported interventions (Number)
                          The indicator measures the number of jobs supported/ created as a result of project interventions on landscape
Description
                          restoration, including temporarily / seasonal / permanent jobs.
Frequency                 Semi-annually
Data source               PIU report on the project implementation progress
Methodology for Data
                          Data for this indicator will be collected through review of project reports and activities’ deliverables/ outputs
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                           PIU
Collection
Net greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions avoided/sequestered (Metric tons/year)
                          Project net greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions are calculated as an annual average of the difference between project gross
                          (absolute) emissions aggregated over the economic lifetime of the project and the emissions of a baseline
Description
                          (counterfactual) scenario aggregated over the same time horizon. They are reported in metric tons of carbon dioxide
                          equivalent per year. GHG accounting will be carried out using the FAO EX-ANTE Carbon-Balance Tool (EX-ACT).
Frequency                 Semi-annually
Data source               PIU report on the project implementation progress
Methodology for Data
                          Data for this indicator will be collected through review of project reports and activities’ deliverables/ outputs
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                           PIU, consultants
Collection
Component 3. Project Management, Monitoring, and Communication
Grievances registered related to delivery of project activities and addressed within a stipulated timeframe, as publicly communicated by the
project (Percentage)
                          This indicator measures the proportion of feedback/grievances that are addressed within the standards as given in the
Description
                          project GRM guidelines.
Frequency                  Regularly collected, annually compiled
Data source                PIU report on the project implementation progress
Methodology for Data
                           Data for this indicator will be collected through review of project reports
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                           PIU
Collection




                                                                                                                                       Page 36
      The World Bank
      Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


ANNEX 2: Project Map




                                                                       Page 37
        The World Bank
        Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


 ANNEX 3: Alignment with the CHO IP Program

1.       Brief statement on the need for programmatic approach. Marine hypoxia is a transboundary issue - it is not
confined to a single country or a single region but is a global issue with global impacts. Consequently, a programmatic
approach that addresses the identification and implementation of collaborative solutions at global, regional, and national
levels is the most effective way to address the problem over the long-term. More information on the rationale for a
programmatic approach is given in the Program Framework Document (PFD).
2.      Summary of the CHO IP. The GEF-8 Clean and Healthy Ocean Integrated Program (CHO IP) targets nitrogen,
phosphorus, and organic matter released by agri-food (crops, livestock, poultry and aquaculture) and industrial and
municipal systems, as nutrient pollutants generated by these sectors are the primary agents causing harmful algal blooms
(HAB) and eutrophication that leads to hypoxia. The overall goal of the CHO-IP, to which Moldova: Restoring Ecosystems
for Marine Pollution Prevention Project contributes, is to address marine hypoxic zones by curbing coastal pollution from
agriculture, industrial and municipal sources through policy and regulatory measures and infrastructure investments
combined with nature-based solutions. The CHO IP consists of 15 Child Projects, 1 Global Coordination Project (GCP) and
14 Country Projects (CP) spanning Latin America, Africa, Asia and the Middle East (Maldives, Thailand, Sri Lanka, Viet Nam,
Venezuela, Mexico, Trinidad and Tobago, Panama, St. Kitts and Nevis, Grenada, Jordan, Moldova, Peru, Madagascar),
which altogether are included within 9 LMEs.
3.       Commitments of the individual Child Project. As a participant in the CHO IP, under the overall coordination and
support of the Global Coordination Project (GCP), Moldova: Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (RE-
MAP) Project will contribute to addressing the issues affecting land-based nutrient pollution and marine hypoxia identified
in the programmatic Theory of Change and following the PFD (see below for details). The project will follow principles that
will guide their collaboration on Knowledge Management and Learning (KML), communications, gender and stakeholder
engagement, and programmatic coordination and reporting, as well as monitoring and evaluation (M&E). These principles
and reporting frameworks will be defined and agreed upon during the Inception phase of the program.
4.       More specifically, the Moldova RE-MAP Project will contribute to and engage with regional and global learning,
help build a resource information base and best management practice archive, strengthen scientific monitoring, shared
capacity-building efforts such as thematic Communities of Practice and other common activities established by the GCP
that link and support action on nutrient pollution and marine hypoxia issues at global, LME, and national levels, and in the
process help shape a global network of informed stakeholders and countries concerned with and better equipped to
address this critical issue.
5. The Moldova RE-MAP aligns well with the programmatic Theory of Change (ToC) set out in the CHO IP Program
   Framework Document (PFD) below.




                                                                                                                      Page 38
         The World Bank
         Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)




 Figure 3.1: Theory of Change of the Clean and Healthy Ocean Integrated Program (CHO IP). For key to assumptions (indicated by an ‘A’) please
                                                 refer to the Program Framework Document.

Benefits from Child Project involvement in Program

6. Participation of the Moldova RE-MAP Project in the larger CHO IP, provides additional opportunities and resources
   not available to the project itself which will improve the delivery and effectiveness of its results at the national as well
   as regional and global levels, and deliver impact at a much wider scale than would be possible as a stand-alone project.
   As a member of the CHO IP, the project includes a set of standard activities that will link with activities at the regional
   and global levels, via the GCP, providing greater connectivity and networking between the Program’s Child Projects,
   and enhanced opportunities for awareness raising and knowledge exchange (particularly technical knowledge),
   stakeholder dialogue and innovation at scale. Furthermore, participation in the Program offers the project the
   opportunity to access additional targeted technical capacity not available to the project alone, to enhance
   achievement of project results, such as support through the GCP to guidance on improving financing for investments
   that include measures to address nutrient pollution and marine hypoxia and technical capacity on monitoring and
   tracking of nutrient pollution, hypoxia, and coastal health to promote science-based strategic and adaptive
   management. Participation in the overall Program will also help ensure that the project’s activities fully and
   meaningfully integrate challenges and opportunities specific to women, youth and Indigenous peoples, employ
   common messaging and communications tailored for impact.



                                                                                                                                        Page 39
        The World Bank
        Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


7. Involvement in the wider CHO IP will help maximize the project’s resources and capacity to facilitate and drive
   transformational change by cohesively and more effectively addressing hypoxia drivers (e.g., agriculture and
   municipal/industrial wastewater pollution) at scale.
Gender Mainstreaming

8. The project will collaborate closely with the CHO IP GCP on its gender-related activities, including a set of mandatory
   activities to ensure harmonization at the programmatic level. This will include the need to: (1) conduct a gender
   analysis and develop a gender action plan (GAP) that aligns with the GCP GAP; (2) conduct a gender-responsive
   stakeholder analysis that aligns with the GCP Stakeholder Analysis and Engagement Plan; (3) ensure that the project’s
   gender specialist and other relevant members of the project team participate regularly in the GCP Gender Working
   Group; (4) participate in relevant program-level capacity-building events organized by the GCP that seek to benefit
   women; (5) establish and collect, analyze and report on sex-disaggregated data, in alignment with the programmatic-
   level gender indicators and report these to the GCP; and (6) identify good practice examples and lessons learned on
   gender issues in relation to the CHO IP and transmit these to the GCP for dissemination through program-level
   communications and/or knowledge products.
9. The project will ensure that gender is mainstreamed throughout its activities, including (as relevant) into: (1) scientific
   and technical data collection and monitoring related to the CHO IP; (2) awareness-raising and outreach campaigns on
   nutrient pollution and marine hypoxia; (3) project activities to integrate gender considerations in policies, strategies
   and plans in the context of the CHO IP; (4) any activities addressing finance and investment to incentivize the take up
   of measures to address marine hypoxia including opportunities to promote women’s access to blue/green finance and
   blue/green jobs; (5) any activities that offer opportunities to facilitate partnerships between women-led businesses
   and other key stakeholders (e.g. WE-Fi) for women to develop small businesses focused on activities addressing
   marine hypoxia; (6) tailored technical support activities promoting best management practices to mitigate aspects of
   nutrient pollution in the agricultural, industrial and urban sectors, and (7) more generally, actions to ensure that
   women and women’s groups/organizations can fully participate in all project activities.
Knowledge Management and Learning (KML)

10. The Country Project will collaborate closely with the GCP to ensure alignment with the program KML Strategy and
    implementation activities. Specifically, the Moldova RE-MAP project will contribute to IW:LEARN activities facilitated
    by the GCP, participate in at least one International Waters Conference (IWC), and prepare knowledge products to
    enhance cross-project learning and gender-transformative actions to reduce land-based pollution causing hypoxia.
    The Country Project will also provide regular updates and contribute content to the CHO knowledge portal, ensuring
    that its activities align with the GCP’s KML and Communications Strategies. In addition, the project will participate in
    learning exchanges, twinning programs, and provide inputs to the Clean and Healthy Ocean Knowledge Atlas as guided
    by the GCP. This collaboration will require staff time, event participation, and support from multimedia and design
    professionals to ensure high-quality contributions to global knowledge-sharing initiatives and foster collective impact
    across the CHO IP.
Stakeholder Engagement
11. The project will be responsible for the development of a country-level detailed SEP, which will be refined and
    operationalized at the start of the project. The country-level SEP includes: (1) a stakeholder mapping and
    identification; (2) a stakeholder analysis characterization, including the following parameters: stakeholder type,
    sectors, stakeholder tiers, importance, interest, influence, action arena, positionality, and gender flag: (3) a



                                                                                                                        Page 40
        The World Bank
        Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


    stakeholder grouping to identify key categories of stakeholder to be prioritized; (4) the development of an
    engagement strategy with specific mechanisms and activities per key stakeholder groups.
12. As part of CHO IP, the project will develop and implement a Private Sector Engagement Strategy (PSES) to ensure
    collaboration with key private sector entities, such as fertilizer companies, agri-food businesses, water supply firms,
    tourism businesses, fishing companies, the banking industry etc.
13. The project will work with the GCP to ensure a harmonized approach to implementing the SEP and the PSES. The
    project will use is own financial support from the IA to develop and implement these plans but may require additional
    technical support from the CGP, which would require additional financial contribution from the project budget.
Communications and Awareness Raising

14. The Moldova RE-MAP will collaborate closely with the CHO IP GCP through strategic communication and awareness-
    raising on marine hypoxia and nutrient pollution. This will include developing a national baseline assessment of marine
    hypoxia and nutrient pollution awareness and a corresponding National Communication and Outreach Plan, adapting
    global communication materials to the national context, executing a national awareness-raising campaign, and
    utilizing gender-responsive social media strategies to highlight impact stories from a gender perspective. The project
    will also contribute to and benefit from GCP initiatives such as the Goodwill Ambassadors plan and the dissemination
    of policy briefs to strengthen the science-policy interface at national and regional levels. The project’s communication
    specialist will participate in the CHO IP Communications Workgroup, implement the CHO IP Visual Identity across all
    communication products, and contribute to global-level communications with project-specific materials. Press
    releases will be issued to announce key achievements, including the project launch, ensuring consistent visibility at
    the national level. Country projects will ensure that all communication materials highlight that the project is part of
    the global CHO IP, ensuring that the collective impact of national projects amplifies the overall global impact of the
    CHO IP.




                                                                                                                      Page 41
           The World Bank
           Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)


 ANNEX 4: The CHO IP Governance Structure
1. The multi-level governance structure of the CHO IP consists of the following key elements:
2. CHO Program Coordination Committee (CHO-PCC). This will provide a channel for representatives of Country Projects
   participating in the IP and diverse global CHO stakeholders (including IAs, EAs, entities, organizations, networks and
   coalitions representing the interests of nitrogen users and producers, women, indigenous peoples, academia, research
   institutions, youth and the private sector) to have their voices heard on the priorities and approaches of the IP,
   including key emerging issues to be addressed and initiatives or stakeholders with which the IP should collaborate.
    The CHO-PCC will also provide a space to provide support, address issues and bottlenecks and advise on new and/or
    corrective actions to ensure consistent progress is made by the 15 CPs of the CHO IP. To facilitate this, the CHO-PCC
    will always be held in conjunction with the annual stocktaking meetings organized by the GCP.
3. A CHO IP Technical Advisory Group (CHO-TAG) will support the GCP and its Project Management Unit (PMU) to
   optimize alignment between the technical activities of the IP/GCP and global initiatives/actors. Relevant members of
   the TAG will meet (as needed, and as requested by the IP co-leads, Program Coordination Committee members,
   partners and/or agencies) to advise on specific policy, strategic or technical issues. These may include:


       •     Guidance on the formulation and application of programmatic indicators that will need to be aggregated across
             the IP, including but not limited to GEF Core Indicators and Sub-Indicators. The full set of programmatic
             indicators will be confirmed at the startup of the GCP.
       •     Brokerage and organization of technical support from specialized institutions and service providers: the costs
             of identifying sources of technical support and organizing its provision will be covered by the GCP, but Country
             Projects will be required to cover the costs of contracting (individually or collectively) the provision of the
             support and of participating in capacity development events.
       •     “Matchmaking”, linking Country Projects with regional and global actors, networks and initiatives that have the
             potential to support the operations of Country Projects (for example as sources of finance, knowledge, and
             policy engagement), knowledge sharing, scaling of impacts, and transformational impacts at systems level (for
             example on policy and legal frameworks).

4. Figures 4.1 and 4.2 below illustrate the multi-level governance structure of the CHO IP. This will consist of the following
   key elements:




                                                                                                                        Page 42
The World Bank
Restoring Ecosystems for Marine Pollution Prevention (P505546)




                                 Figure 4.1: Governance Structure of the CHO IP




                                   Figure 4.2: GCP Governance Structure




                                                                                  Page 43
