Public Disclosure Authorized
                                          The World Bank
                                          Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)




                                      @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^blank@pidaprcoverpage#doctemplate




Public Disclosure Authorized




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                       Project Information Document (PID)


            _For Official Use Only_
                                                      Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 07-Jul-2025 | Report No: PIDIA00897




Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                                                                     Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprbasicinformation#doctemplate
                          BASIC INFORMATION


                          A. Basic Project Data

                          Project Beneficiary(ies)       Region                        Operation ID                  Operation Name
                                                                                                                     Peru: Wastewater
                                                         LATIN AMERICA AND
                          Peru, Peru                                                   P505093                       Management and Circular
                                                         CARIBBEAN
                                                                                                                     Economy
                          Financing Instrument           Estimated Appraisal Date      Estimated Approval Date       Practice Area (Lead)
                          Investment Project
                                                         22-Jul-2025                   11-Sep-2025                   Water
                          Financing (IPF)
                          Borrower(s)                    Implementing Agency
                                                         Ministry of Housing
                                                         Construction and
                                                         Sanitation, Safe Water




_For Official Use Only_
                          Republic of Peru               Program for Lima and
                                                         Callao - PASLC, National
                                                         Urban Sanitation Program -
                                                         PNSU

                          Proposed Development Objective(s)
                          Introduce circular economy principles in the WSS sector and increase access to inclusive and climate resilient WSS in
                          selected basins

                          Components
                          Infraestructure
                          Governance and Project Management

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidprojectfinancing#doctemplate
                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                          Maximizing Finance for Development

                          Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                    Yes
                          Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?              Yes

                          SUMMARY
                            Total Operation Cost                                                                                            266.40

                            Total Financing                                                                                                 266.40


                                                                                                                                               Page 1



                                                                                                                                      Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


                                           of which IBRD/IDA                                                                                      200.00
                              Financing Gap                                                                                                          0.00

                           DETAILS
                              World Bank Group Financing
                                International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                                      200.00
                              Non-World Bank Group Financing
                                Counterpart Funding                                                                                                66.40
                                   National Government                                                                                             66.40




                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@envsocriskdecision#doctemplate
                          Environmental And Social Risk Classification




_For Official Use Only_
                          Substantial


                           Decision
                           The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate




                           B. Introduction and Context
                           Country Context

                          1.       In 2024 Peru recovered from a decade of relatively low growth, but still almost one in three Peruvians is living
                          in poverty. Peru has had six presidents in the last six years, a reflection of the volatile political climate in the country. The
                          weakening of institutions and shocks such as the COVID-19 pandemic and climate events led to a slowdown in growth in
                          the last decade, resulting in the 2023 recession. In 2024, the economy recovered and grew by 3.3 percent, and it is
                          projected to grow by 2.9 percent in 2025 and 2.5 percent in 2026, close to its potential. The recovery can be explained by
                          the return to more stable conditions, greater public investment, and increased business confidence. According to recent
                          World Bank studies, Peru has the potential to become a high-income country within two decades if bold reforms are
                          implemented. However, under current conditions, it would take the country 64 years to achieve high-income status.
                          2.       Water is a key driver of economic development and job creation in Peru. Water-intensive sectors account for
                          nearly two fifths of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP), with about 13 percent from manufacturing, 12 percent from mining
                          and hydrocarbons, 7 percent from construction, 6 percent from agriculture, and 2 percent from water and electricity.1
                          Mining and agriculture sectors account for 63 percent and 16 percent of Peru’s total exports, respectively. The agriculture
                          sector alone, which productivity depends heavily on irrigation, employs almost a quarter of the total labor force. This is
                          significant for rural development, given that 46 percent of rural populations remain poor and about 14 percent are mired

                          1 BCRP (Banco Central de Reserva del Perú), 2022. “GDP by Sector” (220 series).



                                                                                                                                                      Page 2



                                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


                          in extreme poverty2. Water’s contribution to the economy and overall livelihoods is further highlighted when considering
                          the impact of electricity— about 57 percent of which is produced through hydropower—on all GDP-contributing sectors.
                          Water is also essential for sustaining Peru’s diverse ecosystems, which include about 8 million hectares of wetlands and a
                          vast network of rivers and lakes. These contribute to Peru’s tourism industry, which accounts for 4.5 percent of its GDP in
                          2020. Therefore, improving water security3 is crucial to Peru’s path to shared prosperity while addressing climate risks.

                           Sectoral and Institutional Context

                          3.       In the Lima metropolitan area, climate change, untreated wastewater, insufficient infrastructure and water
                          deficit pose critical risks to water security and public health. The Lurín river, located in the coastal region and southern
                          expansion area of Lima city, is born in the central mountain range of the Andes and flows 111 km into the Pacific Ocean.
                          By 2041-46 the annual flows of Lurin river are expected to decrease 21 percent due to climate change, resulting in lower
                          aquifer recharge, water shortfall and higher contaminant concentrations. Of the total water demands in the basin, 86
                          percent is for irrigation and 14 percent is for municipal, industrial, and mining uses. However, only 20 percent of the
                          agricultural water demand is met during the dry period (September-November), mainly due to Lurín river’s non perennial
                          nature and the basin’s unregulated condition. In addition to having an unmet demand, according to the last water balance
                          for 2023-2024, the Lurín aquifer is being overexploited. This overexploitation, along with sea level rise and lower aquifer
                          recharge rates derived from climate change, is resulting in saline intrusion and the degradation of groundwater quality.




_For Official Use Only_
                          The lower, peri-urban segment of the basin falls within SEDAPAL’s (Lima’s WSS utility) service area and covers a population
                          of 306,485 people in the Lurín, Pachacamac and Cieneguilla districts. In this area, sewage coverage averages just between
                          46 and 65 percent, and, treated water is discharged into contaminated rivers or directly into the ocean.
                          4.       Climate change is increasingly destabilizing Lake Titicaca’s delicate hydrological balance, exacerbating existing
                          environmental and socio-economic challenges. Lake Titicaca is the world’s highest navigable lake and a vital resource for
                          communities in the altiplano region. The accelerated glacial melt is a key source of inflows for the Lake, yet paradoxically,
                          prolonged droughts and increased evaporation rates are outpacing replenishment, leading to alarming declines in water
                          levels. The basin’s primary water demands—agriculture, domestic use, and fisheries—are heavily reliant on the lake, with
                          agriculture being the largest consumer and essential for local livelihoods. However, municipal wastewater discharges and
                          fish farming have led to severe pollution, accelerating eutrophication and further deteriorating water quality. Addressing
                          these issues requires robust and ambitious pollution abatement program to ensure the sustainability and climate
                          resilience of Lake Titicaca and its surrounding regions. In this context, the Government of Peru is implementing a national
                          program to enhance the treatment of wastewater discharged into the Titicaca. With an Interamerican Development
                          Bank’s (IADB) lending operation approved in 2023 to improve wastewater management in Juliaca, the most populous city
                          in the basin, the Government now seeks support to finance the other five wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) in the
                          province of Puno under the proposed MPA. In Puno city, the capital and the largest city of the province and the second
                          largest in the basin after Juliaca, existing facilities administrated by EMSAPUNO (the local water utility) are non-functional,
                          resulting in deficient WSS services and poorly treated sewage being discharged into the lake.
                          5.      The Lurín and Lake Titicaca basins are served by utilities with contrasting capacities. SEDAPAL is a strong and
                          regionally recognized utility despite ongoing financial constraints and EMSAPUNO is a significantly weaker utility with
                          limited capacity. On average, EMSAPUNO’s and SEDAPAL’s customers receive water in their taps 10.4 and 21.3 hours per
                          day, 16 and 10 percent of the connections are not equipped with a water meter, and their NRW level stand at 44.5 and
                          32 percent, respectively. EMSAPUNO has a liquidity ratio of 0.35 percent, and in 2023 had a negative debt ratio of -4.37

                          2 INEI, 2021. “Evolución de la Pobreza Monetaria 2019–2020: Informe Técnico”
                          3 Water security is defined as the availability of an acceptable quantity and quality of water for health, livelihoods, ecosystems, and production,

                          coupled with an acceptable level of water-related risks to people, environments, and economies. Grey and Sadoff 2007. “Sink or swim? Water security
                          for growth and development”, Water Policy, 9, 545–571.

                                                                                                                                                                        Page 3



                                                                                                                                                               Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


                          and its return on assets was -5.38 percent4. EMSAPUNO’s debt level is high, and the net worth of the company is negative.
                          Meanwhile SEDAPAL return on assets in 2023 was 3.56 percent. EMSAPUNO’s difficult situation calls for improving the
                          governance and technical capacity of the utility, equipping its staff with the required tools, procedures and know-how,
                          and empowering and giving them the opportunity to excel and contribute to the transformation of the utility.

                           Figure 1. The WICER Framework                                     6. In this challenging context, circular economy offers an
                                                                                             opportunity to recognize and capture the full value of water
                                                                                             as a service, an input to processes, a source of energy and a
                                                                                             carrier of nutrients and other materials. This requires
                                                                                             shifting towards “reduce-reuse-recycle-recover-restore”
                                                                                             approaches that regenerate natural systems, reduce water
                                                                                             use and other external inputs by closing nutrient loops,
                                                                                             reduce waste and pollution, reuse and recycle water
                                                                                             effluents, recover energy and nutrients from wastewater to
                                                                                             minimize land, water, and carbon footprints and regenerate
                                                                                             natural systems. Reducing pollution is essential to ensure
                                                                                             appropriate water resources quality for all uses, and
                                                                                             improving water use efficiency and recycling and reusing
                                                                                             wastewater effluents is key to increasing water availability




_For Official Use Only_
                                                                                             for all, as well as improving resilience against climate change
                                                                                             exacerbated droughts. Additionally, to achieve their full
                                                                                             benefits, circular water systems need to embrace resilience
                                                                                             and inclusiveness, preparing for uncertain shocks and
                                                                                             stressors to avoid the undesired impacts from disruptions or
                            World Bank, 2021. “Water in Circular Economy and Resilience” failures of water services. Figure 1 captures the Water in
                                                                                             Circular Economy and Resilience (WICER) framework
                          developed by the World Bank to guide decision makers to incorporate these principles in policies and strategies, planning,
                          investment prioritization, and design and operations. This framework structures interventions around three main pillars:
                          (i) deliver resilient and inclusive services; (ii) design out waste and pollution; and (iii) preserve and restore natural systems.
                          7.        Peru is building a policy and regulatory framework to pursue a circular economy transition, but the
                          interinstitutional collaboration required to unlock its full potential for improving water security remains a challenge. In
                          2024, the Ministry of Housing, Construction and Sanitation (MVCS) issued a circular economy roadmap for drinking WSS
                          services, but regulatory and financial incentives for its effective application by utilities remain to be developed. Moreover,
                          the legal framework of the energy and solid waste management sectors create barriers for the technical and economic
                          viability of projects aimed at cogenerating renewable energy as part of the wastewater treatment process and for the
                          valorization of the sludge generated as a byproduct of said process. Likewise, the Ministry of Agriculture (MIDAGRI) has
                          also prepared a circular economy road map, but it does not contemplate specific lines of action for the uptake of reclaimed
                          wastewater for irrigation, nor for the use of treated sludge as fertilizer. Additionally, while the 2009 Water Resources Law
                          foresees the establishment of mechanisms to incentivize water use efficiency, these are still to be developed. Also, the
                          economic regime of water rights and discharge authorizations and the economic regulation of WSS services do not create
                          the required incentives for the uptake of reuse for productive purposes and hinders the financial viability of reclamation
                          activities. Similarly, the Water Resources Law does not establish regulations for the use of reclaimed water for MAR. In
                          this context, it is essential to establish effective platforms for the development of coordinated cross-sectoral action to
                          overcome governance gaps and unlock the full potential of circular economy to achieve water security.


                          4 Sunass 2024 “Acta de Inspección”



                                                                                                                                                       Page 4



                                                                                                                                               Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


                          8.        The heavy investments required to move forward the circular economy agenda and achieve universal access to
                          safely managed WSS services, combined with low sector execution capacity and weak utility performance, call for
                          rethinking delivery models. The 2022–26 National Sanitation Plan estimates that additional annual funding of US$2.6
                          billion per year will be needed to achieve universal access to safely managed WSS services by 2030. However, in the past
                          five years, Peru allocated about US$1.6 billion per year and budget execution ranged between 50 and 60 percent. As a
                          result, still only 50 and 43 percent of Peruvians have access to safely managed drinking water and sanitation services,
                          respectively. Women are particularly burdened by this situation, as they dedicate on average 20.21 hours per week to
                          cooking and housecleaning whereas men only dedicate 7.31 hours. Moreover, low WSS tariffs weaken utilities’5 financial
                          sustainability, limiting service quality and efficiency improvements. Combined with aging infrastructure, this leads to high
                          water losses and poor wastewater treatment, with 77 percent of WWTPs failing to meet standards. Addressing these
                          governance and management issues requires a shift in WSS delivery models, including clustering treatment facilities to
                          allow for economies of scale, leveraging public-private partnerships (PPPs), and adopting context-specific technologies,
                          including nature-based solutions, for sector authorities to achieve inclusive and climate resilient WSS access across Peru.
                          9.        Faced with these challenges, the Government of Peru has requested the World Bank support to roll out the
                          national circular economy agenda to increase climate resilience of WSS services and achieve water security, starting in
                          two different but equally critical basins. This support request entails strengthening the capacity of the MVCS to support
                          utilities in this journey, creating an enabling policy and regulatory environment, retrofitting priority WSS projects in their
                          pipeline for the Lurin and the Lake Titicaca basins to adopt and test innovative circular economy approaches, and




_For Official Use Only_
                          developing a new generation of circular economy interventions for wastewater treatment, resource recovery and water
                          reuse across the country that contribute to mitigation efforts and reduce vulnerability to climate change exacerbated
                          droughts, floods and pollution. The Lurin and Lake Titicaca basins have been selected considering that they represent two
                          very different contexts of the Peruvian reality when it comes to water security, with Lurin and the broader Lima water
                          basins system (integrated by the Rimac, Chillón and Lurin basins) been one of the most water scarce basins in the country,
                          representative of the situation faced in urban areas of the Pacific Region; and Lake Titicaca an area where water quality
                          and the degradation of natural ecosystems is the defining challenge, rather than water scarcity. This, along with the
                          socioeconomic priority and high level of readiness of WSS infrastructure subprojects, make of these two basins a perfect
                          laboratory to test circular economy approaches for water security in different contexts, that can subsequently scaled up.


                          Multiphase Programmatic Approach
                          10.      The MPA offers flexibility by enabling a focus on immediate challenges and developing institutional capacity,
                          case studies and pilots that serve as the foundation for longer-term changes in Phase II, with the learning agenda playing
                          a crucial role for rollout at scale. Phase I infrastructure subprojects constitute priority sectoral interventions from the
                          socioeconomic standpoint. Those subprojects have the required engineering designs and therefore present a high level of
                          readiness. Yet these interventions were not designed consistently considering the principles of circular economy for water
                          management and lack the multisectoral approach required to tap the full resource recovery potential of wastewater
                          management activities. Moreover, mainstreaming circular economy and promoting efficient water use and the uptake of
                          reclaimed water effluents, as well as increasing resilience to climate-induced droughts and floods, requires an appropriate
                          governance framework that is not there yet. In this context, the MPA approach allows implementing priority infrastructure
                          interventions, retrofitting their design and complementing them with technical assistance activities for the incorporation
                          of circular economy principles, while in parallel develop and test innovative approaches for circular economy that can be
                          applied at scale and adjusted in Phase II, informing required reforms for the application at the national level.




                          5 On average, utilities apply a tariff of US$0.62 per cubic meter, well below the Latin America and Caribbean regional average of US$1.44



                                                                                                                                                                       Page 5



                                                                                                                                                               Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


                          11.     The Program Development Objective (PrDO) is to “Increase access to inclusive and climate resilient water and
                          sanitation services in selected basins adopting circular economy approaches”.
                          12.      The achievement of the PrDO will be assessed using six result indicators. PrDO indicators cover aspects related
                          to the three outcome areas of the WICER framework, i.e., deliver inclusive (PrDO indicators # 1 and 2) and climate resilient
                          (PrDO indicator # 3 and 4) WSS services; design out waste and pollution (PrDO indicators # 5) and preserve and regenerate
                          natural ecosystems (PrDO indicator #6):
                          (a) PrDO indicator # 1: People provided with access to climate resilient drinking water services, disaggregated by gender.
                          (b) PrDO indicator # 2: People provided with access to climate resilient sanitation services, disaggregated by gender.
                          (c) PrDO indicator # 3: Reduction of Non-Revenue Water levels.
                          (d) PrDO indicator # 4: Annual volume of reclaimed water used for industrial, agricultural and environmental applications.
                          (e) PrDO indicator # 5: Renewable energy cogenerated in water treatment facilities developed under the program.
                          (f) PrDO indicator # 6: Reduction Biological Oxygen Demand (BOD) discharges into the environment.

                           C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
                           Development Objective(s) (From PAD)
                           13.      The Project Development Objective (PDO) of Phase I is to introduce circular economy principles in the WSS
                           sector and increase access to inclusive and climate resilient WSS in selected basins.




_For Official Use Only_
                            Key Results
                           14.    Progress will be measured against the five indicators:
                          (a) Increase in the percentage of WSS investments adopting circular economy principles in the public investment
                              system.
                          (b) People provided with access to climate resilient drinking water services, disaggregated by gender and youth.
                          (c) People provided with access to climate resilient sanitation services, disaggregated by gender and youth.
                          (d) NRW levels in drinking water distribution networks intervened under the project.
                          (e) Volume of reclaimed water used annually for agricultural, industrial or environmental applications in program
                              intervention areas.

                          D. Project Description
                          15.      Phase I of the MPA consists of two components: (a) Infrastructure component and (b) Governance and Project
                          Management component. The scope is described in the following paragraphs.
                          16.      Component 1 - Infrastructure (US$248.3 million, including US$186.2 million in IBRD financing). This component
                          will finance engineering services and works for the rehabilitation and expansion of WSS infrastructure in the Lake Titicaca
                          and Lurín basins. The goals of this component are to design out waste and pollution from WSS services, preserve and
                          regenerate natural ecosystems and increase access to inclusive and climate resilient services in the project intervention
                          areas. The component consists of the following subcomponents:
                            (i) Subcomponent 1.1 – WSS infrastructure in the Lake Titicaca Basin (US$225.0 million, including US$168.8 million in
                                IBRD financing). This includes the rehabilitation and expansion of the WSS networks of the city of Puno, the
                                development of the engineering designs of five WWTPs in the Puno region, as well as the consulting services for the
                                supervision of works and engineering activities. Network works will also be accompanied by gender-sensitive citizen
                                engagement activities to maximize sewer connectivity rates and ensure responsible use of WSS services. Works will
                                be procured under three contracts: (a) one for the improvement and reconfiguration of the primary drinking water
                                supply and main wastewater collection networks; (b) a second contract for the rehabilitation of the secondary

                                                                                                                                                  Page 6



                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                            The World Bank
                            Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


                          drinking water supply distribution and wastewater collection network in areas currently served by the utility; and (c)
                          a third one for the expansion of the drinking water distribution and wastewater collection networks to currently
                          unserved areas. All these investments are expected to result in significant emissions reductions, both associated with
                          drinking water service delivery (46 percent annually relative to the baseline from 94,214 tCO2eq/yr to 51,357
                          tCO2eq/yr) and with sanitation (26 percent, from 64,421 tCO2eq/yr to 47,481 tCO2eq/yr). These reductions are
                          mainly due to the lower NRW levels, improved pumping efficiency, reduced reliance on private wells, water tankers
                          and vacuum trucks, and reduction of fugitive emissions from septic tanks, cesspools and pits. More details on the
                          activities under the subcomponent scope are included below:
                          (a) Improvement, reconfiguration and operation of the primary drinking water supply and main wastewater
                              collection networks (US$102.0 million, US$76.5 million IBRD). This includes the construction of a new
                              subaquatic intake, raw water pumping station and transmission pipeline; the expansion, rehabilitation,
                              retrofitting and assisted operation of the Aziruni drinking water treatment plant, the construction of new and
                              rehabilitation of existing drinking water pumping stations, water mains and reservoirs; as well as the construction
                              and rehabilitation of principal sewer mains and pumping stations to convey wastewater to El Espinar WWTP. The
                              engineering designs of this infrastructure are ready and integrate climate-informed principles that enhance
                              climate resilience of the supply and sewer systems and of the benefiting population. In fact, the subaquatic intake
                              will be deeper than the existing one, which capacity is reduced during drought periods as the level of the lake
                              descents. Moreover, its larger capacity, along with the larger capacity of the associated raw water pumping




_For Official Use Only_
                              stations and transmission pipeline, and of the drinking water treatment facility and drinking water reservoirs,
                              allows to ensure continuity of service even when other water sources feeding the system lower their mobilization
                              capacity during drought periods. Greater water distribution capacity will also allow for expanding the network,
                              contributing to enhance the resilience against droughts of currently unserved families, and to reduce GHG (see
                              paragraph below for more details). The construction and rehabilitation of sewer mains will result in a reduction
                              of freshwater infiltration into the sewer system, which in turn will reduce the volumes to be pumped and will
                              enhance the performance of the treatment facility. This, along with the renewal of pumping equipment, will
                              enhance energy efficiency of service delivery and contribute to reducing GHG emissions.
                          (b) Reconfiguration and rehabilitation of the secondary drinking water supply distribution and wastewater
                              collection network in areas currently served by EMSAPUNO (US$68.0 million, US$51.0 million IBRD). The
                              reconfiguration of the DMAs and the rehabilitation of the distribution networks will bring down significantly the
                              NRW levels in the system, contributing both to adaptation (as more water will be available for distribution as
                              losses decrease) and mitigation (as smaller volumes of water will have to be pumped to satisfy a given level of
                              demand). On the other hand, and as for the case of principal sewer mains rehabilitation works, the rehabilitation
                              of the secondary sewer network will increase the resilience against floods of the wastewater management
                              system, as currently storm and groundwater infiltration represent around 30 percent of the volume conveyed by
                              the network to the treatment facility, a value that is significantly higher during rainfall events.
                          (c) Expansion of the drinking water distribution and wastewater collection networks to unserved areas (US$47.0
                              million, US$35.3 million IBRD). The expansion of the water supply network will allow connecting households that
                              rely on private wells (11.2 percent of the population) and water tankers (9.4 percent) contributing to enhance
                              the resilience against droughts of currently unserved families, and to reduce GHG, as private wells (that require
                              electricity to run) and tankers (that use fuel for service delivery) are displaced by the more energy efficient utility
                              run water supply service. Similarly, the expansion of the sewer network will increase the climate resilience of
                              unserved families, which will no longer rely on cesspools and pits that often collapse and overflow during floods.
                          (d) Procurement strategy, engineering designs adopting CE principles and bidding documents for five WWTPs in
                              Lake Titicaca basin (US$8.0 million, US$6.0 million IBRD), i.e. the Puno City, Moho, Ilave, Juli, and Ayaviri WWTPs.
                              The procurement strategy will assess the potential different contractual approaches for leveraging private sector


                                                                                                                                                Page 7



                                                                                                                                        Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


                                     technical, managerial and financial capacity. The IFC/MIGA will collaborate with the task team for the
                                     development of this procurement strategy as part of the one WBG joint implementation plan for Peru. The
                                     project will also finance the development of the engineering designs for the facilities, which level of detail will be
                                     determined by the choice of the procurement route. Bidding documents for these facilities will subsequently be
                                     developed under the project, for procurement under Phase II. The designs will be developed to maximize
                                     renewable energy cogeneration (contributing to climate change mitigation), recover valuable biosolids and
                                     incorporate nature-based solutions where feasible. These WWTPs will also contribute to climate change
                                     adaptation, reducing drought-exacerbated freshwater quality degradation in Lake Titicaca.
                          (ii) Subcomponent 1.2 – WSS infrastructure in the Lurín Basin (US$23.3 million, US$17.5 million IBRD). This includes:
                                (a) Procurement strategy, engineering designs adopting circular economy principles and bidding documents for
                                     the Jose Galvez and Julio C. Tello WWTPs and associated WSS networks ((US$15.2 million, US$10.5 million
                                     IBRD). Engineering designs will cover water reclamation and MAR facilities and a reuse scheme for land scaping
                                     irrigation (see subcomponent 1.3). Under this activity the project will also develop the engineering designs for
                                     the extension and rehabilitation of the drinking water supply and sewer network of the Pachacamac district.
                                     These plants and the associated MAR and reuse schemes will contribute to increase climate resilience of water
                                     services, as they will increase water availability and reduce climate change-exacerbated groundwater quality
                                     degradation and aquifer depletion. Similarly, they will contribute to climate change mitigation, as the two WWTPs
                                     will incorporate cogeneration facilities to capture methane emissions for renewable energy production.




_For Official Use Only_
                                (b) MAR pilot in the Lurín Basin (US$8.1 million, US$7.0 million IBRD). Lurin’s aquifer water table is descending, and
                                     water quality is worsening due to over exploitation and climate change-induced lower river stream (which
                                     translates into reduced aquifer recharge) and seawater level rise (which translates into greater saline intrusion).
                                     The pilot will recharge the aquifer using treated wastewater from the existing Cieneguilla WWTP through
                                     infiltration ponds and riverbed recharge systems, thus helping mitigate the aquifer’s water deficit, enhance
                                     groundwater reserves, and improve water quality. The MAR pilot will also include hydrogeological assessments,
                                     stakeholder engagement (focused on developing social acceptability of MAR), and scaling plans to address both
                                     the immediate challenges of the Lurín Basin and long-term national water security objectives. The results of the
                                     pilot project will serve to determine how and by how much water availability could be increased in the basin
                                     using reclaimed water for MAR. This, along with the associated studies developed under component two, is
                                     expected to inform the definition of regulations for MAR, the decision-making process to grant new groundwater
                                     use rights associated to MAR initiatives, and the design of the wastewater treatment and reclamation facilities
                                     of Julio C. Tello and José Galvez, which will be financed under Phase II to increase water availability for indirect
                                     potable and irrigation reuse. This will allow SEDAPAL to revisit its plans to build a seawater desalination plan to
                                     satisfy increasing water demand in the area (see technical appraisal section for more details), which would come
                                     along with a significant increase of energy intensity and GHG emissions of drinking water supply activities.
                          (iii) Subcomponent 1.3 – Designs for wastewater reuse schemes for the watering of parks and recreational areas in the
                                Lurin Basin (US$0.5 million, US$0 million IBRD). Lima’s periurban areas located in the Lurin basin are experiencing
                                rapid and unorganized growth, and local authorities are struggling to keep up with the provision of essential services
                                for the well-being of local communities. This does not exclusively relate to the WSS, but also others like access to
                                parks and recreational areas. Villa Maria del Triunfo, where the José Gálvez WWTP is located, is the district of Lima
                                with the lowest ratio of green areas: 0.54 m2/inhabitant. This value is significantly lower than the target set by WHO
                                of 9 m2/inhabitant. In this context, the program will finance a reuse scheme for landscaping applications, allowing
                                for the irrigation of two new parks, also to be developed under the program in the vicinity of the treatment facility.
                                This subcomponent will finance the required designs, and works will be implemented under Phase II. One of the two
                                parks, located across the fence of the José Gálvez facility, will host a permanent water and circular economy



                                                                                                                                                      Page 8



                                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
                                  The World Bank
                                  Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


                               education and visitor center, to expose and sensibilize local communities about the importance of preserving water
                               and associated ecosystems. This center will contribute to building social acceptance of water reclamation and reuse.
                          17.      Component 2 – Governance and Project Management (US18.1 million, including US$13.6 million in IBRD
                          financing). This includes: (a) Governance and (b) Project Management subcomponents.
                          (i) Subcomponent 2.1. – Governance (US$6.8 million, US$5.1 million IBRD). Activities included under this component
                               will develop the capacity of sector stakeholders to enhance climate adaptation and mitigate the climate impact of
                               WSS service delivery, creating the required enabling environment for the scaling up of initiatives aimed at reducing
                               NRW, increasing energy efficiency, reclaiming and reusing water, cogenerating renewable energy and recovering
                               valuable resources from wastewater effluents. These activities are described below:
                               (a) Supporting the implementation of the WSS circular economy roadmap (US$0.6 million, US$0.5 million IBRD).
                                     This subcomponent will focus on informing the creation of policy and regulatory incentives for the adoption of
                                     circular economy principles for water service delivery. Activities will include: (i) the definition of technical norms
                                     and guidelines for the development of WSS infrastructure adopting circular economy principles; (ii) the definition
                                     of WSS circular economy indicators for their inclusion in the national investment system, and the establishment
                                     of associated baselines and targets, as well as the update of methodological tools for the formulation and
                                     evaluation of WSS investments in the public investment system; (iii) the identification of policy and regulatory
                                     barriers and proposal of required reforms to tap the full potential of circular economy to improve water security
                                     and climate adaptation of WSS services; and (iv) studies and pilots to inform the regulations of MAR initiatives.




_For Official Use Only_
                               (b) Strengthening the capacity of key MVCS’ institutions and directorates (US$2.3 million, US$1.7 million IBRD).
                                     This subcomponent will finance goods, consulting and not consulting services aimed at strengthening the
                                     capacity of: (i) the two PIUs of the project (PASLC and PNSU) to design and implement WSS infrastructure works
                                     adopting circular economy principles and integrating climate-informed principles in engineering designs to
                                     enhance climate resilience; (ii) MVCS’ General Directorate for Construction and Sanitation Programs and Projects
                                     (DGPPCS) to identify, prepare and manage PPP projects incorporating circular economy and climate resilience
                                     principles, and (iii) MVCS’ General Directorate for Environmental Affairs (DGAA) to monitor the performance of
                                     wastewater treatment and reclamation facilities. The technical assistance to DGPPCS includes, among others,
                                     support to perform a screening of wastewater treatment, resource recovery and wastewater reuse projects at
                                     the national level with potential to leverage private capital and know-how, conceptualizing procurement and
                                     management models that could be adopted to structure and bid the corresponding transaction in Phase II.
                               (c) Build institutional capacity of selected water utilities (US$3.9 million, US$2.9 million IBRD). This
                                     subcomponent will finance: (i) consulting services for the development of circular economy and water security
                                     master plans for SEDAPAL and EMSAPUNO, aligned with the National WSS Circular Economy Roadmap, which
                                     will look at required infrastructure investments (both grey infrastructure and nature-based solutions) with
                                     circular economy, climate resilience and climate change mitigation lenses and will incorporate financing,
                                     communication, stakeholder engagement and business plans focused on the creation of a market for reclaimed
                                     water and treatment byproducts, such as biosolids; and (ii) technical assistance and capacity-building activities
                                     for SEDAPAL and EMSAPUNO to ensure sound management of the infrastructure to be financed through the
                                     project, thereby ensuring its sustainability. In the case of EMSAPUNO, given its weak financial and management
                                     capacity, the technical assistance will be comprehensive and will cover all aspects of utility management and will
                                     be implemented following World Bank’s “Utility Turnaround” and “Utilities of the Future” frameworks6. The
                                     technical assistance provided to the utilities will also support SEDAPAL and EMSAPUNO to develop and adopt
                                     emergency preparedness and response plans to manage climate change induced natural disasters, such as floods

                          6
                           The Utilities of the Future Program supports water and sanitation utilities in adopting innovative, strategic management approaches. By enhancing
                          operational efficiency, resilience, and adaptability, the program enables utilities to deliver reliable, inclusive, and sustainable services.

                                                                                                                                                                       Page 9



                                                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


                                    and droughts. Likewise, the assistance will identify the barriers and root causes of women’s underrepresentation
                                    in managerial positions and in the definition and implementation of an action plan to tackle identified barriers,
                                    with the objective to increase the share of women in such positions. This may require attracting and hiring more
                                    women into the sector or improving working conditions to ensure the retention and professional growth
                                    opportunities of existing female employees, such as by identifying and offering solutions to help them better
                                    manage childcare responsibilities, provide access to trainings and mentoring programs.
                          (ii) Subcomponent 2.2– Project Management (US$11.3 million, including US$8.5 million in IBRD financing). This
                               subcomponent will finance the procurement of goods, consulting and non-consulting services for the management
                               of project implementation activities, including monitoring and evaluation (M&E), procurement, financial (FM),
                               environmental and social (E&S) management.

                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@pidaprlegalpolicy#doctemplate
                           Legal Operational Policies                                                               Triggered?
                           Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                              Yes
                           Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                        No




_For Official Use Only_
                          Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts


                          18.      The environmental and social risks of the project are considered substantial, and trigger the Environmental and
                          Social Standards (ESS) related to the Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts (ESS1),
                          Labor and Working Conditions (ESS2), Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management (ESS3), Community
                          Health and Safety (ESS4), Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement (ESS5), Biodiversity
                          Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Resources (ESS6), Indigenous Peoples (ESS7), Cultural
                          Heritage (ESS8), and Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure (ESS10). The Substantial rating is associated to
                          potential impacts of the construction and operation of drinking water supply and wastewater collection and treatment
                          infrastructure in Puno, and to MAR activities in Lurín. No adverse impacts are expected from the development of analytical
                          activities included in the governance component and the engineering designs for works to be implemented in Phase II of
                          the MPA. At this stage, the E&S risks of Phase II of the MPA are expected to be in similar magnitude to those of Phase I.
                          However, these will be assessed as part of the preparation of each Phase, adjusting the corresponding ratings as necessary,
                          and seeking Regional Safeguards Advisor clearance if the ESF risk for any of the future Phases is determined High.
                          19.      The rehabilitation and expansion of drinking water supply and sanitation infrastructure in Puno City involves
                          large-scale construction activities, which may lead to temporary, site-specific, and reversible environmental impacts.
                          These potential impacts relate to: (i) resource consumption, (ii) disposal of sludge, debris and hazardous material
                          (asbestos), (iii) traffic disruptions, (iv) dust and noise nuisances, (v) air quality deterioration, and (vi) risks to community
                          and worker safety. Additional risks include potential pollution of Lake Titicaca or ecosystem impacts during the
                          construction Phase, due to the proximity of some facilities to the Lake Titicaca National Reserve, i.e., raw water intake and
                          transmission infrastructure, a reservoir, and five pumping stations.
                          20.      The risk of environmental impacts on Lake Titicaca during the operational Phase of the Puno WSS infrastructure
                          is mitigated by the measures described in the technical appraisal section. The new treatment facility to be constructed
                          on the premises where El Espinar WWTP is located is expected to be operational before the completion of the WSS
                          network’s rehabilitation and extension works. Nevertheless, to mitigate the risk associated with potential delays in the
                          construction of this facility, the contract for the expansion of the network will not be bided until the contract for the

                                                                                                                                                    Page 10



                                                                                                                                             Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


                          construction of the new treatment facility has been awarded. Similarly, works for the expansion of bulk water supply
                          capacity and the rehabilitation of the WSS network in served areas will be contingent on the completion of dredging
                          activities currently under implementation by EMSAPUNO to recover the nominal capacity of El Espinar. This will ensure
                          that project activities in Puno do not result in any incremental environmental impact. Additional complementary
                          preventive measures to ensure appropriate O&M of the treatment facility and monitoring of effluent discharges will be
                          established in the corresponding Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs).
                          21.       The MAR pilot also poses environmental risks during construction and operation. Main construction phase
                          environmental risks relate to: (i) water quality, (ii) hydrological changes, and (iii) regulatory and management complexities
                          which will be mitigated through hydrogeological assessments, and adherence to circular economy principles. During
                          operation, risks include Cieneguilla WWTP underperformance, which could adversely affect ground water quality. These
                          risks will be addressed through rigorous planning, and the implementation of best practices for E&S management.
                          22.       The social risk rating is considered Substantial based on the project scope, the sensitivity of the social context
                          (mainly in Puno), and the potential need for land acquisition. The main social risks and impacts that contribute to this
                          rating include: (i) physical and economic displacement associated to easements and land acquisition potentially needed
                          in Puno and/or Lurín; (ii) potential opposition from local communities to the construction of wastewater treatment plants
                          in Puno, or to the use of reclaimed water for the aquifer recharge in Lurin; (iii) a high sensitivity of the social and political
                          context in Puno with high levels of citizen participation and mobilization capacity, recent experiences of social conflicts
                          with the government, and high urgence/interest for the project; (iv) misinformation from the local media in Puno; (v)




_For Official Use Only_
                          presence of indigenous peoples in the areas where three WWTPs are to be constructed under Phase II (Ayaviri, Juli and
                          Moho) for which the Project will finance the engineering designs and social and environmental studies; (vi) typical impacts
                          associated to the execution of civil works (such as noise, dust, odors and traffic disruptions), which can affect the
                          relationship with local communities; (vii) risks of non-compliance with labor regulations covered by ESS2, including hiring
                          modalities and occupational health and safety risks for project workers; (viii) potential exclusion of vulnerable groups from
                          project benefits; and (ix) low institutional capacity of EMSAPUNO and Puno local government.
                          23.       While ESS5 is considered relevant, the need for land acquisition and resettlement is expected to be minimal, if
                          necessary at all. Although the Borrower indicated that all land and areas necessary for the works in Puno City has been
                          acquired and paid for, changes in the design may arise during project implementation, requiring the acquisition of new
                          areas. Additionally, it is also possible that some properties already acquired in Puno could be occupied and/or used by
                          other individuals who do not have legal rights to the land or the property, under national law. Consequently, there could
                          be a need to evict these individuals. In these situations, the Borrower would have to prepare and implement a
                          Resettlement Action Plan in accordance with the ESS5, and would need resources to finance these activities. Considering
                          that: (i) there are gaps between ESS5 and national regulations, which could limits the Borrower’s ability to meet the ESS5
                          requirements, particularly regarding the “replacement cost” and cash compensations paid before land taking, (ii) there
                          may be insufficient funds to cover these payments in the Local Governments or the WSS utility, as well as an overlapping
                          responsabilities between the different institutions involved; and (iii) the impossibility of acquiring the affected areas in a
                          timely manner, would result in significant delays for project execution. Budgetary provisions for “Land Expenditures” will
                          be included in the Legal Agreement, for Activity 1.1 and 1.2(b)., to proactively manage these potential risks. If the need
                          for land acquisition, or restrictions on land use, causing Involuntary Resettlement is confirmed, the PIU will prepare a
                          Ressettlement Action Plan in accordance with the ESS5, prior to implementing any activities or works in those areas.
                          24.       Proposed measures for the management and mitigation of E&S risks and impacts. The PIU is preparing the
                          instruments listed below to manage E&S risks and impacts. The Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP)
                          establishes the obligation of the PIUs to finalize E&S management instruments according to the calendar detailed below,
                          along with the implementation of other agreements related to capacity building:
                          (a) Already prepared and disclosed instruments:
                              (i) Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP).

                                                                                                                                                     Page 11



                                                                                                                                              Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


                             (ii) Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP).
                             (iii) Environmental Impact Assessment of Puno city WSS network rehabilitation and expansion works. These works have
                                   an Environmental License granted based on a semi detailed Environmental and Social Impact Study (ESIAsd)
                                   approved by the MVCS in July 2021 and valid until July 2026.
                             (iv) Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA) of the Puno WSS network rehabilitation and expansion works. The ESA
                                   included a gap analysis of the EIAsd. This document includes guidelines for the preparation of a Supplementary
                                   Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (S-ESIA) to fill identified gaps.
                          (b) Instruments to be prepared during implementation and prior to initiating the bidding process of the different works:
                             (i) S- ESIA for the Puno city WSS network rehabilitation and expansion works.
                             (ii) ESMPs for works to be implemented under Phase I (MAR pilot and Puno city WSS network works).
                             (iii) Resettlement Action Plans, if needed.
                             (iv) Archeological Management Plan for the Julio C. Tello WWTP. the Julio C. Tello WWTP is adjacent to the
                                   Archaeological Sanctuary of Pachacamac and is within its buffer zone.
                             (v) Archeological “chance and find” procedures for works to be performed in the City of Puno. Lake Titicaca is included
                                   in the indicative list of the World Heritage of the UNESCO Convention of 1972 as a mixed site.
                             (vi) Environmental Assessments for the 7 WWTPs to be designed under the Project.
                            E. Implementation




_For Official Use Only_
                            Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
                          25.       The Government of Peru will be the Borrower and will be represented by the Ministry of Economy and Finance
                          (MEF), which will be responsible for the allocation of loan and counterpart resources to MVCS’ annual budget.
                          26.       Two of the three infrastructure development agencies operating in the WSS sector under the control of MVCS
                          will play the role of PIUs. These two agencies are PASLC, in charge of the design and development of WSS infrastructure
                          in the Lima Metropolitan area, and PNSU, with a similar mandate but for all other urban areas of the country. After
                          commissioning, infrastructure developed by PASLC (the MAR pilot) and PNSU (Puno city WSS network) will be transferred
                          to the corresponding utility, i.e., SEDAPAL and EMSAPUNO, for operation.
                          27.       PASLC will oversee all works and engineering designs of infrastructure to be developed in the Lima
                          metropolitan area and of technical assistance to be provided to SEDAPAL. For Phase I, this includes (i) the
                          implementation of the MAR pilot; (ii) the preparation of the procurement strategy, engineering designs and bidding
                          documents of the Julio C. Tello and José Galvez WWTPs; (iii) the design of the WSS network in the Pachacamac district;
                          (iv) the design of the Villa Maria del Triunfo parks and reuse scheme for land scaping operations; and (v) the development
                          of SEDAPAL’s circular economy and water security master plan. PASLC will be responsible for all technical, fiduciary,
                          environmental and social (E&S) management aspects.
                          28.       Besides the design and implementation of works in the Puno province and of activities included under the
                          governance component, PNSU will be responsible for consolidating interim financial reports for the project and
                          preparing the annual financial audit report. The scope of activities included under the responsibility of PNSU includes: (i)
                          the supervision and implementation of the works for the extension and rehabilitation of the WSS networks of the city of
                          Puno; (ii) the preparation of the procurement strategy, engineering designs and bidding documents of the Puno, Moho,
                          Ayaviri, Ilave and Juli WWTPs; (iii) the development of EMSAPUNO’s circular economy and water security master plan,
                          including the technical assistance to strengthen utility managerial, technical and financial capacity; (v) the technical
                          assistance to the DGPPCS and DGAA to prepare and manage WSS PPP projects and to monitor the performance of water
                          treatment and reclamation facilities; and (vi) the technical assistance to the MVCS to identify regulatory barriers and
                          solutions to incentivize the adoption of circular economy principles for service delivery, the development of technical
                          norms for circular economy in WSS, the screening of water reclamation, resource recovery and reuse opportunities across
                          the country, and the conceptualization of sustainable management models for wastewater treatment and reuse. As for


                                                                                                                                                 Page 12



                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                                 The World Bank
                                 Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


                          the case of PASLC, PNSU will be responsible for managing all fiduciary, technical, E&S dimensions of these activities. PNSU
                          will also consolidate interim financial reports for the project and will prepare an annual audit report.
                          29.      The DGPPCS will be responsible for overall project coordination and oversight. A dedicated team, led by a project
                          director and comprising technical and administrative staff, will be set up within the DGPPCS for this. This team will be
                          responsible for: (i) the overall technical management of the program, (ii) the preparation of the terms of reference (ToR)
                          for activities to be developed under the governance component; (iii) the coordination between benefiting entities
                          (DGPRCS, DGPPCS, DGAA, SEDAPAL and EMSAPUNO) and the PIUs, (iv) the monitoring and evaluation of the project,
                          including the consolidation of technical reports in accordance with the loan agreement requirements.
                          30.      A Project Advisory Committee (PAC) will be established for each Phase of the program. The PAC will report
                          hierarchically to the Deputy Minister of Construction and Sanitation (who will chair the PAC), and it will be composed of a
                          representative of MEF, the directors of DGPPCS, DGAA, and DGPRCS, as well as by the executive directors of PNSU and
                          PASLC. The PAC will provide overall guidance, oversight and monitoring of the projects. It will approve the original project
                          operation manual (POM) and will be informed on any subsequent modifications, authorize changes in key project staff to
                          ensure continuity, and prevent political instability from affecting project performance. The PAC will also help projects’
                          PIUs to unbundle bottlenecks and barriers affecting project performance and bring them to the attention of relevant
                          authorities, directly or through the PCC, depending on their nature. Figure 3 illustrates the implementation arrangements.
                          31.      The ICC is part of the Unidos por el Agua platform, led by the MVCS, with MIDAGRI, ANA, MINAM, and the
                          private sector as permanent members. Its objective is to offer a permanent space for dialogue between public and private




_For Official Use Only_
                          actors, academia, and international cooperation, to report on the MPA progress, find mechanisms for public-private
                          collaboration, and specific spaces for intervention with a contribution from the private sector in the MPA intervention
                          areas. The ICC will analyze lessons learned through implementation, identifying institutional, policy, and regulatory
                          barriers that may hinder the program’s success, and formulating reforms needed to scale up water security and circular
                          economy approaches nationally, based on the analytical work performed as part of the governance component, and
                          engage with other sector stakeholders to facilitate the required policy dialogue to push for identified governance reforms.
                          Other non-permanent members that could be invited to ICC sessions, depending on the area of discussion, include the
                          ministry of energy, the economic regulator of WSS services (SUNASS), Proinversión and industry and professional
                          associations. A World-Bank funded non-lending technical assistance will support the functioning of the ICC.

                           @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@contactpoint#doctemplate
                           CONTACT POINT

                           World Bank
                             Malva Baskovich
                             Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

                             Zael Sanz Uriarte
                             Senior Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist

                           Borrower/Client/Recipient
                            Republic of Peru

                           Implementing Agencies



                                                                                                                                                 Page 13



                                                                                                                                          Official Use Only
                               The World Bank
                               Peru: Wastewater Management and Circular Economy (P505093)


                           Ministry of Housing Construction and Sanitation
                           Darwin Francisco Pardavé Pinto
                           General Director of the General Directorate of Programs and Projects in Construction and Sanitation
                           dpardave@vivienda.gob.pe

                           Safe Water Program for Lima and Callao - PASLC
                           Giovanna De Lourdes Almeida Ramos
                           Executive Director of the Safe Water Program for Lima and Callao
                           galmeida@vivienda.gob.pe

                           National Urban Sanitation Program - PNSU
                           Eleazar Enrique Lozano García
                           Executive Director
                           elozano@vivienda.gob.pe

                          FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT

                          The World Bank




_For Official Use Only_
                          1818 H Street, NW
                          Washington, D.C. 20433
                          Telephone: (202) 473-1000
                          Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

                          @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@approval#doctemplate
                          APPROVAL


                          Task Team Leader(s):                     Malva Baskovich, Zael Sanz Uriarte

                          Approved By

                          Practice Manager/Manager:                David Michaud                           15-May-2025

                          Country Director:                        Oliver Braedt                           07-Jul-2025




                                                                                                                                        Page 14



                                                                                                                                 Official Use Only
