Public Disclosure Authorized                            FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
                                                                                                   Report No: PPHI00527

                                              INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

                                                            PROJECT PAPER




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                 ON A
                                                           PROPOSED GRANT


                                                          IN THE AMOUNT OF

                                                            US$3 MILLION

                                                                TO THE




Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                      NILE BASIN DISCOURSE (NBD)

                                                                FOR A

                                       NILE CIVIL SOCIETY FOR CLIMATE RESILIENCE (NCSCR) PROJECT

                                                                {DATE}
                               Water
                               Other




Public Disclosure Authorized
                            CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

                 (Exchange Rate Effective December 1, 2024)

                   Currency Unit = Uganda Schillings (UGX)
                             UGX 3,667 = US$1

                                  FISCAL YEAR
                                 July 1 - June 30




                Regional Vice President:    Victoria Kwakwa
             Regional Practice Director:    Anna Wellenstein
Acting Director for Regional Integration:   Franz Drees R. Gross
                      Practice Manager:     Francis Ghesquiere
                     Task Team Leaders:     Shyam KC
                     ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

CIWA   Cooperation in International Waters in Africa
CRI    Corporate Results Indicator
CSOs   Civil society organizations
IGAD   Intergovernmental Authority on Development
IWRM   Integrated Water Resources Management
LVBC   Lake Victoria Basin Commission
MoU    Memorandum of Understanding
NBD    Nile Basin Discourse
NBF    Nile Basin Forum
NGO    Nongovernmental organization
      The World Bank
      Nile Civil Society for Climate Resilience (P505581)



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padsgbasicinformation#doctemplate
BASIC INFORMATION


Project Beneficiary(ies)                                     Operation Name
Burundi, Congo, Democratic Republic of, Ethiopia, Kenya,
                                                             Nile Civil Society for Climate Resilience Project
Rwanda, South Sudan, Sudan, Tanzania, Uganda
Financing Instrument                                         Classification
Investment Project Financing (IPF)                           Small Grants
Approval Date              Closing Date                      Environmental and Social Risk Classification
31-Mar-2025                31-Mar-2027                       Moderate
Approval Authority         Bank/IFC Collaboration
CD Decision                No
Please Explain
This a smalll RETF grant that supports multiple countires in the region.



Proposed Development Objective(s)
The development objective (PDO) is to enhance civil society participation in advancing cooperation in the management
and development of transboudary waters in the Nile Basin.

Components
Component Name                                                                                                     Cost (US$)
1. Community Engagements and Capacity Building                                                                   1,428,000.00
2. Innovative Platforms for Stakeholder Dialogue and Action                                                       592,000.00
3. Project Management                                                                                             980,000.00

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padborrower#doctemplate




                                                                                                                           i
      The World Bank
      Nile Civil Society for Climate Resilience (P505581)



Organizations

 Borrower:                      Nile Basin Discourse

 Contact                       Title                        Telephone No.     Email
 Sylvester Matemu              Regional Manager             256 393 252 161   smatemu@nilebasindiscourse.org
 Implementing Agency:          Nile Basin Discourse

 Contact                       Title                        Telephone No.     Email
 Sylvester Matemu              Regional Manager             256 393 252 161   smatemu@nilebasindiscourse.org



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padfinancingsummary#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development

Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?                   No

Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?             No

SUMMARY

  Total Operation Cost                                                                                   3.00

  Total Financing                                                                                        3.00

  Financing Gap                                                                                          0.00

DETAILS

 Non-World Bank Group Financing
   Trust Funds                                                                                            3.00
      Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                                       3.00

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@paddisbursementprojection#doctemplate
Expected Disbursements (US$, Millions)
WB Fiscal Year                              2025                       2026                      2027
Annual                                      0.16                       1.20                      1.60
Cumulative                                  0.16                       1.36                      2.96

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padsgprocessing#doctemplate
                                                                                                                ii
     The World Bank
     Nile Civil Society for Climate Resilience (P505581)


FINANCING & IMPLEMENTATION MODALITIES

Situations of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints
[ ] Fragile State(s)                                         [ ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country
[ ] Small State(s)                                           [ ] Conflict
[ ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster
Other Situations
[ ] Financial Intermediaries (FI)                            [ ] Series of Projects (SOP)
[ ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs)                      [ ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)
[ ] Alternative Procurement Arrangements (APA)               [ ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS)

Practice Area (Lead)
Water

Contributing Practice Areas



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padrisk#doctemplate
OVERALL RISK RATING


Risk Category                                                               Rating
Overall                                                                     ⚫ Low


@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padcompliance#doctemplate
POLICY COMPLIANCE


Policy
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects?
[ ] Yes   [✓] No

Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?
[ ] Yes [✓] No



ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL


Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal
E & S Standards                                                                      Relevance



                                                                                                               iii
       The World Bank
       Nile Civil Society for Climate Resilience (P505581)


ESS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and
                                                                                   Relevant
Impacts
ESS 10: Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure                          Relevant
ESS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                                                Relevant
ESS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management                 Not Currently Relevant
ESS 4: Community Health and Safety                                                 Relevant
ESS 5: Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement     Not Currently Relevant
ESS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural
                                                                                   Relevant
Resources
ESS 7: Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved
                                                                                   Relevant
Traditional Local Communities
ESS 8: Cultural Heritage                                                           Not Currently Relevant
ESS 9: Financial Intermediaries                                                    Not Currently Relevant
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review
Summary (ESRS).

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalcovenants#doctemplate
LEGAL
Legal Covenants
Sections and Description

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padconditions#doctemplate
Conditions
Type                              Citation                   Description                    Financing Source

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padteam#doctemplate
PROJECT TEAM


Bank Staff
                                                                             Specialization in this
Name                            Role                                                                     Unit
                                                                             operation
Shyam KC                        Team Leader(ADM Responsible)                                             SAEW3
                                Financial Management Specialist(ADM
Sufiyian Igwahabi                                                                                        EAEG1
                                Responsible)
Annet Tamale Katuramu           Procurement Specialist(ADM Responsible)                                  EAEP1


                                                                                                                      iv
     The World Bank
     Nile Civil Society for Climate Resilience (P505581)


                                                                          Environmental
Tamene Tiruneh Matebe         Environmental Specialist(ADM Responsible)                       SAEE2
                                                                          Safeguards
Boyenge Isasi Dieng           Social Specialist(ADM Responsible)          Social Safeguards   SAES3
Edith Ruguru Mwenda           Counsel                                                         LEGAM
Jose Ramon R. Pascual IV      Counsel                                                         LEGAM
Babacar Dione                 Team Member                                 Loan officer        WFACS
Wendy Schreiber Ayres         Team Member                                                     SAES2
Charles P Gilman              Team Member                                 Gender, M&E         SWAGP
Ai-Ju Huang                   Team Member                                                     SAEW2
Lars Anders Jagerskog         Team Member                                                     SAEW2




                                                                                                      v
      The World Bank
      Nile Civil Society for Climate Resilience (P505581)


REPUBLIC OF BURUNDI, DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO, ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT, FEDERAL DEMOCRATIC
REPUBLIC OF ETHIOPIA, REPUBLIC OF KENYA, REPUBLIC OF RWANDA, REPUBLIC OF SOUTH SUDAN, REPUBLIC OF
THE SUDAN, UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA, REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

                                                       Nile Civil Society for Climate Resilience

                                                             TABLE OF CONTENTS


I.      STRATEGIC CONTEXT .................................................................................................................. 1
        A. Regional Context .............................................................................................................................. 1
        B. Sectoral and Institutional Context ................................................................................................... 1
        C. Higher Level Objectives to which the Project Contributes .............................................................. 3
II.     PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES ......................................................................................... 4
        A. Project Development Objectives (PDO)........................................................................................... 4
        B. Project Beneficiaries ........................................................................................................................ 4
        C. PDO-Level Results Indicators ........................................................................................................... 4
III. PROJECT DESCRIPTION ............................................................................................................... 4
        A. Project Components ........................................................................................................................ 5
        B. Project Cost and Financing .............................................................................................................. 7
IV. IMPLEMENTATION ..................................................................................................................... 7
        A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements............................................................................ 7
        B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation.................................................................................................. 8
        C. Sustainability.................................................................................................................................... 8
V.      KEY RISKS .................................................................................................................................. 9
        A. Overall Risk Rating and Explanation of Key Risks ............................................................................ 9
VI. APPRAISAL SUMMARY ............................................................................................................... 9
        A. Legal Operational Policies ............................................................................................................... 11
VII. WORLD BANK GRIEVANCE REDRESS ......................................................................................... 11
VIII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING ............................................................................... 13
           The World Bank
           Nile Civil Society for Climate Resilience (P505581)




    I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT


A.      Regional Context

1.      The Nile River basin is shared by eleven countries: Burundi, Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Egypt, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Kenya, Rwanda, South Sudan, Sudan, Tanzania, and Uganda. As one of the world’s longest and iconic rivers—
covering one-tenth of Africa’s total land mass—it has been the economic lifeline of the estimated 238 million people who
have lived within the boundaries of the basin and the roughly 437 million that have depended on Nile waters. Several of
the Nile Basin countries are ranked among the world’s poorest, with eight of 11 among the bottom 50 of the United
Nation’s Human Development Index, which ranks 189 countries according to indicators of life expectancy, education, and
per capita income.1

2.      The development potential in the basin is largely untapped. All of the economies of the basin countries are highly
dependent on exploitation of natural resources, including agriculture and tourism. An estimated 75 per cent of the Nile
population lives in rural areas, where food security and livelihoods are at high risk to natural hazards. Climate change
presents a serious threat to development and could potentially reverse many of the gains that have been made in recent
decades. A recent example is the April 2024 floods, which displaced 197,000 people in Burundi and 413,000 people in
Kenya.2 The floods have also destroyed schools, health centers, and roads. Floods in South Sudan in 2021 and 2022
displaced more than 1 million people. Even without taking climate change into account, disaster risk will continue to
increase in many African countries as more vulnerable people and assets are exposed to soil erosion, increased
sedimentation of reservoirs and canal systems, and water pollution, which raises the costs of treatment.

3.       While the Nile countries are extremely diverse, they are united by their dependence on the river. Each of the
countries has ambitious national development plans to promote economic growth and alleviate poverty that depend on
the sustainable use and management of shared Nile waters. These include energy, food production, transportation,
industrial development, and environmental conservation investments. While these investments were to be made
primarily at the national level, taking a regional perspective would greatly enhance their benefits and sustainability. The
interdependence of limited water resources across national boundaries makes coordination among stakeholders critical.
Civil society could play an important role in raising awareness on the benefits of Nile cooperation, and in mobilizing
support for cooperative dialogue and action. Community ownership and their involvement in implementation is
recognized by many as a critical factor for sustainability.

4.       In addition to considering the transboundary impacts, Nile basin investments need to respond to the priorities
of local communities to ensure that their benefits are shared and help to build community resilience to the effects of
climate change. By consulting local communities, much could be learned about the ways in which they are already
adapting and managing risks. Engaging with riparian citizens is also important to promote Nile cooperation, monitor the
impacts of investment projects, and share knowledge on resilience-building strategies.

B.      Sectoral and Institutional Context

5.         The Nile Basin Discourse (NBD) is a civil society institution established with the support of donors, including the

1
    Nile Basin Initiative. “State of the River Nile Basin report 2021. January 31, 2022.
2
    World Food Programme. “Eastern Africa Seasonal Monitor.” May 23, 2024.
                                                                                                                    Page 1
       The World Bank
       Nile Civil Society for Climate Resilience (P505581)


World Bank, in 2003 to strengthen civil society participation in Nile Basin developmental processes and programs. First
hosted by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature, the NBD has evolved into an independent network
claiming over 640 member organizations throughout the basin. Member organizations are local and national
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) working on a range of issues to promote Nile cooperation, including
environmental conservation, gender equity, livelihoods, and poverty reduction. The NGOs are members of national level
Nile Discourse Forums (NDFs) established in ten of the eleven riparian states, and the NDFs, in turn, are members of the
NBD coordinated by a regional secretariat based in Entebbe, Uganda.3 The NDFs play a crucial role in gathering citizen
data, advocating for national perspectives, and addressing issues related to the river Nile water resources. The NBD
provides a safe and politically neutral space for dialogue at the community, national, and regional levels. The NBD brings
the voices of grassroots communities to enrich transboundary programs and projects within the Nile Basin.

6.        The NBD’s extensive ground presence in riparian communities makes it uniquely placed to link regional and
local perspectives. The Implementation Completion and Results Report dated June 6, 2022 (Report ICR00005700, World
Bank) rated the outcome of the previous project led by the NBD—Engaging Civil Society for Social and Climate Resilience
in The Nile Basin Project (P132448)—as Satisfactory. An independent evaluation of activities financed under the
Cooperation in International Waters in Africa (CIWA) trust fund concluded that the NBD had been highly effective in
facilitating sustained civil society engagement in the basin cooperation and development programs, processes, and
policies. In doing so, it has ensured that development partners respond to the development needs of local communities
by establishing benefit-sharing processes that contribute significantly to more equitable and sustainable outcomes for
poor people in the basin.4

7.      Key achievements of the Engaging Civil Society for Social and Climate Resilience Project included:

•       Communication and outreach between the governments, civil society organizations (CSOs), and communities
        improved. The NBD undertook a stakeholder mapping covering the ten Nile countries to identify the geographical,
        thematic orientation, and capacities of CSO members of the NDFs. It also provided insight into the institutional
        structures of civil society coalitions at national and subnational levels and highlighted challenges individual
        member organizations and NDFs face, such as capacity building, resource mobilization, official recognition, and
        impartiality. In addition to existing members, the mapping identified areas of expertise of potential CSO members
        and invited those with expertise in women and youth empowerment, agriculture, nutrition, and sustainable
        energy (including hydropower development) to join the network. This comprehensive stakeholder map enabled
        project designers to communicate with and understand the interests of the different types of resource users, and
        to manage or resolve issues. The NBD also actively updated a website to serve as a platform for communication
        and information dissemination among member organizations and to steadily expand outreach and connections
        among CSO members. The number of monthly hits reached 69,350 in 2021, exceeding the target by 7 percent. In
        addition, the NBD was mentioned or cited in an increasing number of media sources throughout the project life.

•       Transboundary dialogues led to improvements in the design of investment projects. Dialogues organized by the
        NBD Secretariat, which brought local communities together with relevant government ministries (such as
        agriculture and fisheries), project financiers, local authorities, and technical experts affiliated with the NDFs led to
        changes in the design of several transboundary projects. For example, consultations with communities affected
        by the Nyimur-Aswa Multipurpose Water Resources Project influenced the location of the irrigation facilities and
        led to the decision to construct a permanent access road between Uganda and South Sudan to facilitate trade in

3
 The NDF office in Eritrea was closed in 2005, along with those of most other NGOs in the country.
4
 Universalia Management Group. “External Mid-Term Evaluation of Cooperation in International Waters in Africa.” Montreal,
Quebec, Canada. July 2022.
                                                                                                                      Page 2
       The World Bank
       Nile Civil Society for Climate Resilience (P505581)


        agricultural products and fish, thereby expanding project benefits for the community. Consultations with
        communities affected by the Rusumo Falls Hydropower Project reduced the required resettlement from an
        estimated 6,700 households (40,000 people) to just 664 households (4,000 people), as community members
        voiced strong support for a run-of-river design option instead of an intermediary development scheme that would
        have generated more energy and involved a water storage reservoir. This resulted in huge savings in compensation
        costs for the governments and much reduced disruption for the affected communities.

•       The NBD has proven to be a pivotal force in fostering regional cooperation through its strategic engagement with
        CSOs. Through leading dialogues that include CSOs representing the interests and rights of women and youth at
        the grassroots level, the NBD has empowered vulnerable and socially-excluded groups in decision-making
        concerning water resources. This inclusive approach has been instrumental in ensuring the development needs of
        local communities are addressed and that benefits of development are shared, contributing to more equitable
        and sustainable outcomes for the poor in the basin. The external evaluation stated that the last NBD project
        ‘Engaging Civil Society for Social and Climate Resilience in the Nile Basin Project’ stands out as exemplary and
        widely-cited as its engagement with civil society and individual riparian countries has significantly contributed to
        the overall objective of regional cooperation.

8.      However, when the project closed, the NBD could not continue with the work it had started to meet the
demands of the riparian countries and its ambition to scale-up activities regionally. The NBD has received a grant to
cover 2022–2023 as part of the Nile Cooperation for Climate Resilience Project supported under the Cooperation in
International Waters in Africa (CIWA) trust fund. However, only US$750,000 has been allocated to the NBD to focus on a
very limited set of activities under two themes: flood/drought risk mitigation, and platform for cooperation. This funding
has now been exhausted.

9.       A solid base has been established from which benefits could be significantly increased if the NBD and its
network of civil society organizations (CSOs) were to be strengthened. The NBD is close to the local communities and
can use its relationships to engage them in giving urgent attention to mitigate and adapt to climate change. The NBD
secretariat also has access to national and local policy-makers, which it can use to help align policies with community
priorities. Under the proposed project, the NBD will seek to influence the new or ongoing initiatives that work on
improving transboundary water cooperation, including those described in paragraph 21 below.

10.      The NBD plays three critical roles for the network. These include (a) a bottom-up communications pipeline for
raising the voices of citizens and civil society up to the governmental and regional levels; (b) a top-down pipeline for
educating and informing citizens and civil society on Nile issues and development projects; and (c) a horizontal pipeline
between citizens and civil society organizations both within and across national borders for knowledge and capacity
sharing. While the importance and value of NBD’s role are undisputed by all stakeholders, there is a need to strengthen
the capacity of the network to fulfill its three core functions. Moreover, the evolving situation in the Nile basin with respect
to the Cooperative Framework Agreement underscores the importance of the need for civil society dialogue across the
basin. The case for supporting civil society remains strong among all riparian countries despite recent development
pertaining to the Nile Basin Initiative.

C.   Higher Level Objectives to which the Project Contributes

 11.     The proposed project is consistent with the Africa Regional Integration and Cooperation Assistance Strategy
 (ARICAS) fiscal 2021–2023 Update. The proposed project contributes to the strategy’s fourth pillar—resilience—by
 supporting communities to mitigate and adapt to climate risks and to better manage transboundary waters and natural

                                                                                                                      Page 3
         The World Bank
         Nile Civil Society for Climate Resilience (P505581)


 resources. The project also supports the strategy’s objective of promoting collective action to address risks of regional
 economic contagion, fragility, epidemics, and climate hot spots.

 12.     The proposed project will support the implementation of the World Bank’s Water Security and Climate
 Adaptation Global Challenge Program. It is intended to strengthen water security, increase access to safe water supply
 and sanitation, and invest in the scale-up of sustainable water management and disaster risk reduction solutions in the
 countries in which the World Bank works.

 13.       The proposed project supports broader World Bank climate-related commitments. The proposed project aims
 to help communities strengthen their resilience to climate change in accordance with the World Bank Group Climate
 Action Plan 2021–2025. This has a focus on assisting communities to better prepare for and manage flood and drought
 risks. It also offers support to climate-informed river basin management, including for shared water resources such as
 lakes, rivers, and other international watersheds that collectively draw on one water resource.

 II. PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES

A.     Project Development Objectives (PDO)

14.   The project development objective (PDO) is to promote civil society participation in advancing cooperation in the
management and development of transboudary waters in the Nile Basin.

15.     The PDO will be achieved through strengthening the capacity of the NBD to engage communities and stakeholders
in the Basin. Over the long term, the project is expected to contribute to equitable, sustainable, and climate resilient
growth in the region by providing a platform for citizen engagement in riparian dialogue, learning on climate risk
management and resilience building strategies, and promoting awareness of the benefits of Nile Basin cooperation.

B.     Project Beneficiaries

16.     The NBD will be the direct beneficiary of this project and, through it, the Nile River Basin CSOs and their
members. The Nile Basin member governments will also be beneficiaries of the project. The people who live in the
communities adjacent to Nile Basin development projects will benefit from better engagement with project designers and
implementers. Finally, the people living in the communities benefiting from engagement in improving the management
of natural resources will be better able to adapt to and mitigate climate change and water-related natural disasters.

 C. PDO-Level Results Indicators

 17.       The proposed PDO-level indicator is:

 People benefitting from climate resilient planning, preparation, surveillance, and/or response disaggregated by gender
 and youth (number). (CRI)


III. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

 18.   The proposed project will provide support to strengthen communities’ engagement in the development and
 management of transboundary water projects. It will also support communities to become more resilient to climate
                                                                                                                  Page 4
          The World Bank
          Nile Civil Society for Climate Resilience (P505581)


    change, improve the collection and dissemination of information on environmental conditions and natural hazards, and
    improve the capacity of the NBD and its stakeholders to deliver on its mandate.

    A. Project Components

19.     Component 1: Community Engagements and Capacity Building (US$1,428,000). This component will support (a)
a program of citizen led data management, (b) community consultations with respect to transboundary development
projects, (c) capacity building of the NDFs, and (d) activities to strengthen communities’ resilience to climate change.

20.      Subcomponent 1A: Support a program of citizen led data management (US$1,010,000). This subcomponent will
support the collection and sharing of data by citizens on issues of water quality, water flows, land degradation, soil erosion,
wetland degradation, and climate-related hazards with the aim of influencing policy, resource allocations, and behavior
of citizens. More accurate and timely data will allow for better responses to emerging issues, potentially preventing
disasters. Better data will also contribute to the development of effective plans for water management and the design
and implementation of infrastructure. Moreover, data collection by citizens will contribute towards sharing and valuing
indigenous knowledge and observations on water quality, floods, and droughts which enhance the understanding of local
hydrology, and at the same time increase community engagement, trust, and cooperation in implementing mitigation
measures. Finally, a citizen science initiative is strategically important for the NBD to enable it to establish a concrete value
proposition for its local, national, or inter-governmental counterparts. The NBD—a distributed network of members who
can feasibly collect some sort of evidence of on-the-ground conditions—has a comparative advantage in cost-effectively
collecting evidence of on-the-ground conditions, in contrast to governments, universities, and research institutions.

21.     Specific activities to be supported under this subcomponent include: (a) developing a comprehensive platform
to support citizen data collection and utilization for decision-making (initially targeted basins include Mara Wetland and
Sio-Siteko Wetland);5 (b) building capacities of selected stakeholders for data generation and engagement; (c) establishing
mechanisms for quality control, and (d) developing mechanisms for scale-up to other catchment areas. In addition to
sharing indigenous knowledge, this subcomponent will also support sharing of information from experts on the latest
climate knowledge to NBD members and communities for improved resilience. It will also support engagements with
national universities and national and regional climate data centers, which can help with the development of training
materials and scaling up of citizen scientist/data activities. The NBD will own and manage the platform and the data.

22.     Subcomponent 1B: Community engagement on transboundary development strategies and projects
(US$250,000). This subcomponent will support (a) community consultations and dialogues on Nile cooperation and
transboundary development projects; (b) community awareness and training on approaches to adapt to and mitigate
climate change, including through nature-based solutions; and (c) collaboration and partnerships with media houses at
regional level (MICT, Nile Media Network, Info Nile) for knowledge sharing and information dissemination. Specifically,
the NBD—in collaboration with respective governments and project implementation teams—will facilitate community
engagement, dialogues, and trainings for communities participating in three transboundary programs, namely (a) Sudd
Wetlands Strategy (2022–2050) and associated Sudd Wetlands Action Plan (b) Kagera River Basin Management program
under the Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) Strategy for the Lake Victoria Basin (2023–2050) and (c) Sio-
Siteko Transboundary Wetland Conservation Investment Plan (2020-2030).


5
 The NBD’s personal data privacy framework will apply to the data collected. The NBD is compliant with the Personal Data
Protection Office of Uganda in line with the Data Protection Act, 2019 of Uganda with its Regulations of 2021.
                                                                                                                           Page 5
       The World Bank
       Nile Civil Society for Climate Resilience (P505581)


23.       Subcomponent 1C: Building the capacities of the National Discourse Forums (NDFs) (US$168,000). The NDFs are
critical at the national level to engage communities and bring their voices to policymakers and practitioners. However, to
be effective, they need training and support to strengthen their networks. This subcomponent will support (a) training of
the NDFs’ coordinators on resource mobilization, networking, and coordination skills; (b) training of the boards of the
NDFs on leadership, management, and stakeholder engagement; (c) the establishing of strategic relationships between
the NDFs and relevant line ministries, and between NDFs and media houses through the signing of memorandums of
understanding or letters of agreement. These activities are expected to enhance the NDFs’ engagement, outreach,
visibility, and impact at national levels.

24.     Component 2: Innovative Platforms for Stakeholder Dialogue and Action (US$592,000). This component will
strengthen the NBD and its stakeholders.

25.     Subcomponent 2A: Women’s empowerment and youth engagement in dialogues on Nile cooperation and
transboundary water management (US$186,000). This subcomponent is intended to elevate the voice of women and
youth and strengthen their participation in the planning, design, and implementation of Nile development projects. The
voices of women and youth matter because they are primarily responsible for collecting water for drinking and household
use. Youth are also important because they are the agents of change. This subcomponent will support: (a) development
and implementation of gender action plans for NBD and respective NDFs; (b) workshops for national Nile women’s
networks on water management, adaptation to climate change, and other emerging issues; (c) a workshop for Regional
Nile Women Networks to discuss progress of the network’s actions and sustainability plans, best practices on networking,
and strategic partnership approaches; (d) workshops to establish national Nile youth networks (youth transforming the
Nile through water diplomacy); and (e) a workshop to establish Nile Youth Network at the regional level.

26.      Subcomponent 2B: Leveraging platforms for transboundary dialogue and knowledge exchange (US$216,000).
This subcomponent will support (a) an NBD Summit, (b) NBD Governance meetings (Board and General Assembly); and (c)
training of the new Board members on corporate governance. The Summit will bring together scientists, policymakers,
practitioners, and community representatives to: (i) share knowledge and best practices; (ii) jointly identify innovative
solutions to transboundary water management challenges; and (iii) develop joint strategies and action plans. This
subcomponent will also support NBD’s participation in World Water Week, hosted by the Stockholm International Water
Institute. The NBD will host a session to present its objectives and achievements, participate in panel discussions, and
provide material for the exhibitions. Through participation in this high-profile event, the NBD expects to attract new
development partners in support of NBD’s long-term engagements. Finally, this subcomponent will support national and
regional Nile Days. The Nile Days, which the NBD has previously sponsored, provide the opportunity to bring together
stakeholders to raise awareness of NBD’s members and communities on the benefits of cooperation in the Nile Basin, and
the role of the NBD, the NDFs, and other stakeholders in promoting collaboration and dialogue.


27.      Subcomponent 2C: Supporting the internship program (US$190,000). This subcomponent will support
recruitment, stipends, office expenses, and travel of 30 interns from 10 countries (Three batches-for a period of six months
each) and 2 Young Professionals (YPs) (One at a time, each for 12 months) to support coordination of the internship
program. The NBD will recruit women and youth with expertise in specialized areas—water resources management,
climate adaptation and resilience, data generation and management—to serve as interns. Priority will be given to interns
from the science, technology, engineering and mathematics fields. The interns will work under the supervision of the NDFs
in their home countries. Support under the project will also be provided through the NBD to ensure that interns receive
adequate technical and operational support to carry out their responsibilities in the event that the capacity of NDFs is low.
The interns will meet with communities participating in the project under subcomponents 1A and 1B to build capacity for

                                                                                                                   Page 6
         The World Bank
         Nile Civil Society for Climate Resilience (P505581)


data collection and management, increase awareness of stakeholders of sustainable water management practices, and
mobilize public support for transboundary water cooperation. This subcomponent would also support the creation of a
platform through which alumni of the internship program can communicate and share knowledge.


28.     Component 3: Project management (US$980,000). This component will finance the remuneration of staff of NBD
for project coordination, financial management, procurement, monitoring and evaluation, communication, and
administrative support. This component will also support activities to operationalize recommendations from past studies
for longer term sustainability of NBD, in particular for mobilizing financial resources (providing consultancy, crowdfunding,
reserve fund, and membership fees). It will also finance the procurement of goods required to carry out project activities,
operating costs,6 and consultants required for specific tasks, such as redesigning the website and carrying out an external
audit.

    B. Project Cost and Financing

29.     The lending instrument for this project is a Small Trust Fund Investment Project Financing for a two-year
program. A Small Trust Fund Investment Project Financing was chosen as it is designed to support the range of activities
proposed under this project (for example, community engagement, strategic development of the NBD secretariat).
Funding for the Pro is received from CIWA and the funding through this project constitutes the only source available at
this time for maintaining the core activities of the NBD.

30.       The project costs and financing are presented in Table 1 below.

                                               Table 1: Project Costs and Financing
                                    Project Cost (US$)        Trust Funds (US$)                  % Financing
    Component 1                             1,428,000                 1,428,000                     100%
    Component 2                               592,000                   592,000                     100%
    Component 3                               980,000                   980,000                     100%
    Total Project Costs                     3,000,000                 3,000,000                     100%
    Total Financing Required                3,000,000                 3,000,000


    IV. IMPLEMENTATION

A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

31.      The implementing agency for this project is the NBD Regional Secretariat based in Entebbe, Uganda. The NBD
Secretariat currently has five technical experts—regional manager, regional monitoring and evaluation specialist, regional
finance and administrative specialist, regional procurement specialist, regional ICT and social media specialist—and three
NBD Secretariat support staff. The Secretariat plans to recruit a regional communications and media specialist once the
project is approved.

32.       The NBD Board will oversee and guide the implementation of the project. The Board comprises 13

6
 Office rent, utilities, security, repair and maintenance, communication, fuel, office supplies, staff insurance, staff recruitment, and
others.
                                                                                                                               Page 7
       The World Bank
       Nile Civil Society for Climate Resilience (P505581)


representatives of the countries in the Nile Basin. Three of the Board members are responsible for ensuring project
activities address women’s needs. The Board is responsible for reviewing and approving the project’s annual workplan
and budget.
 B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation
33.     Objectives and design. The objective of the monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system is to track the project’s
implementation progress and achievement of expected outcomes to enable the NBD stakeholders and the World Bank to
address issues as they arise. The NBD secretariat will be responsible for collecting and reporting on indicators specified in
the project’s results framework and other relevant outcomes for which data exist. It will maintain an internal tracking
system covering all activities, and the intermediate and PDO-level outcomes to which they contribute. The NBD secretariat
has an experienced M&E specialist on its staff, who has capably monitored and reported on implementation progress and
progress towards results of the projects the NBD has been involved with in the past.

34.     Data generation and reporting. The data to track the key performance indicators come from (a) the NDFs that
participate in consultations and training sessions, (b) transboundary project managers who adapt designs based on
feedback from communities that participate in NBD-organized citizen engagements, (c) data collected by citizens and
uploaded to a platform. Others will be identified as the project design evolves. The NBD Secretariat is responsible for
preparing the quarterly financial and progress reports. It will submit quarterly project progress reports to the World Bank,
the NBD Board, and to other stakeholders within 45 days of the end of each quarter. The NBD and World Bank will prepare
a comprehensive midterm review of the project implementation and results in 2026, during which the target values of key
performance indicators will be reviewed and any required adjustments to project design agreed. The NBD will prepare an
end-project report, reporting on the relevance of the project, implementation challenges and how they were resolved,
and achievement of results, among other issues.
 C. Sustainability
 35.      Institutional sustainability. The NBD has grown from a hosted project to an independent organization and is
 legally registered as a regional organization in Uganda. This gives the NBD legitimacy to conduct its work in the Nile
 Basin countries. The NBD has a Strategy 2023–2027 in place and up-to-date institutional manuals covering governance,
 finance and administration, procurement, and human resource manuals to provide institutional direction and guidance.
 An important aspect of the proposed project is to further strengthen the NBD’s institutional capacity, particularly in the
 areas of climate and flood management, so that it can, over the long-term, engage with communities to improve the
 design of transboundary development projects and to assist them in mitigating and adapting to climate risks.

 36.      Financial sustainability. The financial sustainability of the NBD is a critical issue. NBD has developed several
 strategies for communications, outreach, monitoring, evaluation, and financial sustainability since 2016. The NBD
 Fundraising Plan 2022–2025 outlines specific proposals for mobilizing funding from development partners and NGOs,
 upgrading the website for online fundraising, and generating income through consulting services and citizen science
 data sales. The proposed project will support the NBD to develop other sources of revenue, particularly through the
 expansion of the community-generated data on water, climate, and agriculture This citizen science initiative will create
 a value proposition for NBD's partners at local, national, and inter-governmental levels. With its vast distributed
 network of members at local and grassroot levels, NBD can efficiently gather on-the-ground evidence, offering a
 significant advantage over traditional entities like governments, universities, and research institutions. By monetizing
 consulting services and the data collected through these citizen science efforts, NBD aims to bolster its financial
 sustainability, ensuring the enduring success and impact of its projects in the Nile Basin region.

 37.    Social sustainability. The project supports the NBD and its stakeholders to more effectively share knowledge
 and expertise on transboundary projects and climate resilience. Citizen engagement in turn will result in better designed
                                                                                                                   Page 8
       The World Bank
       Nile Civil Society for Climate Resilience (P505581)


 projects and greater resilience to natural hazards. Thus, the project will contribute to the social sustainability of
 development efforts in the Nile Basin.



 V. KEY RISKS

A. Overall Risk Rating and Explanation of Key Risks

Systematic Operations Risk- Rating Tool (SORT) ratings
       Risk Categories                                                                    Rating
 Political and Governance                                                                Moderate
 Macroeconomic                                                                             Low
 Sector Strategies and Policies                                                            Low
 Technical Design of Project                                                               Low
 Institutional Capacity for Implementation and                                           Moderate
 Sustainability
 Fiduciary                                                                               Moderate
 Environmental and Social                                                                Moderate
 Stakeholders                                                                            Moderate
 Overall                                                                                   Low

38.     The overall risk rating of the project is Low. All major risks are rated Moderate or Low after mitigation measures
are considered.

 VI. APPRAISAL SUMMARY

Paris Alignment

39.     The operation is aligned with the goals of the Paris Agreement on both mitigation and adaptation. The risk level
of the project interventions, for both mitigation and adaptation, is assessed to be low. A summary of the assessment and
reduction of risks is below.

40.      Assessment and reduction of mitigation risks. The project will support data collection and dissemination on flood
risks and measures to prevent and respond to them, including through implementation of nature-based solutions. The
project will also support training and dialogue on approaches to conserve ecologically sensitive areas and the protect
habitats of high conservation value, while also seeking to enhance nature-based tourism opportunities. With respect to
livelihood diversification, the project aims to support people in adopting livelihoods that do not depend on the exploitation
of the natural resources. It will help people find climate-friendly livelihood options, and promote the use of solar or wind
energy, wherever possible. The flood-risk reduction and livelihood diversification identified above can be considered to
have low mitigation-related risks.

41.    Assessment and reduction of adaptation risks. The main climate and disaster risks likely to affect the communities
engaged under the project arise from flooding. The project will support data collection and dissemination and training on
approaches to mitigate and respond to flood risks. It will support implementation of wetland and river basin management

                                                                                                                   Page 9
       The World Bank
       Nile Civil Society for Climate Resilience (P505581)


plans. Adoption of climate-smart agricultural practices and alternative livelihoods will also assist communities with
adaptation.

Financial management

42.      NBD has been previously involved in implementation of various grants and currently it has been implementing the
NCCR project (P142848). The entity has the Finance and administration officer who is well qualified and is assisted by the
program and administration. The planning and budgeting arrangements are handled in a team and participating manner
which is activity based. This is usually submitted to the executive for review and then to the Board for approval. The
entity’s bankers are Stanbic where the accounts are held. The Board chair, the treasurer, the regional manager, the finance
and administration officer are the signatories whose mandate is that any two sign for financial transactions. The finance
and administration officer are responsible for maintaining the proper books of accounts that are kept more than 5 years
as required by the accounting standards. The entity does not have an internal audit department although the internal
controls are adequate. It may require outsourcing for these services as need may arise. The period and annual financial
statements are usually prepared on time, accurate and reliable that are usually submitted to the regional manager for
approval. The services of the external audit are usually undertaken through procurement of a certified public accountant
firm from a list of prequalified firms and acceptable to the Bank.

Procurement
44.      NBD is an implementing agency in the ongoing NCCR project (P172848) and has gained experience in handling
Bank financed projects. The procurements planned under the project are similar to those implemented under the NCCR
Project and comprise mainly of goods, consulting and non-consulting services; and were of low value, complexity and risk.
A change in the current procurement arrangements is not envisaged at this point. Procurement processing will be in
accordance with the World Bank’s Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers dated September 2023 (Procurement
Regulations), and the Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and Corruption in Projects Financed by IBRD Loans
and IDA Credits and Grants revised as of July 1, 2016, and other provisions stipulated in the Financing Agreements. All
procurement will be processed through the Bank’s online procurement system STEP. Under NCCR Project, late initiation
of needs by user departments was a major cause of delayed procurement processing. Under this project it is important to
identify and address the delay points early.

Environmental and Social Safeguards

43.     The project's development objective and components are meant to strengthen community engagement for
climate resilience in the affected communities, which in itself is a mitigation measure to the risk of exclusion of certain
stakeholders. The activities to be financed by the project are technical assistance and capacity building activities without
any on-the-ground activity or civil works with potentially negative environmental risks or impacts. Furthermore, no health
and safety concerns are anticipated due to the activities supported under the project. The main social risk associated with
the proposed activities is the exclusion of certain individuals or groups (indigenous peoples, women, youth, and members
of other vulnerable groups) from the proposed capacity building activities, notably, during the identification and selection
of beneficiaries. There's also a risk that activities such as the elaboration of gender action plans, and wetland and
watershed management plans are not carried out in accordance with the Environmental and Social Framework (ESF). To
address this risk, guidelines for (a) the engagement and inclusion of these groups, including the establishment of a
grievance redress mechanism (GRM), and (b) clear selection criteria for beneficiaries will be included in the Stakeholder
Engagement Plan. The project will ensure that all terms of reference for relevant activities are consistent with the ESF.
Guidelines for the management of labor under the project, including the establishment of workers' GRM and signature of
                                                                                                                 Page 10
       The World Bank
       Nile Civil Society for Climate Resilience (P505581)


codes of conduct will also be included in the Stakeholder Engagement Plan. Based on the above, social risk at this stage is
rated moderate.

Lessons learned and reflected in the project’s design

44.     Creating and maintaining a network of CSOs, NGOs, government entities, and other stakeholders is invaluable
to strengthen cooperation among communities sharing a common resource. The NDB can call upon its members on short
notice to provide training in specific topics, to facilitate and inform transboundary dialogues, and to share knowledge on
technical issues. Having such an extensive network at regional, national, community levels also facilitate communications
and outreach, which helps to elevate the profile of the NBD regionally and internationally. Moreover, such a network of
CSOs and NGOs helps to strengthen political commitment of Nile Basin riparian countries to promote regional
collaborative management and development of shard water resources.

45.     A dedicated team is required to ensure that the priorities of the community affected by transboundary projects
are reflected in the project design and implementation. Organizations such as the LVBC and project implementing
agencies rarely have the resources to carryout in-depth community consultations which can inform project designs. The
NBD has been given the mandate to do so. Elevating community voices results in important benefits to communities.

46.      Trust fund resources are critical to finance small but high-impact technical assistance projects. Projects such as
the “Engaging Civil Society for Social and Climate Resilience in the Nile Basin Project,” may be small but they can have
significant impacts. Given the Bank’s growing focus on supporting large multisectoral projects, trust funds are critical to
finance smaller but potentially transformative projects.

 A. Legal Operational Policies

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalpolicy#doctemplate
 Legal Operational Policies                                                           Triggered?
 Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50                                          No
 Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60                                                    No




 VII. WORLD BANK GRIEVANCE REDRESS


 47.     Grievance Redress. Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a project
 supported by the World Bank may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance mechanisms or the Bank’s
 Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to address
 project-related concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the Bank’s
 independent Accountability Mechanism (AM). The AM houses the Inspection Panel, which determines whether harm
 occurred, or could occur, as a result of Bank non-compliance with its policies and procedures, and the Dispute

                                                                                                                Page 11
     The World Bank
     Nile Civil Society for Climate Resilience (P505581)


Resolution Service, which provides communities and borrowers with the opportunity to address complaints through
dispute resolution. Complaints may be submitted to the AM at any time after concerns have been brought directly to
the attention of Bank Management and after Management has been given an opportunity to respond. For information
on how to submit complaints to the Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS), visit http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For
information on how to submit complaints to the Bank’s Accountability Mechanism, visit
https://accountability.worldbank.org.




                                                                                                         Page 12
        The World Bank
        Nile Civil Society for Climate Resilience(P505581)



                                                               VIII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING



@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padsgannexresultframework#doctemplate
Project Development Objective Indicators


Project Development Objective(s)
The development objective (PDO) is to enhance civil society participation in advancing cooperation in the management and development of transboudary waters in the
Nile Basin.

   Baseline                                                                                  Closing Period
   People benefitting from climate resilient planning, preparation, surveillance, and/or response (Number of people) CRI
   Jan/2025                                                                                    Mar/2027
   0                                                                                           10,000
     ➢People benefitting from climate resilient planning, preparation, surveillance, and/or response - Female (Number of people) CRI
   Jan/2025                                                                                    Mar/2027
   0                                                                                           5,000
     ➢People benefitting from climate resilient planning, preparation, surveillance, and/or response - Youth (Number of people) CRI
   Jan/2025                                                                                    Mar/2027
   0                                                                                           4,000


Intermediate Indicators


   Baseline                                                                                  Closing Period
   Data and information systems established under the project used by governments and communities to strengthen resilience (Yes/No)
   Jan/2025                                                                                  Mar/2027
   0                                                                                         Yes
   Design of transboundary projects is influenced through consultations with the surrounding communities (Number)




                                                                                                                                                               Page 13
     The World Bank
     Nile Civil Society for Climate Resilience(P505581)


Jan/2025                                                                                 Mar/2027
0                                                                                        3
Citizens participating in the dialogues concerning the transboundary projects or in capacity building events/trainings (Number)
Jan/2025                                                                                 Mar/2027
0                                                                                        2,000
Letters of Agreement signed between NDFs and key stakeholders such as line ministries and other strategic partners (Number)
Jan/2025                                                                                 Mar/2027
0                                                                                        6
Women participating in dialogues Nile cooperation and transboundary water management (number) (Number)
Jan/2025                                                                                 Mar/2027
0                                                                                        1,000
Youth participating in dialogues Nile cooperation and transboundary water management (Number)
Jan/2025                                                                                 Mar/2027
0                                                                                        500
Knowledge products to illustrate the evidence base for cooperation (Number)
Jan/2025                                                                                 Mar/2027
0                                                                                        6
Interns supported under the project (Number)
Jan/2025                                                                                 Mar/2027
0                                                                                        32
Interns (Female) (Percentage)
Jan/2025                                                                                 Mar/2027
0                                                                                        50
Interns from FCV countries (Percentage)
Jan/2025                                                                                 Mar/2027
0                                                                                        40




                                                                                                                                  Page 14
         The World Bank
         Nile Civil Society for Climate Resilience (P505581)


Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes

 People with enhanced resilience to climate risks (number)
 People benefitting from climate resilient planning, preparation, surveillance, and/or response (Number of people) CRI
                          This indicator measures the number of people benefitting directly and indirectly from improved climate risk
 Description              management and increased climate resilience due to dialogue and capacity development through NBD initiatives,
                          including for enhanced climate disaster response.
 Frequency                Continuous
                          Population data from the countries participating in the project, project documents, surveys conducted by NBD, or
 Data source
                          project implementers, government/project reports.
 Methodology for Data     Various national institutes of statistics that carry out population censuses. Suverys conducted by NBD and/or project
 Collection               implementers, relevant government Ministries and Institutions; Field observations.
 Responsibility for Data
                          The NBD is responsible for compiling and reporting the data.
 Collection


 People with increased resilience to climate risks (number) female
 People benefitting from climate resilient planning, preparation, surveillance, and/or response (Number of people) CRI
 Description              This indicator measures the percentage of beneficiaries that are female.
 Frequency                Continuous
                          Population data from the countries participating in the project, project documents, surveys conducted by NBD, or
 Data source
                          project implementers, government/inter-governmental organizations reports.
 Methodology for Data     Various national institutes of statistics that carry out population censuses. Suverys conducted by NBD and/or project
 Collection               implementers, relevant government Ministries and Institutions; Field observations.
 Responsibility for Data
                          The NBD is responsible for compiling and reporting the data.
 Collection


 People with increased resilience to climate risks (number) youth
 People benefitting from climate resilient planning, preparation, surveillance, and/or response (Number of people) CRI
 Description              This indicator measures the percentage of beneficiaries that are youth.
 Frequency                Continuous
                          Population data from the countries participating in the project, project documents, surveys conducted by NBD, or
 Data source
                          project implementers, government/inter-governmental organizations reports.
 Methodology for Data     Various national institutes of statistics that carry out population censuses. Suverys conducted by NBD and/or project
 Collection               implementers, relevant government Ministries and Institutions; Field observations.
 Responsibility for Data
                          The NBD is responsible for compiling and reporting the data.
 Collection



Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: Intermediate Results Indicators by Components

                                         Component 1: Community engagement and capacity building
                                           Subcomponent 1A: Citizen led water data management
 Data and information systems established under the project used by governments and communities to strengthen resilience (Yes/No).
 Description                      This indicator measures the establishment and use of the citizen science data platform.
 Frequency                        Continuous.
 Data source                      Consultant reports showing progress with desiign and implementation.
 Methodology for Data
                                  Implementation progress reports, and usage data, once active.
 Collection
 Responsibility for Data          NBD


                                                                                                                                            Page 15
        The World Bank
        Nile Civil Society for Climate Resilience (P505581)


Collection
                                 Subcomponent 1B: Community engagement on transboundary development
The design or implementation of transboundary projects is influenced through consultations with the surrounding communities (number).
                                  This indicator measures the number of transboundary projects whose design is influenced due to community
Description
                                  dialogues.
Frequency                         Continuous.
Data source                       Project implementing agencies.
Methodology for Data
                                  Changes documented through the minutes or proceedings of the dialogue meetings..
Collection
Responsibility for Data           NBD is responsible for compling and reporting on the information received from the project implementing
Collection                        agencies.
F)
Description                       This indicator measures the number of people who participate in an NBD-led training or community dialogue.
Frequency                         Continuous.
Data source                       Sign-in sheets and time-stamped photos of participants; Training or community dialogue reports
Methodology for Data
                                  Circulation of sign-in sheets, supplemented with time stamped photos and reports
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                                  NBD will collect and compile the information from whichever organization conducts the training.
Collection
                              Subcomponent 1C: Building the capacities of the National Discourse Forums (NDFs)
Letters of Agreement signed between NDFs and key stakeholders such as line ministries and other strategic partners (number).
                                  This indicator measures the number of MoUs or Letters of Agreement signed between NDFs and key
Description
                                  stakeholders.
Frequency                         Continuous.
Data source                       NDFs.
Methodology for Data
                                  Signed MoUs and Letters of Agreement.
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                                  NBD collects and compiles the information from the NDFs.
Collection
                                   Component 2: Innovative Platforms for Stakeholder Dialogue and Action
     Subcomponent 2A: Women’s empowerment and youth engagement in dialogues on Nile cooperation and transboundary water
     management
Women participating in dialogues on Nile cooperation and transboundary water management (number)
                                  This indicator measures the number of women participating in the workshops for national Nile women’s
Description
                                  networks and the workshop for Regional Nile Women Networks.
Frequency                         Semin-Annual and Annual.
Data source                       Minutes or proceedings of the workshops. Time stamped photos of participants.
Methodology for Data
                                  Preparation of minutes or proceedings of the workshops.
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                                  NBD.
Collection
Youth participating in dialogues Nile cooperation and transboundary water management (number)
                                  This indicator measures the number of youth participating in the workshops for national Nile youth networks
Description
                                  and the workshop for Regional Nile Youth Networks.
Frequency                         Semi-Annual and Annual.
Data source                       Minutes or proceedings of the workshops, and time stamped photos.
Methodology for Data
                                  Preparation of minutes or proceedings of the workshops.
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                                  NBD.
Collection


                                                                                                                                        Page 16
        The World Bank
        Nile Civil Society for Climate Resilience (P505581)


                        Subcomponent 2B: Leveraging platforms for transboundary dialogue and knowledge exchange
Knowledge products to illustrate the evidence base for cooperation (number).
                                  This indicator measures the number of knowledge products that the NBD produces in collaboration with its
Description
                                  stakeholders.
Frequency                         Quarterly, Semi-Annual, and Annual
Data source                       Knowledge products
Methodology for Data
                                  Tracking of issuance of knowledge products.
Collection
Responsibility for Data
                                  NBD.
Collection
                                             Subcomponent 2C: Scaling up the internship program

Interns supported under the project (number).

Description                         This indicator measures the number of interns benefittingfrom the project.
Frequency                           Continuous.
Data source                         Recruitment and follow-up data.
Methodology for Data                The NBD will sign contracts with the interns. NBD and the NDFs areresponsible for supervising the interns, and
Collection                          will report on their participation and activities.
Responsibility for Data
                                    NBD.
Collection
Interns female (%)
Description                         This indicator measures the percentage of female interns benefitting from the project.
Frequency                           Continuous.
Data source                         Recruitment and follow-up data.
Methodology for Data                The NBD will sign contracts with the interns. NBD and the NDFs are responsible for supervising the interns,
Collection                          and will report on their participation and activities.
Responsibility for Data
                                    NBD.
Collection
Interns from Fragile, Conflict, and Violence countries (%)
Description                         This indicator measures the percentage of female interns benefitting from the project.
Frequency                           Continuous.
Data source                         Recruitment and follow-up data.
Methodology for Data                The NBD will sign contracts with the interns. NBD and the NDFs are responsible for supervising the interns,
Collection                          and will report on their participation and activities.
Responsibility for Data
                                    NBD.
Collection




                                                                                                                                            Page 17
